---
id: ch029
label: "Ch. 29: THE INFINITY OF GOD AND THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF KNOWING THE"
type: chapter
description: "THE INFINITY OF GOD AND THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF KNOWING THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XXIX.—THE INFINITY OF GOD AND THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF KNOWING THE
      DIVINE ESSENCE, OCCASIONS AND JUSTIFIES ATHEISM.


Without doubt the more to perplex matters, theologians have chosen to say
      nothing about what their God is; they tell us what He is not. By negations
      and abstractions they imagine themselves composing a real and perfect
      being, while there can result from it but a being of human reason. A
      spirit has no body; an infinite being is a being which is not finite; a
      perfect being is a being which is not imperfect. Can any one form any real
      notions of such a multitude of deficiencies or absence of ideas? That
      which excludes all idea, can it be anything but nothingness? To pretend
      that the divine attributes are beyond the understanding of the human mind
      is to render God unfit for men. If we are assured that God is infinite, we
      admit that there can be nothing in common between Him and His creatures.
      To say that God is infinite, is to destroy Him for men, or at least render
      Him useless to them.


God, we are told, created men intelligent, but He did not create them
      omniscient: that is to say, capable of knowing all things. We conclude
      that He was not able to endow him with intelligence sufficient to
      understand the divine essence. In this case it is demonstrated that God
      has neither the power nor the wish to be known by men. By what right could
      this God become angry with beings whose own essence makes it impossible to
      have any idea of the divine essence? God would evidently be the most
      unjust and the most unaccountable of tyrants if He should punish an
      atheist for not knowing that which his nature made it impossible for him
      to know.
