---
id: ch037
label: "Ch. 37: THE WONDERS OF NATURE EXPLAIN THEMSELVES BY NATURAL CAUSES"
type: chapter
description: "THE WONDERS OF NATURE EXPLAIN THEMSELVES BY NATURAL CAUSES"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XXXVII.—THE WONDERS OF NATURE EXPLAIN THEMSELVES BY NATURAL CAUSES.


Is there anything more surprising than the logic of so many profound
      doctors, who, instead of acknowledging the little light they have upon
      natural agencies, seek outside of nature—that is to say, in
      imaginary regions—an agent less understood than this nature, of
      which they can at least form some idea? To say that God is the author of
      the phenomena that we see, is it not attributing them to an occult cause?
      What is God? What is a spirit? They are causes of which we have no idea.
      Sages! study nature and her laws; and when you can from them unravel the
      action of natural causes, do not go in search of supernatural causes,
      which, very far from enlightening your ideas, will but entangle them more
      and more and make it impossible for you to understand yourselves.


## XXXVIII—CONTINUATION.


Nature, you say, is totally inexplicable without a God; that is to say, in
      order to explain what you understand so little, you need a cause which you
      do not understand at all. You pretend to make clear that which is obscure,
      by magnifying its obscurity. You think you have untied a knot by
      multiplying knots. Enthusiastic philosophers, in order to prove to us the
      existence of a God, you copy complete treatises on botany; you enter into
      minute details of the parts of the human body; you ascend into the air to
      contemplate the revolutions of the stars; you return then to earth to
      admire the course of the waters; you fly into ecstasies over butterflies,
      insects, polyps, organized atoms, in which you think to find the greatness
      of your God; all these things will not prove the existence of this God;
      they will only prove that you have not the ideas which you should have of
      the immense variety of causes and effects that can produce the infinitely
      diversified combinations, of which the universe is the assemblage. This
      will prove that you ignore nature, that you have no idea of her resources
      when you judge her incapable of producing a multitude of forms and beings,
      of which your eyes, even by the aid of the microscope, see but the least
      part; finally, this will prove, that not being able to know the sensible
      and comprehensible agents, you find it easier to have recourse to a word,
      by which you designate an agent, of whom it will always be impossible for
      you to form any true idea.
