---
id: ch030
label: "Ch. 30: IT IS NEITHER LESS NOR MORE CRIMINAL TO BELIEVE IN GOD THAN "
type: chapter
description: "IT IS NEITHER LESS NOR MORE CRIMINAL TO BELIEVE IN GOD THAN NOT"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XXX.—IT IS NEITHER LESS NOR MORE CRIMINAL TO BELIEVE IN GOD THAN NOT
      TO BELIEVE IN HIM.


For the generality of men nothing renders an argument more convincing than
      fear. In consequence of this fact, theologians tell us that the safest
      side must be taken; that nothing is more criminal than incredulity; that
      God will punish without mercy all those who have the temerity to doubt His
      existence; that His severity is just; since it is only madness or
      perversity which questions the existence of an angry monarch who revenges
      himself cruelly upon atheists. If we examine these menaces calmly, we
      shall find that they assume always the thing in question. They must
      commence by proving to our satisfaction the existence of a God, before
      telling us that it is safer to believe, and that it is horrible to doubt
      or to deny it. Then they must prove that it is possible for a just God to
      punish men cruelly for having been in a state of madness, which prevented
      them from believing in the existence of a being whom their enlightened
      reason could not comprehend. In a word, they must prove that a God that is
      said to be full of equity, could punish beyond measure the invincible and
      necessary ignorance of man, caused by his relation to the divine essence.
      Is not the theologians' manner of reasoning very singular? They create
      phantoms, they fill them with contradictions, and finally assure us that
      the safest way is not to doubt the existence of those phantoms, which they
      have themselves invented. By following out this method, there is no
      absurdity which it would not be safer to believe than not to believe.


All children are atheists—they have no idea of God; are they, then,
      criminal on account of this ignorance? At what age do they begin to be
      obliged to believe in God? It is, you say, at the age of reason. At what
      time does this age begin? Besides, if the most profound theologians lose
      themselves in the divine essence, which they boast of not comprehending,
      what ideas can common people have?—women, mechanics, and, in short,
      those who compose the mass of the human race?
