---
id: ch041
label: "Ch. 41: OTHER PROOFS THAT MOTION IS IN THE ESSENCE OF MATTER, AND TH"
type: chapter
description: "OTHER PROOFS THAT MOTION IS IN THE ESSENCE OF MATTER, AND THAT"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XLI.—OTHER PROOFS THAT MOTION IS IN THE ESSENCE OF MATTER, AND THAT
      IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO SUPPOSE A SPIRITUAL MOTOR.


It is but by the diversity of impressions or of effects which substances
      or bodies make upon us, that we feel them, that we have perceptions and
      ideas of them, that we distinguish them one from another, that we assign
      to them peculiarities. Moreover, in order to perceive or to feel an
      object, this object must act upon our organs; this object can not act upon
      us without exciting some motion in us; it can not produce any motion in us
      if it is not itself in motion. As soon as I see an object, my eyes must be
      struck by it; I can not conceive of light and of vision without a motion
      in the luminous, extended, and colored body which communicates itself to
      my eye, or which acts upon my retina. As soon as I smell a body, my
      olfactory nerve must be irritated or put into motion by the parts exhaled
      from an odorous body. As soon as I hear a sound, the tympanum of my ear
      must be struck by the air put in motion by a sonorous body, which could
      not act if it was not moved of itself. From which it follows, evidently,
      that without motion I can neither feel, see, distinguish, compare, nor
      judge the body, nor even occupy my thought with any matter whatever. It is
      said in the schools, that the essence of a being is that from which flow
      all the properties of that being. Now then, it is evident that all the
      properties of bodies or of substances of which we have ideas, are due to
      the motion which alone informs us of their existence, and gives us the
      first conceptions of it. I can not be informed or assured of my own
      existence but by the motions which I experience within myself. I am
      compelled to conclude that motion is as essential to matter as its
      extension, and that it can not be conceived of without it. If one persists
      in caviling about the evidences which prove to us that motion is an
      essential property of matter, he must at least acknowledge that substances
      which seemed dead or deprived of all energy, take motion of themselves as
      soon as they are brought within the proper distance to act upon each
      other. Pyrophorus, when enclosed in a bottle or deprived of contact with
      the air, can not take fire by itself, but it burns as soon as exposed to
      the air. Flour and water cause fermentation as soon as they are mixed.
      Thus dead substances engender motion of themselves. Matter has then the
      power to move itself, and nature, in order to act, does not need a motor
      whose essence would hinder its activity.
