---
id: ch049
label: "Ch. 49: IT IS ABSURD TO SAY THAT THE HUMAN RACE IS THE OBJECT AND TH"
type: chapter
description: "IT IS ABSURD TO SAY THAT THE HUMAN RACE IS THE OBJECT AND THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XLIX.—IT IS ABSURD TO SAY THAT THE HUMAN RACE IS THE OBJECT AND THE
      END OF CREATION.


Man, charmed with his own merits, imagines that it is but his own kind
      that God proposed as the object and the end in the formation of the
      universe. Upon what is this so flattering opinion based? It is, we are
      told, upon this: that man is the only being endowed with an intelligence
      which enables him to know the Divine nature, and to render to it homage
      worthy of it. We are assured that God created the world for His own glory,
      and that the human race was included in His plan, in order that He might
      have somebody to admire and glorify Him in His works. But by these
      intentions has not God visibly missed His end?


1. According to you, it would always be impossible for man to know his
      God, and he would be kept in the most invincible ignorance of the Divine
      essence.


2. A being who has no equals, can not be susceptible of glory. Glory can
      result but from the comparison of his own excellence with that of others.


3. If God by Himself is infinitely happy and is sufficient unto Himself,
      why does He need the homage of His feeble creatures?


4. In spite of all His works, God is not glorified; on the contrary, all
      the religions of the world show Him to us as perpetually offended; their
      great object is to reconcile sinful, ungrateful, and rebellious man with
      his wrathful God.
