---
id: ch044
label: "Ch. 44: NEITHER DOES THE ORDER OF THE UNIVERSE PROVE THE EXISTENCE O"
type: chapter
description: "NEITHER DOES THE ORDER OF THE UNIVERSE PROVE THE EXISTENCE OF"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XLIV.—NEITHER DOES THE ORDER OF THE UNIVERSE PROVE THE EXISTENCE OF
      A GOD.


The worshipers of a God find, especially in the order of the universe, an
      invincible proof of the existence of an intelligent and wise being who
      rules it. But this order is only a result of motions necessarily brought
      on by causes or by circumstances which are sometimes favorable and
      sometimes injurious to ourselves; we approve the former and find fault
      with the latter.


Nature follows constantly the same progress; that is to say, the same
      causes produce the same effects, as long as their action is not
      interrupted by other causes which occasion the first ones to produce
      different effects. When the causes, whose effects we feel, are interrupted
      in their action by causes which, although unknown to us, are no less
      natural and necessary, we are stupefied, we cry out miracles: and we
      attribute them to a cause far less known than all those we see operating
      before us. The universe is always in order; there can be no disorder for
      it. Our organization alone is suffering if we complain about disorder.
      Bodies, causes, beings, which this world embraces, act necessarily in the
      manner in which we see them act, whether we approve or disapprove their
      action. Earthquakes, volcanoes, inundations, contagions, and famines are
      effects as necessary in the order of nature as the fall of heavy bodies,
      as the course of rivers, as the periodical movements of the seas, the
      blowing of the winds, the abundant rains, and the favorable effects for
      which we praise and thank Providence for its blessings.


To be astonished that a certain order reigns in the world, is to be
      surprised to see the same causes constantly producing the same effects. To
      be shocked at seeing disorder, is to forget that the causes being changed
      or disturbed in their action, the effects can no longer be the same. To be
      astonished to see order in nature, is to be astonished that anything can
      exist; it is to be surprised at one's own existence. What is order for one
      being, is disorder for another. All wicked beings find that everything is
      in order when they can with impunity put everything into disorder; they
      find, on the contrary, that everything is in disorder when they are
      prevented from exercising their wickedness.
