---
id: ch045
label: "Ch. 45: CONTINUATION"
type: chapter
description: "CONTINUATION"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XLV.—CONTINUATION.


Supposing God to be the author and the motor of nature, there could be no
      disorder relating to Him; all causes which He would have made would
      necessarily act according to their properties the essences and the
      impulsions that He had endowed them with. If God should change the
      ordinary course of things, He would not be immutable. If the order of the
      universe—in which we believe we see the most convincing proof of His
      existence, of His intelligence, His power, and His goodness—should
      be inconsistent, His existence might be doubted; or He might be accused at
      least of inconstancy, of inability, of want of foresight, and of wisdom in
      the first arrangement of things; we would have a right to accuse Him of
      blundering in His choice of agents and instruments. Finally, if the order
      of nature proves the power and the intelligence, disorder ought to prove
      the weakness, inconstancy, and irrationality of Divinity. You say that God
      is everywhere; that He fills all space; that nothing was made without Him;
      that matter could not act without Him as its motor. But in this case you
      admit that your God is the author of disorder; that it is He who deranges
      nature; that He is the Father of confusion; that He is in man; and that He
      moves man at the moment when he sins. If God is everywhere, He is in me;
      He acts with me; He is deceived when I am deceived; He questions with me
      the existence of God; He offends God with me. Oh, theologians! you never
      understand yourselves when you speak of God.
