---
id: ch054
label: "Ch. 54: NO! THE WORLD IS NOT GOVERNED BY AN INTELLIGENT BEING"
type: chapter
description: "NO! THE WORLD IS NOT GOVERNED BY AN INTELLIGENT BEING"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LIV.—NO! THE WORLD IS NOT GOVERNED BY AN INTELLIGENT BEING.


The logic of common sense teaches us that we should judge a cause but by
      its effects. A cause can not be reputed as constantly good, except when it
      constantly produces good, useful, and agreeable effects. A cause which
      produces good at one time, and evil at another, is a cause which is
      sometimes good and sometimes bad. But the logic of Theology destroys all
      this. According to it, the phenomena of nature, or the effects which we
      see in this world, prove to us the existence of an infinitely good Cause,
      and this Cause is God. Although this world is full of evils, although
      disorder reigns here very often, although men groan every moment under the
      fate which oppresses them, we ought to be convinced that these effects are
      due to a benevolent and immutable Cause; and many people believe it, or
      pretend to believe it!


Everything which takes place in the world proves to us in the clearest way
      that it is not governed by an intelligent being. We can judge of the
      intelligence of a being but by the means which he employs to accomplish
      his proposed design. The aim of God, it is said, is the happiness of our
      race; however, the same necessity regulates the fate of all sentient
      beings—which are born to suffer much, to enjoy little, and to die.
      Man's cup is full of joy and of bitterness; everywhere good is side by
      side with evil; order is replaced by disorder; generation is followed by
      destruction. If you tell me that the designs of God are mysteries, and
      that His views are impossible to understand, I will answer, that in this
      case it is impossible for me to judge whether God is intelligent.
