---
id: ch059
label: "Ch. 59: IN VAIN DOES THEOLOGY EXERT ITSELF TO ACQUIT GOD OF MAN'S"
type: chapter
description: "IN VAIN DOES THEOLOGY EXERT ITSELF TO ACQUIT GOD OF MAN'S"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LIX.—IN VAIN DOES THEOLOGY EXERT ITSELF TO ACQUIT GOD OF MAN'S
      DEFECTS. EITHER THIS GOD IS NOT FREE, OR HE IS MORE WICKED THAN GOOD.


The world, it will be said, has all the perfection of which it was
      susceptible; by the very reason that the world was not the God who made
      it, it was necessary that it should have great qualities and great
      defects. But we will answer, that the world necessarily having great
      defects, it would have been better suited to the nature of a good God not
      to create a world which He could not render completely happy. If God, who
      was, according to you, supremely happy before the world was created, had
      continued to be supremely happy in the created world, why did He not
      remain in peace? Why must man suffer? Why must man exist What is his
      existence to God? Nothing or something. If his existence is not useful or
      necessary to God, why did He not leave him in nothingness? If man's
      existence is necessary to His glory, He then needed man, He lacked
      something before this man existed!


We can forgive an unskillful workman for doing imperfect work, because he
      must work, well or ill, or starve; this workman is excusable; but your God
      is not. According to you, He is self-sufficient; in this case, why does He
      create men? He has, according to you, all that is necessary to render man
      happy; why, then, does He not do it? You must conclude that your God has
      more malice than goodness, or you must admit that God was compelled to do
      what He has done, without being able to do otherwise. However, you assure
      us that your God is free; you say also that He is immutable, although
      beginning in time and ceasing in time to exercise His power, like all the
      inconstant beings of this world. Oh, theologians! you have made vain
      efforts to acquit your God of all the defects of man; there is always
      visible in this God so perfect, "a tip of the [human] ear."
