---
id: ch061
label: "Ch. 61: CONTINUATION"
type: chapter
description: "CONTINUATION"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXI.—CONTINUATION.


According to theologians, the afflictions and evils of this life are
      chastisements which culpable men receive from Divinity. But why are men
      culpable? If God is Almighty, does it cost Him any more to say, "Let
      everything remain in order!"—"let all my subjects be good, innocent,
      fortunate!"—than to say, "Let everything exist?" Was it more
      difficult for this God to do His work well than to do it so badly? Was it
      any farther from the nonexistence of beings to their wise and happy
      existence, than from their non-existence to their insensate and miserable
      existence? Religion speaks to us of a hell—that is, of a fearful
      place where, notwithstanding His goodness, God reserves eternal torments
      for the majority of men. Thus, after having rendered mortals very
      miserable in this world, religion teaches them that God can make them much
      more wretched in another. They meet our objections by saying, that
      otherwise the goodness of God would take the place of His justice. But
      goodness which takes the place of the most terrible cruelty, is not
      infinite kindness. Besides, a God who, after having been infinitely good,
      becomes infinitely wicked, can He be regarded as an immutable being? A God
      filled with implacable fury, is He a God in whom we can find a shadow of
      charity or goodness?
