---
id: ch062
label: "Ch. 62: THEOLOGY MAKES OF ITS GOD A MONSTER OF NONSENSE, OF INJUSTIC"
type: chapter
description: "THEOLOGY MAKES OF ITS GOD A MONSTER OF NONSENSE, OF INJUSTICE,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXII.—THEOLOGY MAKES OF ITS GOD A MONSTER OF NONSENSE, OF INJUSTICE,
      OF MALICE, AND ATROCITY—A BEING ABSOLUTELY HATEFUL.


Divine justice, such as our theologians paint it, is, without doubt, a
      quality intended to make us love Divinity. According to the notions of
      modern theology, it appears evident that God has created the majority of
      men with the view only of punishing them eternally. Would it not have been
      more in conformity with kindness, with reason, with equity, to create but
      stones or plants, and not sentient beings, than to create men whose
      conduct in this world would cause them eternal chastisements in another? A
      God so perfidious and wicked as to create a single man and leave him
      exposed to the perils of damnation, can not be regarded as a perfect
      being, but as a monster of nonsense, injustice, malice, and atrocity. Far
      from forming a perfect God, the theologians have made the most imperfect
      of beings. According to theological ideas, God resembles a tyrant who,
      having deprived the majority of his slaves of their eyesight, would
      confine them in a cell where, in order to amuse himself he could observe
      incognito their conduct through a trap-door, in order to have occasion to
      cruelly punish all those who in walking should hurt each other; but who
      would reward splendidly the small number of those to whom the sight was
      spared, for having the skill to avoid an encounter with their comrades.
      Such are the ideas which the dogma of gratuitous predestination gives of
      Divinity!


Although men repeat to us that their God is infinitely good, it is evident
      that in the bottom of their hearts they can believe nothing of it. How can
      we love anything we do not know? How can we love a being, the idea of whom
      is but liable to keep us in anxiety and trouble? How can we love a being
      of whom all that is told conspires to render him supremely hateful?
