---
id: ch071
label: "Ch. 71: ACCORDING TO ALL THE RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS OF THE EARTH, GOD WOU"
type: chapter
description: "ACCORDING TO ALL THE RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS OF THE EARTH, GOD WOULD"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXI.—ACCORDING TO ALL THE RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS OF THE EARTH, GOD WOULD
      BE THE MOST CAPRICIOUS AND THE MOST INSENSATE OF BEINGS.


Nothing could be more extravagant than the role which in every country
      theology makes Divinity play. If the thing was real, we would be obliged
      to see in it the most capricious and the most insane of beings; one would
      be obliged to believe that God made the world to be the theater of
      dishonoring wars with His creatures; that He created angels, men, demons,
      wicked spirits, but as adversaries, against whom He could exercise His
      power. He gives them liberty to offend Him, makes them wicked enough to
      upset His projects, obstinate enough to never give up: all for the
      pleasure of getting angry, and being appeased, of reconciling Himself, and
      of repairing the confusion they have made. Had Divinity formed at once His
      creatures such as they ought to be in order to please Him, what trouble He
      might have spared Himself! or, at least, how much embarrassment He might
      have saved to His theologians! According to all the religious systems of
      the earth, God seems to be occupied but in doing Himself injury; He does
      it as those charlatans do who wound themselves, in order to have occasion
      to show the public the value of their ointments. We do not see, however,
      that so far Divinity has been able to radically cure itself of the evil
      which is caused by men.
