---
id: ch076
label: "Ch. 76: IF GOD COULD NOT RENDER HUMAN NATURE SINLESS, HE HAS NO RIGH"
type: chapter
description: "IF GOD COULD NOT RENDER HUMAN NATURE SINLESS, HE HAS NO RIGHT"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXVI.—IF GOD COULD NOT RENDER HUMAN NATURE SINLESS, HE HAS NO RIGHT
      TO PUNISH MAN.


Man's nature, it is said, must necessarily become corrupt. God could not
      endow him with sinlessness, which is an inalienable portion of Divine
      perfection. But if God could not render him sinless, why did He take the
      trouble of creating man, whose nature was to become corrupt, and which,
      consequently, had to offend God? On the other side, if God Himself was not
      able to render human nature sinless, what right had He to punish men for
      not being sinless? It is but by the right of might. But the right of the
      strongest is violence; and violence is not suited to the most Just of
      Beings. God would be supremely unjust if He punished men for not having a
      portion of the Divine perfections, or for not being able to be Gods like
      Himself.


Could not God have at least endowed men with that sort of perfection of
      which their nature is susceptible? If some men are good or render
      themselves agreeable to their God, why did not this God bestow the same
      favor or give the same dispositions to all beings of our kind? Why does
      the number of wicked exceed so greatly the number of good people? Why, for
      every friend, does God find ten thousand enemies in a world which depended
      upon Him alone to people with honest men? If it is true that God intends
      to form in heaven a court of saints, of chosen ones, or of men who have
      lived in this world according to His views, would He not have had a court
      more numerous, more brilliant, and more honorable to Him, if it were
      composed of all the men to whom, in creating them, He could have granted
      the degree of goodness necessary to obtain eternal happiness? Finally,
      were it not easier not to take man from nothingness than to create him
      full of defects, rebellious to his Creator, perpetually exposed to lose
      himself by a fatal abuse of his liberty? Instead of creating men, a
      perfect God ought to have created only docile and submissive angels. The
      angels, it is said, are free; a few among them have sinned; but all of
      them have not sinned; all have not abused their liberty by revolting
      against their Master. Could not God have created only angels of the good
      kind? If God could create angels who have not sinned, could He not create
      men sinless, or those who would never abuse their liberty by doing evil.
      If the chosen ones are incapable of sinning in heaven, could not God have
      made sinless men upon the earth?
