---
id: ch078
label: "Ch. 78: IT IS ABSURD TO CALL HIM A GOD OF JUSTICE AND GOODNESS, WHO"
type: chapter
description: "IT IS ABSURD TO CALL HIM A GOD OF JUSTICE AND GOODNESS, WHO"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXVIII.—IT IS ABSURD TO CALL HIM A GOD OF JUSTICE AND GOODNESS, WHO
      INFLICTS EVIL INDISCRIMINATELY ON THE GOOD AND THE WICKED, UPON THE
      INNOCENT AND THE GUILTY; IT IS IDLE TO DEMAND THAT THE UNFORTUNATE SHOULD
      CONSOLE THEMSELVES FOR THEIR MISFORTUNES, IN THE VERY ARMS OF THE ONE WHO
      ALONE IS THE AUTHOR OF THEM.


Physical evil commonly passes as the punishment of sin. Calamities,
      diseases, famines, wars, earthquakes, are the means which God employs to
      chastise perverse men. Therefore, they have no difficulty in attributing
      these evils to the severity of a just and good God. However, do we not see
      these plagues fall indiscriminately upon the good and the wicked, upon the
      impious and the pious, upon the innocent and the guilty? How can we be
      made to admire, in this proceeding, the justice and the goodness of a
      being, the idea of whom appears so consoling to the unfortunate? Doubtless
      the brain of these unfortunate ones has been disturbed by their
      misfortunes, since they forget that God is the arbiter of things, the sole
      dispenser of the events of this world. In this case ought they not to
      blame Him for the evils for which they would find consolation in His arms?
      Unfortunate father! you console yourself in the bosom of Providence for
      the loss of a cherished child or of a wife, who made your happiness! Alas!
      do you not see that your God has killed them? Your God has rendered you
      miserable; and you want Him to console you for the fearful blows He has
      inflicted upon you.


The fantastic and supernatural notions of theology have succeeded so
      thoroughly in overcoming the simplest, the clearest, the most natural
      ideas of the human spirit, that the pious, incapable of accusing God of
      malice, accustom themselves to look upon these sad afflictions as
      indubitable proofs of celestial goodness. Are they in affliction, they are
      told to believe that God loves them, that God visits them, that God wishes
      to try them. Thus it is that religion changes evil into good! Some one has
      said profanely, but with reason: "If the good God treats thus those whom
      He loves, I beseech Him very earnestly not to think of me." Men must have
      formed very sinister and very cruel ideas of their God whom they call so
      good, in order to persuade themselves that the most frightful calamities
      and the most painful afflictions are signs of His favor! Would a wicked
      Genii or a Devil be more ingenious in tormenting his enemies, than
      sometimes is this God of goodness, who is so often occupied with
      inflicting His chastisements upon His dearest friends?
