---
id: ch079
label: "Ch. 79: A GOD WHO PUNISHES THE FAULTS WHICH HE COULD HAVE PREVENTED,"
type: chapter
description: "A GOD WHO PUNISHES THE FAULTS WHICH HE COULD HAVE PREVENTED,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXIX.—A GOD WHO PUNISHES THE FAULTS WHICH HE COULD HAVE PREVENTED,
      IS A FOOL, WHO ADDS INJUSTICE TO FOOLISHNESS.


What would we say or a father who, we are assured, watches without
      relaxation over the welfare of his feeble and unforeseeing children, and
      who, however, would leave them at liberty to go astray in the midst of
      rocks, precipices, and waters; who would prevent them but rarely from
      following their disordered appetites; who would permit them to handle,
      without precaution, deadly arms, at the risk of wounding themselves
      severely? What would we think of this same father, if, instead of blaming
      himself for the harm which would have happened to his poor children, he
      should punish them for their faults in the most cruel way? We would say,
      with reason, that this father is a fool, who joins injustice to
      foolishness. A God who punishes the faults which He could have prevented,
      is a being who lacks wisdom, goodness, and equity. A God of foresight
      would prevent evil, and in this way would be saved the trouble of
      punishing it. A good God would not punish weaknesses which He knows to be
      inherent in human nature. A just God, if He has made man, would not punish
      him for not being strong enough to resist his desires. To punish weakness,
      is the most unjust tyranny. Is it not calumniating a just God, to say that
      He punishes men for their faults, even in the present life? How would He
      punish beings whom He alone could correct, and who, as long as they had
      not received grace, can not act otherwise than they do?


According to the principles of theologians themselves, man, in his actual
      state of corruption, can do nothing but evil, for without Divine grace he
      has not the strength to do good. Moreover, if man's nature, abandoned to
      itself, of destitute of Divine help, inclines him necessarily to evil, or
      renders him incapable of doing good, what becomes of his free will?
      According to such principles, man can merit neither reward nor punishment;
      in rewarding man for the good he does, God would but recompense Himself;
      in punishing man for the evil he does, God punishes him for not having
      been given the grace, without which it was impossible for him to do
      better.
