---
id: ch075
label: "Ch. 75: THE DEVIL, LIKE RELIGION, WAS INVENTED TO ENRICH THE PRIESTS"
type: chapter
description: "THE DEVIL, LIKE RELIGION, WAS INVENTED TO ENRICH THE PRIESTS"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXV.—THE DEVIL, LIKE RELIGION, WAS INVENTED TO ENRICH THE PRIESTS.


We are told a story of the simple-heartedness of an Italian monk, which
      does him honor. This good man preaching one day felt obliged to announce
      to his auditory that, thanks to Heaven, he had at last discovered a sure
      means of rendering all men happy. "The devil," said he, "tempts men but to
      have them as comrades of his misery in hell. Let us address ourselves,
      then, to the Pope, who possesses the keys of paradise and of hell; let us
      ask him to beseech God, at the head of the whole Church, to reconcile
      Himself with the devil; to take him back into His favor; to re-establish
      him in His first rank. This can not fail to put an end to his sinister
      projects against mankind." The good monk did not see, perhaps, that the
      devil is at least fully as useful as God to the ministers of religion.
      These reap too many benefits from their differences to lend themselves
      willingly to a reconciliation between the two enemies ties, upon whose
      contests their existence and their revenues depend. If men would cease to
      be tempted and to sin, the ministry of priests would become useless to
      them. Manicheism is evidently the support of all religions; but
      unfortunately the devil, being invented to remove all suspicion of malice
      from Divinity, proves to us at every moment the powerlessness or the
      awkwardness of his celestial Adversary.
