---
id: ch087
label: "Ch. 87: MEN'S PRAYERS TO GOD PROVE SUFFICIENTLY THAT THEY ARE NOT"
type: chapter
description: "MEN'S PRAYERS TO GOD PROVE SUFFICIENTLY THAT THEY ARE NOT"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXXVII.—MEN'S PRAYERS TO GOD PROVE SUFFICIENTLY THAT THEY ARE NOT
      SATISFIED WITH THE DIVINE ECONOMY.


Although men incessantly admire the wisdom the goodness, the justice, the
      beautiful order of Providence, they are, in fact, never contented with it.
      The prayers which they continually offer to Heaven, prove to us that they
      are not at all satisfied with God's administration. Praying to God, asking
      a favor of Him, is to mistrust His vigilant care; to pray God to avert or
      to suppress an evil, is to endeavor to put obstacles in the way of His
      justice; to implore the assistance of God in our calamities, means to
      appeal to the very author of these calamities in order to represent to Him
      our welfare; that He ought to rectify in our favor His plan, which is not
      beneficial to our interests. The optimist, or the one who thinks that
      everything is good in the world, and who repeats to us incessantly that we
      live in the best world possible, if he were consistent, ought never to
      pray; still less should he expect another world where men will be happier.
      Can there be a better world than the best possible of all worlds? Some of
      the theologians have treated the optimists as impious for having claimed
      that God could not have made a better world than the one in which we live;
      according to these doctors it is limiting the Divine power and insulting
      it. But do not theologians see that it is less offensive for God, to
      pretend that He did His best in creating the world, than to say that He,
      having the power to produce a better one, had the malice to make a very
      bad one? If the optimist, by his system, does wrong to the Divine power,
      the theologian, who treats him as impious, is himself a reprobate, who
      wounds the Divine goodness under pretext of taking interest in God.
