---
id: ch082
label: "Ch. 82: REFUTATION OF THE ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF FREE WILL"
type: chapter
description: "REFUTATION OF THE ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF FREE WILL"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXXII.—REFUTATION OF THE ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF FREE WILL.


If everything is necessary, if errors, opinions, and ideas of men are
      fated, how or why can we pretend to reform them? The errors of men are the
      necessary results of their ignorance; their ignorance, their obstinacy,
      their credulity, are the necessary results of their inexperience, of their
      indifference, of their lack of reflection; the same as congestion of the
      brain or lethargy are the natural effects of some diseases. Truth,
      experience, reflection, reason, are the proper remedies to cure ignorance,
      fanaticism, and follies; the same as bleeding is good to soothe congestion
      of the brain. But you will say, why does not truth produce this effect
      upon many of the sick heads? There are some diseases which resist all
      remedies; it is impossible to cure obstinate patients who refuse to take
      the remedies which are given them; the interest of some men and the folly
      of others naturally oppose them to the admission of truth. A cause
      produces its effect only when it is not interrupted in its action by other
      causes which are stronger, or which weaken the action of the first cause
      or render it useless. It is entirely impossible to have the best arguments
      accepted by men who are strongly interested in error; who are prejudiced
      in its favor; who refuse to reflect; but it must necessarily be that truth
      undeceives the honest souls who seek it in good faith. Truth is a cause;
      it produces necessarily its effect when its impulse is not interrupted by
      causes which suspend its effects.
