---
id: ch086
label: "Ch. 86: ALL EVIL, ALL DISORDER, ALL SIN, CAN BE ATTRIBUTED BUT TO"
type: chapter
description: "ALL EVIL, ALL DISORDER, ALL SIN, CAN BE ATTRIBUTED BUT TO"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## LXXXVI.—ALL EVIL, ALL DISORDER, ALL SIN, CAN BE ATTRIBUTED BUT TO
      GOD; AND CONSEQUENTLY, HE HAS NO RIGHT TO PUNISH OR REWARD.


Divinity is continually compared to a king, the majority of whose subjects
      revolt against Him and it is pretended that He has the right to reward His
      faithful subjects, and to punish those who revolt against Him. This
      comparison is not just in any of its parts. God presides over a machine,
      of which He has made all the springs; these springs act according to the
      way in which God has formed them; it is the fault of His inaptitude if
      these springs do not contribute to the harmony of the machine in which the
      workman desired to place them. God is a creating King, who created all
      kinds of subjects for Himself; who formed them according to His pleasure,
      and whose wishes can never find any resistance. If God in His empire has
      rebellious subjects, it is God who resolved to have rebellious subjects.
      If the sins of men disturb the order of the world, it is God who desired
      this order to be disturbed. Nobody dares to doubt Divine justice; however,
      under the empire of a just God, we find nothing but injustice and
      violence. Power decides the fate of nations. Equity seems to be banished
      from the earth; a small number of men enjoy with impunity the repose, the
      fortunes, the liberty, and the life of all the others. Everything is in
      disorder in a world governed by a God of whom it is said that disorder
      displeases Him exceedingly.
