---
id: ch092
label: "Ch. 92: THE LIFE OF MORTALS, ALL WHICH TAKES PLACE HERE BELOW,"
type: chapter
description: "THE LIFE OF MORTALS, ALL WHICH TAKES PLACE HERE BELOW,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XCII.—THE LIFE OF MORTALS, ALL WHICH TAKES PLACE HERE BELOW,
      TESTIFIES AGAINST MAN'S LIBERTY AND AGAINST THE JUSTICE AND GOODNESS OF A
      PRETENDED GOD.


In calling mortals into life, what a cruel and dangerous game does the
      Divinity force them to play! Thrust into the world without their wish,
      provided with a temperament of which they are not the masters, animated by
      passions and desires inherent in their nature, exposed to snares which
      they have not the skill to avoid, led away by events which they could
      neither foresee nor prevent, the unfortunate beings are obliged to follow
      a career which conducts them to horrible tortures.


Travelers assert that in some part of Asia reigns a sultan full of
      phantasies, and very absolute in his will. By a strange mania this prince
      spends his time sitting before a table, on which are placed six dice and a
      dice-box. One end of the table is covered with a pile of gold, for the
      purpose of exciting the cupidity of the courtiers and of the people by
      whom the sultan is surrounded. He, knowing the weak point of his subjects,
      speaks to them in this way: "Slaves! I wish you well; my aim is to enrich
      you and render you all happy. Do you see these treasures? Well, they are
      for you! try to win them; let each one in turn take this box and these
      dice; whoever shall have the good luck to raffle six, will be master of
      this treasure; but I warn you that he who has not the luck to throw the
      required number, will be precipitated forever into an obscure cell, where
      my justice exacts that he shall be burned by a slow fire." Upon this
      threat of the monarch, they regarded each other in consternation; no one
      willing to take a risk so dangerous. "What!" said the angry sultan, "no
      one wants to play? Oh, this does not suit me! My glory demands that you
      play. You will raffle then; I wish it; obey without replying!" It is well
      to observe that the despot's dice are prepared in such a way, that upon a
      hundred thousand throws there is but one that wins; thus the generous
      monarch has the pleasure to see his prison well filled, and his treasures
      seldom carried away. Mortals! this Sultan is your God; His treasures are
      heaven; His cell is hell; and you hold the dice!
