---
id: ch096
label: "Ch. 96: THERE ARE NO MORE DETESTABLE ANIMALS IN THIS WORLD THAN"
type: chapter
description: "THERE ARE NO MORE DETESTABLE ANIMALS IN THIS WORLD THAN"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XCVI.—THERE ARE NO MORE DETESTABLE ANIMALS IN THIS WORLD THAN
      TYRANTS.


We are assured that the human soul is a simple substance; but if the soul
      is such a simple substance, it ought to be the same in all the individuals
      of the human race, who all ought to have the same intellectual faculties;
      however, this is not the case; men differ as much in qualities of mind as
      in the features of the face. There are in the human race, beings as
      different from one another as man is from a horse or a dog. What
      conformity or resemblance do we find between some men? What an infinite
      distance between the genius of a Locke, of a Newton, and that of a
      peasant, of a Hottentot, or of a Laplander!


Man differs from other animals but by the difference of his organization,
      which causes him to produce effects of which they are not capable. The
      variety which we notice in the organs of individuals of the human race,
      suffices to explain to us the difference which is often found between them
      in regard to the intellectual faculties. More or less of delicacy in these
      organs, of heat in the blood, of promptitude in the fluids, more or less
      of suppleness or of rigidity in the fibers and the nerves, must
      necessarily produce the infinite diversities which are noticeable in the
      minds of men. It is by exercise, by habitude, by education, that the human
      mind is developed and succeeds in rising above the beings which surround
      it; man, without culture and without experience, is a being as devoid of
      reason and of industry as the brute. A stupid individual is a man whose
      organs are acted upon with difficulty, whose brain is hard to move, whose
      blood circulates slowly; a man of mind is he whose organs are supple, who
      feels very quickly, whose brain moves promptly; a learned man is one whose
      organs and whose brain have been exercised a long while upon objects which
      occupy him.


The man without culture, experience, or reason, is he not more despicable
      and more abominable than the vilest insects, or the most ferocious beasts?
      Is there a more detestable being in nature than a Tiberius, a Nero, a
      Caligula? These destroyers of the human race, known by the name of
      conquerors, have they better souls than those of bears, lions, and
      panthers? Are there more detestable animals in this world than tyrants?
