---
id: ch093
label: "Ch. 93: IT IS NOT TRUE THAT WE OWE ANY GRATITUDE TO WHAT WE CALL"
type: chapter
description: "IT IS NOT TRUE THAT WE OWE ANY GRATITUDE TO WHAT WE CALL"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XCIII.—IT IS NOT TRUE THAT WE OWE ANY GRATITUDE TO WHAT WE CALL
      PROVIDENCE.


We are constantly told that we owe an infinite gratitude to Providence for
      the countless blessings It is pleased to lavish upon us. They boast above
      all that our existence is a blessing. But, alas! how many mortals are
      really satisfied with their mode of existence? If life has its sweets, how
      much of bitterness is mingled with it? Is not one bitter trouble
      sufficient to blight all of a sudden the most peaceful and happy life? Is
      there a great number of men who, if it depended upon them, would wish to
      begin, at the same sacrifice, the painful career into which, without their
      consent, destiny has thrown them? You say that existence itself is a great
      blessing. But is not this existence continually troubled by griefs, fears,
      and often cruel and undeserved maladies. This existence, menaced on so
      many sides, can we not be deprived of it at any moment? Who is there,
      after having lived for some time, who has not been deprived of a beloved
      wife, a beloved child, a consoling friend, whose loss fills his mind
      constantly? There are very few mortals who have not been compelled to
      drink from the cup of bitterness; there are but few who have not often
      wished to die. Finally, it did not depend upon us to exist or not to
      exist. Would the bird be under such great obligations to the bird-catcher
      for having caught it in his net and for having put it into his cage, in
      order to eat it after being amused with it?
