---
id: ch097
label: "Ch. 97: REFUTATION OF MAN'S EXCELLENCE"
type: chapter
description: "REFUTATION OF MAN'S EXCELLENCE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XCVII.—REFUTATION OF MAN'S EXCELLENCE.


Human extravagances soon dispel, in the eyes of reason, the superiority
      which man arrogantly claims over other animals. Do we not see many animals
      show more gentleness, more reflection and reason than the animal which
      calls itself reasonable par excellence? Are there amongst men, who are so
      often enslaved and oppressed, societies as well organized as those of
      ants, bees, or beavers? Do we ever see ferocious beasts of the same kind
      meet upon the plains to devour each other without profit? Do we see among
      them religious wars? The cruelty of beasts against other species is caused
      by hunger, the need of nourishment; the cruelty of man against man has no
      other motive than the vanity of his masters and the folly of his
      impertinent prejudices. Theorists who try to make us believe that
      everything in the universe was made for man, are very much embarrassed
      when we ask them in what way can so many mischievous animals which
      continually infest our life here, contribute to the welfare of men. What
      known advantage results for God's friend to be bitten by a viper, stung by
      a gnat, devoured by vermin, torn into pieces by a tiger? Would not all
      these animals reason as wisely as our theologians, if they should pretend
      that man was made for them?
