---
id: ch090
label: "Ch. 90: REDEMPTION, AND THE CONTINUAL EXTERMINATIONS ATTRIBUTED TO"
type: chapter
description: "REDEMPTION, AND THE CONTINUAL EXTERMINATIONS ATTRIBUTED TO"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## XC.—REDEMPTION, AND THE CONTINUAL EXTERMINATIONS ATTRIBUTED TO
      JEHOVAH IN THE BIBLE, ARE SO MANY ABSURD AND RIDICULOUS INVENTIONS WHICH
      PRESUPPOSE AN UNJUST AND BARBAROUS GOD.


What strange ideas of the Divine justice must the Christians have who
      believe that their God, with the view of reconciling Himself with mankind,
      guilty without knowledge of the fault of their parents, sacrificed His own
      innocent and sinless Son! What would we say of a king, whose subjects
      having revolted against him, in order to appease himself could find no
      other expedient than to put to death the heir to his crown, who had taken
      no part in the general rebellion? It is, the Christian will say, through
      kindness for His subjects, incapable of satisfying themselves of His
      Divine justice, that God consented to the cruel death of His Son. But the
      kindness of a father to strangers does not give him the right to be unjust
      and cruel to his son. All the qualities that theology gives to its God
      annul each other. The exercise of one of His perfections is always at the
      expense of another.


Has the Jew any more rational ideas than the Christian of Divine justice?
      A king, by his pride, kindles the wrath of Heaven. Jehovah sends
      pestilence upon His innocent people; seventy thousand subjects are
      exterminated to expiate the fault of a monarch that the kindness of God
      resolved to spare.
