---
id: ch107
label: "Ch. 107: THE DOGMA OF ANOTHER LIFE IS USEFUL BUT FOR THOSE WHO PROFIT"
type: chapter
description: "THE DOGMA OF ANOTHER LIFE IS USEFUL BUT FOR THOSE WHO PROFIT"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CVII.—THE DOGMA OF ANOTHER LIFE IS USEFUL BUT FOR THOSE WHO PROFIT
      BY IT AT THE EXPENSE OF THE CREDULOUS PUBLIC.


We are constantly told of the usefulness of the dogma of life hereafter.
      It is pretended that even if it should be a fiction, it is advantageous,
      because it imposes upon men and leads them to virtue. But is it true that
      this dogma renders men wiser and more virtuous? The nations where this
      fiction is established, are they remarkable for the morality of their
      conduct? Is not the visible world always preferred to the invisible world?
      If those who are charged to instruct and to govern men had themselves
      enlightenment and virtue, they would govern them far better by realities
      than by vain chimeras; but deceitful, ambitious, and corrupt, the
      legislators found it everywhere easier to put the nations to sleep by
      fables than to teach them truths; than to develop their reason; than to
      excite them to virtue by sensible and real motives; than to govern them in
      a reasonable way.


Theologians, no doubt, have had reasons for making the soul immaterial.
      They needed souls and chimeras to populate the imaginary regions which
      they have discovered in the other life. Material souls would have been
      subjected, like all bodies, to dissolution. Moreover, if men believe that
      everything is to perish with the body, the geographers of the other world
      would evidently lose the chance of guiding their souls to this unknown
      abode. They would draw no profits from the hopes with which they feast
      them, and from the terrors with which they take care to overwhelm them. If
      the future is of no real utility to the human race, it is at least of the
      greatest advantage to those who take upon themselves the responsibility of
      conducting mankind thither.
