---
id: ch101
label: "Ch. 101: THE EXISTENCE OF A SOUL IS AN ABSURD SUPPOSITION, AND THE"
type: chapter
description: "THE EXISTENCE OF A SOUL IS AN ABSURD SUPPOSITION, AND THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CI.—THE EXISTENCE OF A SOUL IS AN ABSURD SUPPOSITION, AND THE
      EXISTENCE OF AN IMMORTAL SOUL IS A STILL MORE ABSURD SUPPOSITION.


Although it is impossible for men to have the least idea of the soul, or
      of this pretended spirit which animates them, they persuade themselves,
      however, that this unknown soul is exempt from death; everything proves to
      them that they feel, think, acquire ideas, enjoy or suffer, but by the
      means of the senses or of the material organs of the body. Even admitting
      the existence of this soul, one can not refuse to recognize that it
      depends wholly on the body, and suffers conjointly with it all the
      vicissitudes which it experiences itself; and however it is imagined that
      it has by its nature nothing analogous with it; it is pretended that it
      can act and feel without the assistance of this body; that deprived of
      this body and robbed of its senses, this soul will be able to live, to
      enjoy, to suffer, be sensitive of enjoyment or of rigorous torments. Upon
      such a tissue of conjectural absurdities the wonderful opinion of the
      immortality of the soul is built.


If I ask what ground we have for supposing that the soul is immortal: they
      reply, it is because man by his nature desires to be immortal, or to live
      forever. But I rejoin, if you desire anything very much, is it sufficient
      to conclude that this desire will be fulfilled? By what strange logic do
      they decide that a thing can not fail to happen because they ardently
      desire it to happen? Man's childish desires of the imagination, are they
      the measure of reality? Impious people, you say, deprived of the
      flattering hopes of another life, desire to be annihilated. Well, have
      they not just as much right to conclude by this desire that they will be
      annihilated, as you to conclude that you will exist forever because you
      desire it?
