---
id: ch100
label: "Ch. 100: WHAT IS THE SOUL? WE KNOW NOTHING ABOUT IT. IF THIS PRETENDE"
type: chapter
description: "WHAT IS THE SOUL? WE KNOW NOTHING ABOUT IT. IF THIS PRETENDED"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## C.—WHAT IS THE SOUL? WE KNOW NOTHING ABOUT IT. IF THIS PRETENDED
      SOUL WAS OF ANOTHER ESSENCE FROM THAT OF THE BODY, THEIR UNION WOULD BE
      IMPOSSIBLE.


The superiority which men arrogate to themselves over other animals, is
      principally founded upon the opinion of possessing exclusively an immortal
      soul. But as soon as we ask what this soul is, they begin to stammer. It
      is an unknown substance; it is a secret force distinguished from their
      bodies; it is a spirit of which they can form no idea. Ask them how this
      spirit, which they suppose like their God, totally deprived of a physical
      substance, could combine itself with their material bodies? They will tell
      you that they know nothing about it; that it is a mystery to them; that
      this combination is the effect of the Almighty power. These are the clear
      ideas which men form of the hidden, or, rather, imaginary substance which
      they consider the motor of all their actions! If the soul is a substance
      essentially different from the body, and which can have no affinity with
      it, their union would be, not a mystery, but a thing impossible. Besides,
      this soul, being of an essence different from that of the body, ought to
      act necessarily in a different way from it. However, we see that the
      movements of the body are felt by this pretended soul, and that these two
      substances, so different in essence, always act in harmony. You will tell
      us that this harmony is a mystery; and I will tell you that I do not see
      my soul, that I know and feel but my body; that it is my body which feels,
      which reflects, which judges, which suffers, and which enjoys, and that
      all of its faculties are the necessary results of its own mechanism or of
      its organization.
