---
id: ch102
label: "Ch. 102: IT IS EVIDENT THAT THE WHOLE OF MAN DIES"
type: chapter
description: "IT IS EVIDENT THAT THE WHOLE OF MAN DIES"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CII.—IT IS EVIDENT THAT THE WHOLE OF MAN DIES.


Man dies entirely. Nothing is more evident to him who is not delirious.
      The human body, after death, is but a mass, incapable of producing any
      movements the union of which constitutes life. We no longer see
      circulation, respiration, digestion, speech, or reflection. It is claimed
      then that the soul has separated itself from the body. But to say that
      this soul, which is unknown, is the principle of life, is saying nothing,
      unless that an unknown force is the invisible principle of imperceptible
      movements. Nothing is more natural and more simple than to believe that
      the dead man lives no more, nothing more absurd than to believe that the
      dead man is still living.


We ridicule the simplicity of some nations whose fashion is to bury
      provisions with the dead—under the idea that this food might be
      useful and necessary to them in another life. Is it more ridiculous or
      more absurd to believe that men will eat after death than to imagine that
      they will think; that they will have agreeable or disagreeable ideas; that
      they will enjoy; that they will suffer; that they will be conscious of
      sorrow or joy when the organs which produce sensations or ideas are
      dissolved and reduced to dust? To claim that the souls of men will be
      happy or unhappy after the death of the body, is to pretend that man will
      be able to see without eyes, to hear without ears, to taste without a
      palate, to smell without a nose, and to feel without hands and without
      skin. Nations who believe themselves very rational, adopt, nevertheless,
      such ideas.
