---
id: ch112
label: "Ch. 112: CONTINUATION"
type: chapter
description: "CONTINUATION"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXII.—CONTINUATION.


All the revealed religions which we see in the world are filled with
      mysterious dogmas, unintelligible principles, of incredible miracles, of
      astonishing tales which seem imagined but to confound reason. Every
      religion announces a concealed God, whose essence is a mystery;
      consequently, it is just as difficult to conceive of His conduct as of the
      essence of this God Himself. Divinity has never spoken to us but in an
      enigmatical and mysterious way in the various religions which have been
      founded in the different regions of our globe. It has revealed itself
      everywhere but to announce mysteries, that is to say, to warn mortals that
      it designs that they should believe in contradictions, in impossibilities,
      or in things of which they were incapable of forming any positive idea.


The more mysteries a religion has, the more incredible objects it presents
      to the mind, the better fitted it is to please the imagination of men, who
      find in it a continual pasturage to feed upon. The more obscure a religion
      is, the more it appears divine, that is to say, in conformity to the
      nature of an invisible being, of whom we have no idea.


It is the peculiarity of ignorance to prefer the unknown, the concealed,
      the fabulous, the wonderful, the incredible, even the terrible, to that
      which is clear, simple, and true. Truth does not give to the imagination
      such lively play as fiction, which each one may arrange as he pleases. The
      vulgar ask nothing better than to listen to fables; priests and
      legislators, by inventing religions and forging mysteries from them, have
      served them to their taste. In this way they have attracted enthusiasts,
      women, and the illiterate generally. Beings of this kind resign easily to
      reasons which they are incapable of examining; the love of the simple and
      the true is found but in the small number of those whose imagination is
      regulated by study and by reflection. The inhabitants of a village are
      never more pleased with their pastor than when he mixes a good deal of
      Latin in his sermon. Ignorant men always imagine that he who speaks to
      them of things which they do not understand, is a very wise and learned
      man. This is the true principle of the credulity of nations, and of the
      authority of those who pretend to guide them.
