---
id: ch116
label: "Ch. 116: ALL RELIGIONS ARE RIDICULED BY THOSE OF OPPOSITE THOUGH"
type: chapter
description: "ALL RELIGIONS ARE RIDICULED BY THOSE OF OPPOSITE THOUGH"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXVI.—ALL RELIGIONS ARE RIDICULED BY THOSE OF OPPOSITE THOUGH
      EQUALLY INSANE BELIEF.


Nothing appears more ridiculous in the eyes of a sensible man than for one
      denomination to criticize another whose creed is equally foolish. A
      Christian thinks that the Koran, the Divine revelation announced by
      Mohammed, is but a tissue of impertinent dreams and impostures injurious
      to Divinity. The Mohammedan, on his side, treats the Christian as an
      idolater and a dog; he sees but absurdities in his religion; he imagines
      he has the right to conquer his country and force him, sword in hand, to
      accept the faith of his Divine prophet; he believes especially that
      nothing is more impious or more unreasonable than to worship a man or to
      believe in the Trinity. The Protestant Christian, who without scruple
      worships a man, and who believes firmly in the inconceivable mystery of
      the Trinity, ridicules the Catholic Christian because the latter believes
      in the mystery of the transubstantiation. He treats him as a fool, as
      ungodly and idolatrous, because he kneels to worship the bread in which he
      believes he sees the God of the universe. All the Christian denominations
      agree in considering as folly the incarnation of the God of the Indies,
      Vishnu. They contend that the only true incarnation is that of Jesus, Son
      of the God of the universe and of the wife of a carpenter. The theist, who
      calls himself a votary of natural religion, is satisfied to acknowledge a
      God of whom he has no conception; indulges himself in jesting upon other
      mysteries taught by all the religions of the world.
