---
id: ch115
label: "Ch. 115: THE PROOF THAT RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY, IS THAT IT IS"
type: chapter
description: "THE PROOF THAT RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY, IS THAT IT IS"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXV.—THE PROOF THAT RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY, IS THAT IT IS
      UNINTELLIGIBLE.


If religion was necessary to all men, it ought to be intelligible to all
      men. If this religion was the most important thing for them, the goodness
      of God, it seems, ought to make it for them the clearest, the most
      evident, and the best demonstrated of all things. Is it not astonishing to
      see that this matter, so essential to the salvation of mortals, is
      precisely the one which they understand the least, and about which, during
      so many centuries, their doctors have disputed the most? Never have
      priests, of even the same sect, come to an agreement among themselves
      about the manner of understanding the wishes of a God who has truly
      revealed Himself to them. The world which we inhabit can be compared to a
      public place, in whose different parts several charlatans are placed, each
      one straining himself to attract customers by depreciating the remedies
      offered by his competitors. Each stand has its purchasers, who are
      persuaded that their empiric alone possesses the good remedies;
      notwithstanding the continual use which they make of them, they do not
      perceive that they are no better, or that they are just as sick as those
      who run after the charlatans of another stand. Devotion is a disease of
      the imagination, contracted in infancy; the devotee is a hypochondriac,
      who increases his disease by the use of remedies. The wise man takes none
      of it; he follows a good regimen and leaves the rest to nature.
