---
id: ch110
label: "Ch. 110: EVERY RELIGION IS BUT A SYSTEM IMAGINED FOR THE PURPOSE OF"
type: chapter
description: "EVERY RELIGION IS BUT A SYSTEM IMAGINED FOR THE PURPOSE OF"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CX.—EVERY RELIGION IS BUT A SYSTEM IMAGINED FOR THE PURPOSE OF
      RECONCILING CONTRADICTIONS BY THE AID OF MYSTERIES.


Theology could very properly be defined as the science of contradictions.
      Every religion is but a system imagined for the purpose of reconciling
      irreconcilable ideas. By the aid of habitude and terror, we come to
      persist in the greatest absurdities, even when they are the most clearly
      exposed. All religions are easy to combat, but very difficult to
      eradicate. Reason can do nothing against habit, which becomes, as is said,
      a second nature. There are many persons otherwise sensible, who, even
      after having examined the ruinous foundations of their belief, return to
      it in spite of the most striking arguments.


As soon as we complain of not understanding religion, finding in it at
      every step absurdities which are repulsive, seeing in it but
      impossibilities, we are told that we are not made to conceive the truths
      of the religion which is proposed to us; that wandering reason is but an
      unfaithful guide, only capable of conducting us to perdition; and what is
      more, we are assured that what is folly in the eyes of man, is wisdom in
      the eyes of God, to whom nothing is impossible. Finally, in order to
      decide by a single word the most insurmountable difficulties which
      theology presents to us on all sides, they simply cry out: "Mysteries!"
