---
id: ch122
label: "Ch. 122: THE MORE ANCIENT AND GENERAL A RELIGIOUS OPINION IS, THE"
type: chapter
description: "THE MORE ANCIENT AND GENERAL A RELIGIOUS OPINION IS, THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXII.—THE MORE ANCIENT AND GENERAL A RELIGIOUS OPINION IS, THE
      GREATER THE REASON FOR SUSPECTING IT.


Whoever has formed true ideas of the ignorance, credulity, negligence, and
      sottishness of common people, will always regard their religious opinions
      with the greater suspicion for their being generally established. The
      majority of men examine nothing; they allow themselves to be blindly led
      by custom and authority; their religious opinions are specially those
      which they have the least courage and capacity to examine; as they do not
      understand anything about them, they are compelled to be silent or put an
      end to their reasoning. Ask the common man if he believes in God. He will
      be surprised that you could doubt it. Then ask him what he understands by
      the word God. You will confuse him; you will perceive at once that he is
      incapable of forming any real idea of this word which he so often repeats;
      he will tell you that God is God, and you will find that he knows neither
      what he thinks of Him, nor the motives which he has for believing in Him.


All nations speak of a God; but do they agree upon this God? No! Well,
      difference of opinion does not serve as evidence, but is a sign of
      uncertainty and obscurity. Does the same man always agree with himself in
      his ideas of God? No! This idea varies with the vicissitudes of his life.
      This is another sign of uncertainty. Men always agree with other men and
      with themselves upon demonstrated truths, regardless of the position in
      which they find themselves; except the insane, all agree that two and two
      make four, that the sun shines, that the whole is greater than any one of
      its parts, that Justice is a benefaction, that we must be benevolent to
      deserve the love of men, that injustice and cruelty are incompatible with
      goodness. Do they agree in the same way if they speak of God? All that
      they think or say of Him is immediately contradicted by the effects which
      they wish to attribute to Him. Tell several artists to paint a chimera,
      each of them will form different ideas of it, and will paint it
      differently; you will find no resemblance in the features each of them
      will have given to a portrait whose model exists nowhere. In painting God,
      do any of the theologians of the world represent Him otherwise than as a
      great chimera, upon whose features they never agree, each one arranging it
      according to his style, which has its origin but in his own brain? There
      are no two individuals in the world who have or can have the same ideas of
      their God.
