---
id: ch129
label: "Ch. 129: ABSURDITY OF PRETENDED MIRACLES"
type: chapter
description: "ABSURDITY OF PRETENDED MIRACLES"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXIX.—ABSURDITY OF PRETENDED MIRACLES.


The founders of all religions have usually proved their mission by
      miracles. But what is a miracle? It is an operation directly opposed to
      the laws of nature. But, according to you, who has made these laws? It is
      God. Thus your God, who, according to you, has foreseen everything,
      counteracts the laws which His wisdom had imposed upon nature! These laws
      were then defective, or at least in certain circumstances they were but in
      accordance with the views of this same God, for you tell us that He
      thought He ought to suspend or counteract them.


An attempt is made to persuade us that men who have been favored by the
      Most High have received from Him the power to perform miracles; but in
      order to perform a miracle, it is necessary to have the faculty of
      creating new causes capable of producing effects opposed to those which
      ordinary causes can produce. Can we realize how God can give to men the
      inconceivable power of creating causes out of nothing? Can it be believed
      that an unchangeable God can communicate to man the power to change or
      rectify His plan, a power which, according to His essence, an immutable
      being can not have himself? Miracles, far from doing much honor to God,
      far from proving the Divinity of religion, destroy evidently the idea
      which is given to us of God, of His immutability, of His incommunicable
      attributes, and even of His omnipotence. How can a theologian tell us that
      a God who embraced at once the whole of His plan, who could make but
      perfect laws, who can change nothing in them, should be obliged to employ
      miracles to make His projects successful, or grant to His creatures the
      faculty of performing prodigies, in order to execute His Divine will? Is
      it probable that a God needs the support of men? An Omnipotent Being,
      whose wishes are always gratified, a Being who holds in His hands the
      hearts and the minds of His creatures, needs but to wish, in order to make
      them believe all He desires.
