---
id: ch121
label: "Ch. 121: ALL RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES BEAR THE SEAL OF STUPIDITY OR"
type: chapter
description: "ALL RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES BEAR THE SEAL OF STUPIDITY OR"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXI.—ALL RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES BEAR THE SEAL OF STUPIDITY OR
      BARBARITY.


In all times the ferocity, the stupidity, the folly of savage men were
      shown in religious customs which were often cruel and extravagant. A
      spirit of barbarity has come down to our days; it intrudes itself into the
      religions which are followed by the most civilized nations. Do we not
      still see human victims offered to Divinity? In order to appease the wrath
      of a God whom we suppose as ferocious, as jealous, as vindictive, as a
      savage, do not sanguinary laws cause the destruction of those who are
      believed to have displeased Him by their way of thinking?


Modern nations, at the instigation of their priests, have even excelled
      the atrocious folly of the most barbarous nations; at least do we not find
      that it never entered into a savage's mind to torment for the sake of
      opinions, to meddle in thought, to trouble men for the invisible actions
      of their brains? When we see polished and wise nations, such as the
      English, French, German, etc., notwithstanding all their enlightenment,
      continue to kneel before the barbarous God of the Jews, that is to say, of
      the most stupid, the most credulous, the most savage, the most unsocial
      nation which ever was on the earth; when we see these enlightened nations
      divide themselves into sects, tear one another, hate and despise each
      other for opinions, equally ridiculous, upon the conduct and the
      intentions of this irrational God; when we see intelligent persons occupy
      themselves foolishly in meditating on the wishes of this capricious and
      foolish God; we are tempted to exclaim, "Oh, men! you are still savages!
      Oh, men! you are but children in the matter of religion!"
