---
id: ch124
label: "Ch. 124: REVELATION REFUTED"
type: chapter
description: "REVELATION REFUTED"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXIV.—REVELATION REFUTED.


In all parts of the world, we are assured that God revealed Himself. What
      did He teach men? Does He prove to them evidently that He exists? Does He
      tell them where He resides? Does He teach them what He is, or of what His
      essence consists? Does He explain to them clearly His intentions and His
      plan? What He says of this plan, does it agree with the effects which we
      see? No! He informs us only that "He is the One that is," [I am that I am,
      saith the Lord] that He is an invincible God, that His ways are ineffable,
      that He becomes furious as soon as one has the temerity to penetrate His
      decrees, or to consult reason in order to judge of Him or His works. Does
      the revealed conduct of God correspond with the magnificent ideas which
      are given to us of His wisdom, goodness, justice, of His omnipotence? Not
      at all; in every revelation this conduct shows a partial, capricious
      being, at least, good to His favorite people, an enemy to all others. If
      He condescends to show Himself to some men, He takes care to keep all the
      others in invincible ignorance of His divine intentions. Does not every
      special revelation announce an unjust, partial, and malicious God?


Are the revealed wishes of a God capable of striking us by the sublime
      reason or the wisdom which they contain? Do they tend to the happiness of
      the people to whom Divinity has declared them? Examining the Divine
      wishes, I find in them, in all countries, but whimsical ordinances,
      ridiculous precepts, ceremonies of which we do not understand the aim,
      puerile practices, principles of conduct unworthy of the Monarch of
      Nature, offerings, sacrifices, expiations, useful, in fact, to the
      ministers of God, but very onerous to the rest of mankind. I find also,
      that they often have a tendency to render men unsocial, disdainful,
      intolerant, quarrelsome, unjust, inhuman toward all those who have not
      received either the same revelations as they, or the same ordinances, or
      the same favors from Heaven.
