---
id: ch126
label: "Ch. 126: NOTHING ESTABLISHES THE TRUTH OF MIRACLES"
type: chapter
description: "NOTHING ESTABLISHES THE TRUTH OF MIRACLES"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXVI.—NOTHING ESTABLISHES THE TRUTH OF MIRACLES.


If, in the economy of all Divine revelations, I am unable to recognize
      either the wisdom, the goodness, or the equity of a God; if I suspect
      deceit, ambition, selfish designs in the great personages who have
      interposed between Heaven and us, I am assured that God has confirmed, by
      splendid miracles, the mission of those who have spoken for Him. But was
      it not much easier to show Himself, and to explain for Himself? On the
      other hand, if I have the curiosity to examine these miracles, I find that
      they are tales void of probability, related by suspicious people, who had
      the greatest interest in making others believe that they were sent from
      the Most High.


What witnesses are referred to in order to make us believe incredible
      miracles? They call as witnesses stupid people, who have ceased to exist
      for thousands of years, and who, even if they could attest the miracles in
      question, would be suspected of having been deceived by their own
      imagination, and of permitting themselves to be seduced by the illusions
      which skillful impostors performed before their eyes. But, you will say,
      these miracles are recorded in books which through constant tradition have
      been handed down to us. By whom were these books written? Who are the men
      who have transmitted and perpetuated them? They are either the same people
      who established these religions, or those who have become their adherents
      and their assistants. Thus, in the matter of religion, the testimony of
      interested parties is irrefragable and can not be contested!
