---
id: ch127
label: "Ch. 127: IF GOD HAD SPOKEN, IT WOULD BE STRANGE THAT HE HAD SPOKEN"
type: chapter
description: "IF GOD HAD SPOKEN, IT WOULD BE STRANGE THAT HE HAD SPOKEN"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXVII.—IF GOD HAD SPOKEN, IT WOULD BE STRANGE THAT HE HAD SPOKEN
      DIFFERENTLY TO ALL THE ADHERENTS OF THE DIFFERENT SECTS, WHO DAMN EACH
      OTHER, WHO ACCUSE EACH OTHER, WITH REASON, OF SUPERSTITION AND IMPIETY.


God has spoken differently to each nation of the globe which we inhabit.
      The Indian does not believe one word of what He said to the Chinaman; the
      Mohammedan considers what He has told to the Christian as fables; the Jew
      considers the Mohammedan and the Christian as sacrilegious corruptors of
      the Holy Law, which his God has given to his fathers. The Christian, proud
      of his more modern revelation, equally damns the Indian and the Chinaman,
      the Mohammedan, and even the Jew, whose holy books he holds. Who is wrong
      or right? Each one exclaims: "It is I!" Every one claims the same proofs;
      each one speaks of his miracles, his saints, his prophets, his martyrs.
      Sensible men answer, that they are all delirious; that God has not spoken,
      if it is true that He is a Spirit who has neither mouth nor tongue; that
      the God of the Universe could, without borrowing mortal organism, inspire
      His creatures with what He desired them to learn, and that, as they are
      all equally ignorant of what they ought to think about God, it is evident
      that God did not want to instruct them. The adherents of the different
      forms of worship which we see established in this world, accuse each other
      of superstition and of ungodliness. The Christians abhor the superstition
      of the heathen, of the Chinese, of the Mohammedans. The Roman Catholics
      treat the Protestant Christians as impious; the latter incessantly declaim
      against Roman superstition. They are all right. To be impious, is to have
      unjust opinions about the God who is adored; to be superstitious, is to
      have false ideas of Him. In accusing each other of superstition, the
      different religionists resemble humpbacks who taunt each other with their
      malformation.
