---
id: ch133
label: "Ch. 133: THE FANATICISM OF THE MARTYRS, THE INTERESTED ZEAL OF"
type: chapter
description: "THE FANATICISM OF THE MARTYRS, THE INTERESTED ZEAL OF"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXXIII.—THE FANATICISM OF THE MARTYRS, THE INTERESTED ZEAL OF
      MISSIONARIES, PROVE IN NOWISE THE TRUTH OF RELIGION.


To die for a religion does not prove it true or Divine; this proves at
      most that we suppose it to be so. An enthusiast in dying proves nothing
      but that religious fanaticism is often stronger than the love of life. An
      impostor can sometimes die with courage; he makes then, as is said, "a
      virtue of necessity." We are often surprised and affected at the sight of
      the generous courage and the disinterested zeal which have led
      missionaries to preach their doctrine at the risk even of suffering the
      most rigorous torments. We draw from this love, which is exhibited for the
      salvation of men, deductions favorable to the religion which they have
      proclaimed; but in truth this disinterestedness is only apparent. "Nothing
      ventured, nothing gained!" A missionary seeks fortune by the aid of his
      doctrine; he knows that if he has the good fortune to retail his
      commodity, he will become the absolute master of those who accept him as
      their guide; he is sure to become the object of their care, of their
      respect, of their veneration; he has every reason to believe that he will
      be abundantly provided for. These are the true motives which kindle the
      zeal and the charity of so many preachers and missionaries who travel all
      over the world.


To die for an opinion, proves no more the truth or the soundness of this
      opinion than to die in a battle proves the right of the prince, for whose
      benefit so many people are foolish enough to sacrifice themselves. The
      courage of a martyr, animated by the idea of Paradise, is not any more
      supernatural than the courage of a warrior, inspired with the idea of
      glory or held to duty by the fear of disgrace. What difference do we find
      between an Iroquois who sings while he is burned by a slow fire, and the
      martyr St. Lawrence, who while upon the gridiron insults his tyrant?


The preachers of a new doctrine succumb because they are not the
      strongest; the apostles usually practice a perilous business, whose
      consequences they can foresee; their courageous death does not prove any
      more the truth of their principles or their own sincerity, than the
      violent death of an ambitious man or a brigand proves that they had the
      right to trouble society, or that they believed themselves authorized to
      do it. A missionary's profession has been always flattering to his
      ambition, and has enabled him to subsist at the expense of the common
      people; these advantages have been sufficient to make him forget the
      dangers which are connected with it.
