---
id: ch137
label: "Ch. 137: HOW PRETEND THAT MAN OUGHT TO BELIEVE VERBAL TESTIMONY ON"
type: chapter
description: "HOW PRETEND THAT MAN OUGHT TO BELIEVE VERBAL TESTIMONY ON"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXXVII.—HOW PRETEND THAT MAN OUGHT TO BELIEVE VERBAL TESTIMONY ON
      WHAT IS CLAIMED TO BE THE MOST IMPORTANT THING FOR HIM?


Men persuade themselves that religion is the most serious affair in the
      world for them, while it is the very thing which they least examine for
      themselves. If the question arises in the purchase of land, of a house, of
      the investment of money, of a transaction, or of some kind of an
      agreement, you will see each one examine everything with care, take the
      greatest precautions, weigh all the words of a document, to beware of any
      surprise or imposition. It is not the same with religion; each one accepts
      it at hazard, and believes it upon verbal testimony, without taking the
      trouble to examine it. Two causes seem to concur in sustaining men in the
      negligence and the thoughtlessness which they exhibit when the question
      comes up of examining their religious opinions. The first one is, the
      hopelessness of penetrating the obscurity by which every religion is
      surrounded; even in its first principles, it has only a tendency to repel
      indolent minds, who see in it but chaos, to penetrate which, they judge
      impossible. The second is, that each one is afraid to incommode himself by
      the severe precepts which everybody admires in the theory, and which few
      persons take the trouble of practicing. Many people preserve their
      religion like old family titles which they have never taken the trouble to
      examine minutely, but which they place in their archives in case they need
      them.
