---
id: ch132
label: "Ch. 132: EVEN THE BLOOD OF THE MARTYRS, TESTIFIES AGAINST THE TRUTH"
type: chapter
description: "EVEN THE BLOOD OF THE MARTYRS, TESTIFIES AGAINST THE TRUTH"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXXII.—EVEN THE BLOOD OF THE MARTYRS, TESTIFIES AGAINST THE TRUTH
      OF MIRACLES AND AGAINST THE DIVINE ORIGIN WHICH CHRISTIANITY CLAIMS.


If history informs me that the first apostles, founders or reformers of
      religions, performed great miracles, history teaches me also that these
      reforming apostles and their adherents have been usually despised,
      persecuted, and put to death as disturbers of the peace of nations. I am
      then tempted to believe that they have not performed the miracles
      attributed to them. Finally, these miracles should have procured to them a
      great number of disciples among those who witnessed them, who ought to
      have prevented the performers from being maltreated. My incredulity
      increases if I am told that the performers of miracles have been cruelly
      tormented or slain. How can we believe that missionaries, protected by a
      God, invested with His Divine Power, and enjoying the gift of miracles,
      could not perform the simple miracle of escaping from the cruelty of their
      persecutors?


Persecutions themselves are considered as a convincing proof in favor of
      the religion of those who have suffered them; but a religion which boasts
      of having caused the death of many martyrs, and which informs us that its
      founders have suffered for its extension unheard-of torments, can not be
      the religion of a benevolent, equitable, and Almighty God. A good God
      would not permit that men charged with revealing His will should be
      misused. An omnipotent God desiring to found a religion, would have
      employed simpler and less fatal means for His most faithful servants. To
      say that God desired that His religion should be sealed by blood, is to
      say that this God is weak, unjust, ungrateful, and sanguinary, and that He
      sacrifices unworthily His missionaries to the interests of His ambition.
