---
id: ch138
label: "Ch. 138: FAITH TAKES ROOT BUT IN WEAK, IGNORANT, OR INDOLENT MINDS"
type: chapter
description: "FAITH TAKES ROOT BUT IN WEAK, IGNORANT, OR INDOLENT MINDS"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXXVIII.—FAITH TAKES ROOT BUT IN WEAK, IGNORANT, OR INDOLENT MINDS.


The disciples of Pythagoras had an implicit faith in their Master's
      doctrine: "HE HAS SAID IT!" was for them the solution of all problems. The
      majority of men act with as little reason. A curate, a priest, an ignorant
      monk, will become in the matter of religion the master of one's thoughts.
      Faith relieves the weakness of the human mind, for whom application is
      commonly a very painful work; it is much easier to rely upon others than
      to examine for one's self; examination being slow and difficult, it is
      usually unpleasant to ignorant and stupid minds as well as to very ardent
      ones; this is, no doubt, why faith finds so many partisans.


The less enlightenment and reason men possess, the more zeal they exhibit
      for their religion. In all the religious factions, women, aroused by their
      directors, exhibit very great zeal in opinions of which it is evident they
      have not the least idea. In theological quarrels people rush like a
      ferocious beast upon all those against whom their priest wishes to excite
      them. Profound ignorance, unlimited credulity, a very weak head, an
      irritated imagination, these are the materials of which devotees, zealots,
      fanatics, and saints are made. How can we make those people understand
      reason who allow themselves to be guided without examining anything? The
      devotees and common people are, in the hands of their guides, only
      automatons which they move at their fancy.
