---
id: ch130
label: "Ch. 130: REFUTATION OF PASCAL'S MANNER OF REASONING AS TO HOW WE SHOU"
type: chapter
description: "REFUTATION OF PASCAL'S MANNER OF REASONING AS TO HOW WE SHOULD"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXX.—REFUTATION OF PASCAL'S MANNER OF REASONING AS TO HOW WE SHOULD
      JUDGE MIRACLES.


What should we say of religions that based their Divinity upon miracles
      which they themselves cause to appear suspicious? How can we place any
      faith in the miracles related in the Holy Books of the Christians, where
      God Himself boasts of hardening hearts, of blinding those whom He wishes
      to ruin; where this God permits wicked spirits and magicians to perform as
      wonderful miracles as those of His servants; where it is prophesied that
      the Anti-Christ will have the power to perform miracles capable of
      destroying the faith even of the elect? This granted, how can we know
      whether God wants to instruct us or to lay a snare for us? How can we
      distinguish whether the wonders which we see, proceed from God or the
      Devil? Pascal, in order to disembarrass us, says very gravely, that we
      must judge the doctrine by miracles, and the miracles by the doctrine;
      that doctrine judges the miracles, and the miracles judge the doctrine. If
      there exists a defective and ridiculous circle, it is no doubt in this
      fine reasoning of one of the greatest defenders of the Christian religion.
      Which of all the religions in the world does not claim to possess the most
      admirable doctrine, and which does not bring to its aid a great number of
      miracles?


Is a miracle capable of destroying a demonstrated truth? Although a man
      should have the secret of curing all diseases, of making the lame to walk,
      of raising all the dead of a city, of floating in the air, of arresting
      the course of the sun and of the moon, will he be able to convince me by
      all this that two and two do not make four; that one makes three and that
      three makes but one; that a God who fills the universe with His immensity,
      could have transformed Himself into the body of a Jew; that the eternal
      can perish like man; that an immutable, foreseeing, and sensible God could
      have changed His opinion upon His religion, and reform His own work by a
      new revelation?
