---
id: ch136
label: "Ch. 136: HOW ABSURD AND RIDICULOUS IS THE SOPHISTRY OF THOSE WHO WISH"
type: chapter
description: "HOW ABSURD AND RIDICULOUS IS THE SOPHISTRY OF THOSE WHO WISH"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXXXVI.—HOW ABSURD AND RIDICULOUS IS THE SOPHISTRY OF THOSE WHO WISH
      TO SUBSTITUTE FAITH FOR REASON.


You tell me continually that the "truths of religion are beyond reason."
      Do you not admit, then, that these truths are not made for reasonable
      beings? To pretend that reason can deceive us, is to say that truth can be
      false, that usefulness can be injurious. Is reason anything else but the
      knowledge of the useful and the true? Besides, as we have but our reason,
      which is more or less exercised, and our senses, such as they are, to lead
      us in this life, to claim that reason is an unsafe guide, and that our
      senses are deceivers, is to tell us that our errors are necessary, that
      our ignorance is invincible, and that, without extreme injustice, God can
      not punish us for having followed the only guides which He desired to give
      us. To pretend that we are obliged to believe in things which are beyond
      our reason, is an assertion as ridiculous as to say that God would compel
      us to fly without wings. To claim that there are objects on which reason
      should not be consulted, is to say that in the most important affairs, we
      must consult but imagination, or act by chance.


Our Doctors of Divinity tell us that we ought to sacrifice our reason to
      God; but what motives can we have for sacrificing our reason to a being
      who gives us but useless gifts, which He does not intend that we should
      make use of? What confidence can we place in a God who, according to our
      Doctors themselves, is wicked enough to harden hearts, to strike us with
      blindness, to place snares in our way, to lead us into temptation?
      Finally, how can we place confidence in the ministers of this God, who, in
      order to guide us more conveniently, command us to close our eyes?
