---
id: ch146
label: "Ch. 146: CHRISTIANITY EXTENDED ITSELF BUT BY ENCOURAGING DESPOTISM, O"
type: chapter
description: "CHRISTIANITY EXTENDED ITSELF BUT BY ENCOURAGING DESPOTISM, OF"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXLVI.—CHRISTIANITY EXTENDED ITSELF BUT BY ENCOURAGING DESPOTISM, OF
      WHICH IT, LIKE ALL RELIGION, IS THE STRONGEST SUPPORT.


If we read history with some attention, we shall see that Christianity,
      fawning at first, insinuated itself among the savage and free nations of
      Europe but by showing their chiefs that its principles would favor
      despotism and place absolute power in their hands. We see, consequently,
      barbarous kings converting themselves with a miraculous promptitude; that
      is to say, adopting without examination a system so favorable to their
      ambition, and exerting themselves to have it adopted by their subjects. If
      the ministers of this religion have since often moderated their servile
      principles, it is because the theory has no influence upon the conduct of
      the Lord's ministers, except when it suits their temporal interests.


Christianity boasts of having brought to men a happiness unknown to
      preceding centuries. It is true that the Grecians have not known the
      Divine right of tyrants or usurpers over their native country. Under the
      reign of Paganism it never entered the brain of anybody that Heaven did
      not want a nation to defend itself against a ferocious beast which
      insolently ravaged it. The Christian religion, devised for the benefit of
      tyrants, was established on the principle that the nations should renounce
      the legitimate defense of themselves. Thus Christian nations are deprived
      of the first law of nature, which decrees that man should resist evil and
      disarm all who attempt to destroy him. If the ministers of the Church have
      often permitted nations to revolt for Heaven's cause, they never allowed
      them to revolt against real evils or known violences.


It is from Heaven that the chains have come to fetter the minds of
      mortals. Why is the Mohammedan everywhere a slave? It is because his
      Prophet subdued him in the name of the Deity, just as Moses before him
      subjugated the Jews. In all parts of the world we see that priests were
      the first law-givers and the first sovereigns of the savages whom they
      governed. Religion seems to have been invented but to exalt princes above
      their nations, and to deliver the people to their discretion. As soon as
      the latter find themselves unhappy here below, they are silenced by
      menacing them with God's wrath; their eyes are fixed on Heaven, in order
      to prevent them from perceiving the real causes of their sufferings and
      from applying the remedies which nature offers them.
