---
id: ch145
label: "Ch. 145: RELIGION IS FATAL TO POLITICS; IT FORMS BUT LICENTIOUS AND"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION IS FATAL TO POLITICS; IT FORMS BUT LICENTIOUS AND"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXLV.—RELIGION IS FATAL TO POLITICS; IT FORMS BUT LICENTIOUS AND
      PERVERSE DESPOTS, AS WELL AS ABJECT AND UNHAPPY SUBJECTS.


We are told constantly of the immense advantages which religion secures to
      politics; but if we reflect a moment, we will see without trouble that
      religious opinions blind and lead astray equally the rulers and the
      people, and never enlighten them either in regard to their true duties or
      their real interests. Religion but too often forms licentious, immoral
      tyrants, obeyed by slaves who are obliged to conform to their views. From
      lack of the knowledge of the true principles of administration, the aim
      and the rights of social life, the real interests of men, and the duties
      which unite them, the princes are become, in almost every land,
      licentious, absolute, and perverse; and their subjects abject unhappy, and
      wicked. It was to avoid the trouble of studying these important subjects,
      that they felt themselves obliged to have recourse to chimeras, which so
      far, instead of being a remedy, have but increased the evils of the human
      race and withdrawn their attention from the most interesting things. Does
      not the unjust and cruel manner in which so many nations are governed here
      below, furnish the most visible proofs, not only of the non-effect
      produced by the fear of another life, but of the non-existence of a
      Providence interested in the fate of the human race? If there existed a
      good God, would we not be forced to admit that He strangely neglects the
      majority of men in this life? It would appear that this God created the
      nations but to be toys for the passions and follies of His representatives
      upon earth.
