---
id: ch140
label: "Ch. 140: RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY TO MORALITY AND TO VIRTUE"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY TO MORALITY AND TO VIRTUE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXL.—RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY TO MORALITY AND TO VIRTUE.


We are constantly told, and a good many sensible persons come to believe
      it, that religion is necessary to restrain men; that without it there
      would be no check upon the people; that morality and virtue are intimately
      connected with it: "The fear of the Lord is," we are told, "the beginning
      of wisdom." The terrors of another life are salutary terrors, and
      calculated to subdue men's passions. To disabuse us in regard to the
      utility of religious notions, it is sufficient to open the eyes and to
      consider what are the morals of the most religious people. We see haughty
      tyrants, oppressive ministers, perfidious courtiers, countless
      extortioners, unscrupulous magistrates, impostors, adulterers, libertines,
      prostitutes, thieves, and rogues of all kinds, who have never doubted the
      existence of a vindictive God, or the punishments of hell, or the joys of
      Paradise.


Although very useless for the majority of men, the ministers of religion
      have tried to make death appear terrible to the eyes of their votaries. If
      the most devoted Christians could be consistent, they would pass their
      whole lives in tears, and would finally die in the most terrible alarms.
      What is more frightful than death to those unfortunate ones who are
      constantly reminded that "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
      a living God;" that they should "seek salvation with fear and trembling!"
      However, we are assured that the Christian's death has great consolations,
      of which the unbeliever is deprived. The good Christian, we are told, dies
      with the firm hope of enjoying eternal happiness, which he has tried to
      deserve. But this firm assurance, is it not a punishable presumption in
      the eyes of a severe God? The greatest saints, are they not to be in doubt
      whether they are worthy of the love or of the hatred of God Priests who
      console us with the hope of the joys of Paradise, and close your eyes to
      the torments of hell, have you then had the advantage of seeing your names
      and ours inscribed in the book of life?
