---
id: ch141
label: "Ch. 141: RELIGION IS THE WEAKEST RESTRAINT THAT CAN BE OPPOSED TO THE"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION IS THE WEAKEST RESTRAINT THAT CAN BE OPPOSED TO THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXLI.—RELIGION IS THE WEAKEST RESTRAINT THAT CAN BE OPPOSED TO THE
      PASSIONS.


To oppose to the passions and present interests of men the obscure notions
      about a metaphysical God whom no one can conceive of; the incredible
      punishments of another life; the pleasures of Heaven, of which we can not
      form an idea, is it not combating realities with chimeras? Men have always
      but confused ideas of their God; they see Him only in the clouds; they
      never think of Him when they wish to do wrong. Whenever ambition, fortune,
      or pleasure entices them or leads them away, God, and His menaces, and His
      promises weigh nothing in the balance. The things of this life have for
      men a degree of certainty, which the most lively faith can never give to
      the objects of another life.


Every religion, in its origin, was a restraint invented by legislators who
      wished to subjugate the minds of the common people. Like nurses who
      frighten children in order to put them to sleep, ambitious men use the
      name of the gods to inspire fear in savages; terror seems well suited to
      compel them to submit quietly to the yoke which is to be imposed upon
      them. Are the ghost stories of childhood fit for mature age? Man in his
      maturity no longer believes in them, or if he does, he is troubled but
      little by it, and he keeps on his road.
