---
id: ch153
label: "Ch. 153: THE DOMINANT PASSIONS AND CRIMES OF PRIESTCRAFT. WITH THE"
type: chapter
description: "THE DOMINANT PASSIONS AND CRIMES OF PRIESTCRAFT. WITH THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLIII.—THE DOMINANT PASSIONS AND CRIMES OF PRIESTCRAFT. WITH THE
      ASSISTANCE OF ITS PRETENDED GOD AND OF RELIGION, IT ASSERTS ITS PASSIONS
      AND COMMITS ITS CRIMES.


The ministers of religion have taken great care to make of their God a
      terrible, capricious, and changeable tyrant; it was necessary for them
      that He should be thus in order that He might lend Himself to their
      various interests. A God who would be just and good, without a mixture of
      caprice and perversity; a God who would constantly have the qualities of
      an honest man or of a compliant sovereign, would not suit His ministers.
      It is necessary to the priests that we tremble before their God, in order
      that we have recourse to them to obtain the means to be quieted. No man is
      a hero to his valet de chambre. It is not surprising that a God clothed by
      His priests in such a way as to cause others to fear Him, should rarely
      impose upon those priests themselves, or exert but little influence upon
      their conduct. Consequently we see them behave themselves in a uniform way
      in every land; everywhere they devour nations, debase souls, discourage
      industry, and sow discord under the pretext of the glory of their God.
      Ambition and avarice were at all times the dominating passions of the
      priesthood; everywhere the priest places himself above the sovereign and
      the laws; everywhere we see him occupied but with the interests of his
      pride, his cupidity, his despotic and vindictive mood; everywhere he
      substitutes expiations, sacrifices, ceremonies, and mysterious practices;
      in a word, inventions lucrative to himself for useful and social virtues.
      The mind is confounded and reason interdicted with the view of ridiculous
      practices and pitiable means which the ministers of the gods invented in
      every country to purify souls and render Heaven favorable to nations.
      Here, they practice circumcision upon a child to procure it Divine
      benevolence; there, they pour water upon his head to wash away the crimes
      which he could not yet have committed; in other places he is told to
      plunge himself into a river whose waters have the power to wash away all
      his impurities; in other places certain food is forbidden to him, whose
      use would not fail to excite celestial indignation; in other countries
      they order the sinful man to come periodically for the confession of his
      faults to a priest, who is often a greater sinner than he.
