---
id: ch151
label: "Ch. 151: RELIGION FAVORS THE ERRORS OF PRINCES, BY DELIVERING THEM FR"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION FAVORS THE ERRORS OF PRINCES, BY DELIVERING THEM FROM"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLI.—RELIGION FAVORS THE ERRORS OF PRINCES, BY DELIVERING THEM FROM
      FEAR AND REMORSE.


If the sacerdotal flatteries succeed in perverting princes and changing
      them into tyrants, the latter on their side necessarily corrupt the great
      men and the people. Under an unjust master, without goodness, without
      virtue, who knows no law but his caprice, a nation must become necessarily
      depraved. Will this master wish to have honest, enlightened, and virtuous
      men near him? No! he needs flatterers in those who approach him,
      imitators, slaves, base and servile minds, who give themselves up to his
      taste; his court will spread the contagion of vice to the inferior
      classes. By degrees all will be necessarily corrupted, in a State whose
      chief is corrupt himself. It was said a long time ago that the princes
      seem ordained to do all they do themselves. Religion, far from being a
      restraint upon the sovereigns, entitles them, without fear and without
      remorse, to the errors which are as fatal to themselves as to the nations
      which they govern. Men are never deceived with impunity. Tell a prince
      that he is a God, and very soon he will believe that he owes nothing to
      anybody. As long as he is feared, he will not care much for love; he will
      recognize no rights, no relations with his subjects, nor obligations in
      their behalf. Tell this prince that he is responsible for his actions to
      God alone, and very soon he will act as if he was responsible to nobody.
