---
id: ch158
label: "Ch. 158: RELIGION GIVES LICENSE TO THE FEROCITY OF THE PEOPLE BY"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION GIVES LICENSE TO THE FEROCITY OF THE PEOPLE BY"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLVIII.—RELIGION GIVES LICENSE TO THE FEROCITY OF THE PEOPLE BY
      LEGITIMIZING IT, AND AUTHORIZES CRIME BY TEACHING THAT IT CAN BE USEFUL TO
      THE DESIGNS OF GOD.


"Never," says Pascal, "do we do evil so thoroughly and so willingly as
      when we do it through a false principle of conscience." Nothing is more
      dangerous than a religion which licenses the ferocity of the people, and
      justifies in their eyes the blackest crimes; it puts no limits to their
      wickedness as soon as they believe it authorized by their God, whose
      interests, as they are told, can justify all their actions. If there is a
      question of religion, immediately the most civilized nations become true
      savages, and believe everything is permitted to them. The more cruel they
      are, the more agreeable they suppose themselves to be to their God, whose
      cause they imagine can not be sustained by too much zeal. All religions of
      the world have authorized countless crimes. The Jews, excited by the
      promises of their God, arrogated to themselves the right of exterminating
      whole nations; the Romans, whose faith was founded upon the oracles of
      their Gods, became real brigands, and conquered and ravaged the world; the
      Arabians, encouraged by their Divine preceptor, carried the sword and the
      flame among Christians and idolaters. The Christians, under pretext of
      spreading their holy religion, covered the two hemispheres a hundred times
      with blood. In all events favorable to their own interests, which they
      always call the cause of God, the priests show us the finger of God.
      According to these principles, religious bigots have the luck of seeing
      the finger of God in revolts, in revolutions, massacres, regicides,
      prostitutions, infamies, and, if these things contribute to the advantage
      of religion, we can say, then, that God uses all sorts of means to secure
      His ends. Is there anything better calculated to annihilate every idea of
      morality in the minds of men, than to make them understand that their God,
      who is so powerful and so perfect, is often compelled to use crime to
      accomplish His designs?
