---
id: ch156
label: "Ch. 156: EVERY RELIGION IS INTOLERANT, AND CONSEQUENTLY DESTRUCTIVE O"
type: chapter
description: "EVERY RELIGION IS INTOLERANT, AND CONSEQUENTLY DESTRUCTIVE OF"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLVI.—EVERY RELIGION IS INTOLERANT, AND CONSEQUENTLY DESTRUCTIVE OF
      BENEFICENCE.


There is no religious person who, according to his temperament, does not
      hate, despise, or pity the adherents of a sect different from his own. The
      dominant religion (which is never but that of the sovereign and the
      armies) always makes its superiority felt in a very cruel and injurious
      manner toward the weaker sects. There does not exist yet upon earth a true
      tolerance; everywhere a jealous God is worshiped, and each nation believes
      itself His friend to the exclusion of all others.


Every nation boasts itself of worshiping the true God, the universal God,
      the Sovereign of Nature; but when we come to examine this Monarch of the
      world, we perceive that each organization, each sect, each religious
      party, makes of this powerful God but an inferior sovereign, whose cares
      and kindness extend themselves but over a small number of His subjects who
      pretend to have the exclusive advantage of His favors, and that He does
      not trouble Himself about the others.


The founders of religions, and the priests who maintain them, have
      intended to separate the nations which they indoctrinated, from other
      nations; they desired to separate their own flock by distinctive features;
      they gave to their votaries Gods inimical to other Gods as well as the
      forms of worship, dogmas, ceremonies, separately; they persuaded them
      especially that the religions of others were ungodly and abominable. By
      this infamous contrivance, these ambitious impostors took exclusive
      possession of the minds of their votaries, rendered them unsocial, and
      made them consider as outcasts all those who had not the same ideas and
      form of worship as their own. This is the way religion succeeded in
      closing the heart, and in banishing from it that affection which man ought
      to have for his fellow-being. Sociability, tolerance, humanity, these
      first virtues of all morality are totally in compatible with religious
      prejudices.
