---
id: ch150
label: "Ch. 150: THE SHIELD OF RELIGION IS FOR TYRANNY, A WEAK RAMPART AGAINS"
type: chapter
description: "THE SHIELD OF RELIGION IS FOR TYRANNY, A WEAK RAMPART AGAINST"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CL.—THE SHIELD OF RELIGION IS FOR TYRANNY, A WEAK RAMPART AGAINST
      THE DESPAIR OF THE PEOPLE. A DESPOT IS A MADMAN, WHO INJURES HIMSELF AND
      SLEEPS UPON THE EDGE OF A PRECIPICE.


Priests in all times have shown themselves supporters of despotism, and
      the enemies of public liberty. Their profession requires vile and
      submissive slaves, who never have the audacity to reason. In an absolute
      government, their great object is to secure control of the mind of a weak
      and stupid prince, in order to make themselves masters of the people.
      Instead of leading the people to salvation, priests have always led them
      to servitude.


For the sake of the supernatural titles which religion has forged for the
      most wicked princes, the latter have generally united with the priests,
      who, sure of governing by controlling the opinion of the sovereign
      himself, have charge of tying the hands of the people and of keeping them
      under their yoke. But it is vain that the tyrant, protected by the shield
      of religion, flatters himself with being sheltered from all the blows of
      fate. Opinion is a weak rampart against the despair of the people.
      Besides, the priest is the friend of the tyrant only so long as he finds
      his profit by the tyranny; he preaches sedition and demolishes the idol
      which he has made, when he considers it no longer in conformity with the
      interests of Heaven, which he speaks of as he pleases, and which never
      speaks but in behalf of his interests. No doubt it will be said, that the
      sovereigns, knowing all the advantages which religion procures for them,
      are truly interested in upholding it with all their strength. If religious
      opinions are useful to tyrants, it is evident that they are useless to
      those who govern according to the laws of reason and of equity. Is there
      any advantage in exercising tyranny? Does not tyranny deprive princes of
      true power, the love of the people, in which is safety? Should not every
      rational prince perceive that the despot is but an insane man who injures
      himself? Will not every enlightened prince beware of his flatterers, whose
      object is to put him to sleep at the edge of the precipice to which they
      lead him?
