---
id: ch161
label: "Ch. 161: THE MORALS OF THE GOSPEL ARE IMPRACTICABLE"
type: chapter
description: "THE MORALS OF THE GOSPEL ARE IMPRACTICABLE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXI.—THE MORALS OF THE GOSPEL ARE IMPRACTICABLE.


The votaries of Christ would like to make us regard as a miracle the
      establishment of their religion, which is in every respect contrary to
      nature, opposed to all the inclinations of the heart, an enemy to physical
      pleasures. But the austerity of a doctrine has a tendency to render it
      more wonderful to the ignorant. The same reason which makes us respect, as
      Divine and supernatural, inconceivable mysteries, causes us to admire, as
      Divine and supernatural, a morality impracticable and beyond the power of
      man. To admire morals and to practice them, are two very different things.
      All the Christians continually admire the morals of the Gospel, but it is
      practiced but by a small number of saints; admired by people who
      themselves avoid imitating their conduct, under the pretext that they are
      lacking either the power or the grace.


The whole universe is infected more or less with a religious morality
      which is founded upon the opinion that to please the Deity it is necessary
      to render one's self unhappy upon earth. We see in all parts of our globe
      penitents, hermits, fakirs, fanatics, who seem to have studied profoundly
      the means of tormenting themselves for the glory of a Being whose goodness
      they all agree in celebrating. Religion, by its essence, is the enemy of
      joy and of the welfare of men. "Blessed are those who suffer!" Woe to
      those who have abundance and joy! These are the rare revelations which
      Christianity teaches!
