---
id: ch166
label: "Ch. 166: THE FEAR OF GOD IS POWERLESS AGAINST HUMAN PASSIONS"
type: chapter
description: "THE FEAR OF GOD IS POWERLESS AGAINST HUMAN PASSIONS"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXVI.—THE FEAR OF GOD IS POWERLESS AGAINST HUMAN PASSIONS.


The majority of men rarely think of God, or, at least, do not occupy
      themselves much with Him. The idea of God has so little stability, it is
      so afflicting, that it can not hold the imagination for a long time,
      except in some sad and melancholy visionists who do not constitute the
      majority of the inhabitants of this world. The common man has no
      conception of it; his weak brain becomes perplexed the moment he attempts
      to think of Him. The business man thinks of nothing but his affairs; the
      courtier of his intrigues; worldly men, women, youth, of their pleasures;
      dissipation soon dispels the wearisome notions of religion. The ambitious,
      the avaricious, and the debauchee sedulously lay aside speculations too
      feeble to counterbalance their diverse passions.


Whom does the idea of God overawe? A few weak men disappointed and
      disgusted with this world; some persons whose passions are already
      extinguished by age, by infirmities, or by reverses of fortune. Religion
      is a restraint but for those whose temperament or circumstances have
      already subjected them to reason. The fear of God does not prevent any
      from committing sin but those who do not wish to sin very much, or who are
      no longer in a condition to sin. To tell men that Divinity punishes crime
      in this world, is to claim as a fact that which experience contradicts
      constantly The most wicked men are usually the arbiters of the world, and
      those whom fortune blesses with its favors. To convince us of the
      judgments of God by sending us to the other life, is to make us accept
      conjectures in order to destroy facts which we can not dispute.
