---
id: ch165
label: "Ch. 165: THE DOGMA OF THE REMISSION OF SINS HAS BEEN INVENTED IN THE"
type: chapter
description: "THE DOGMA OF THE REMISSION OF SINS HAS BEEN INVENTED IN THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXV.—THE DOGMA OF THE REMISSION OF SINS HAS BEEN INVENTED IN THE
      INTEREST OF THE PRIESTS.


When a man has a great desire to sin, he thinks very little about his God;
      more than this, whatever crimes he may have committed, he always flatters
      himself that this God will mitigate the severity of his punishments. No
      mortal seriously believes that his conduct can damn him. Although he fears
      a terrible God, who often makes him tremble, every time he is strongly
      tempted he succumbs and sees but a God of mercy, the idea of whom quiets
      him. Does he do evil? He hopes to have the time to correct himself, and
      promises earnestly to repent some day.


There are in the religious pharmacy infallible receipts for calming the
      conscience; the priests in every country possess sovereign secrets for
      disarming the wrath of Heaven. However true it may be that the anger of
      Deity is appeased by prayers, by offerings, by sacrifices, by penitential
      tears, we have no right to say that religion holds in check the
      irregularities of men; they will first sin, and afterward seek the means
      to reconcile God. Every religion which expiates, and which promises the
      remission of crimes, if it restrains any, it encourages the great number
      to commit evil. Notwithstanding His immutability, God is, in all the
      religions of this world, a veritable Proteus. His priests show Him now
      armed with severity, and then full of clemency and gentleness; now cruel
      and pitiless, and then easily reconciled by the repentance and the tears
      of the sinners. Consequently, men face the Deity in the manner which
      conforms the most to their present interests. An always wrathful God would
      repel His worshipers, or cast them into despair. Men need a God who
      becomes angry and who can be appeased; if His anger alarms a few timid
      souls, His clemency reassures the determined wicked ones who intend to
      have recourse sooner or later to the means of reconciling themselves with
      Him; if the judgments of God frighten a few faint-hearted devotees who
      already by temperament and by habitude are not inclined to evil, the
      treasures of Divine mercy reassure the greatest criminals, who have reason
      to hope that they will participate in them with the others.
