---
id: ch162
label: "Ch. 162: A SOCIETY OF SAINTS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE"
type: chapter
description: "A SOCIETY OF SAINTS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXII.—A SOCIETY OF SAINTS WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE.


In what consists the saint of all religions? It is a man who prays, fasts,
      who torments himself, who avoids the world, who, like an owl, is pleased
      but in solitude, who abstains from all pleasure, who seems frightened at
      every object which turns him a moment from his fanatical meditations. Is
      this virtue? Is a being of this stamp of any use to himself or to others?
      Would not society be dissolved, and would not men retrograde into
      barbarism, if each one should be fool enough to wish to be a saint?


It is evident that the literal and rigorous practice of the Divine
      morality of the Christians would lead nations to ruin. A Christian who
      would attain perfection, ought to drive away from his mind all that can
      alienate him from heaven—his true country. He sees upon earth but
      temptations, snares, and opportunities to go astray; he must fear science
      as injurious to faith; he must avoid industry, as it is a means of
      obtaining riches, which are fatal to salvation; he must renounce
      preferments and honors, as things capable of exciting his pride and
      calling his attention away from his soul; in a word, the sublime morality
      of Christ, if it were not impracticable, would sever all the ties of
      society.


A saint in the world is no more useful than a saint in the desert; the
      saint has an unhappy, discontented, and often irritable, turbulent
      disposition; his zeal often obliges him, conscientiously, to disturb
      society by opinions or dreams which his vanity makes him accept as
      inspirations from Heaven. The annals of all religions are filled with
      accounts of anxious, intractable, seditious saints, who have distinguished
      themselves by ravages that, for the greater glory of God, they have
      scattered throughout the universe. If the saints who live in solitude are
      useless, those who live in the world are very often dangerous. The vanity
      of performing a role, the desire of distinguishing themselves in the eyes
      of the stupid vulgar by a strange conduct, constitute usually the
      distinctive characteristics of great saints; pride persuades them that
      they are extraordinary men, far above human nature; beings who are more
      perfect than others; chosen ones, which God looks upon with more
      complaisance than the rest of mortals. Humility in a saint is, is a
      general rule, but a pride more refined than that of common men. It must be
      a very ridiculous vanity which can determine a man to continually war with
      his own nature!
