---
id: ch167
label: "Ch. 167: THE INVENTION OF HELL IS TOO ABSURD TO PREVENT EVIL"
type: chapter
description: "THE INVENTION OF HELL IS TOO ABSURD TO PREVENT EVIL"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXVII.—THE INVENTION OF HELL IS TOO ABSURD TO PREVENT EVIL.


No one dreams about another life when he is very much absorbed in objects
      which he meets on earth. In the eyes of a passionate lover, the presence
      of his mistress extinguishes the fires of hell, and her charms blot out
      all the pleasures of Paradise. Woman! you leave, you say, your lover for
      your God? It is that your lover is no longer the same in your estimation;
      or your lover leaves you, and you must fill the void which is made in your
      heart. Nothing is more common than to see ambitious, perverse, corrupt,
      and immoral men who are religious, and who sometimes exhibit even zeal in
      its behalf; if they do not practice religion, they promise themselves they
      will practice it some day; they keep it in reserve as a remedy which,
      sooner or later, will be necessary to quiet the conscience for the evil
      which they intend yet to do. Besides, devotees and priests being a very
      numerous, active, and powerful party, it is not astonishing to see
      impostors and thieves seek for its support in order to gain their ends. We
      will be told, no doubt, that many honest people are sincerely religious
      without profit; but is uprightness of heart always accompanied with
      intelligence? We are cited to a great number of learned men, men of
      genius, who are very religious. This proves that men of genius can have
      prejudices, can be pusillanimous, can have an imagination which seduces
      them and prevents them from examining objects coolly. Pascal proves
      nothing in favor of religion, except that a man of genius can possess a
      grain of weakness, and is but a child when he is weak enough to listen to
      prejudices. Pascal himself tells us "that the mind can be strong and
      narrow, and just as extended as it is weak." He says more: "We can have
      our senses all right, and not be equally able in all things; because there
      are men who, being right in a certain sphere of things, lose themselves in
      others."
