---
id: ch163
label: "Ch. 163: HUMAN NATURE IS NOT DEPRAVED; AND A MORALITY WHICH"
type: chapter
description: "HUMAN NATURE IS NOT DEPRAVED; AND A MORALITY WHICH"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXIII.—HUMAN NATURE IS NOT DEPRAVED; AND A MORALITY WHICH
      CONTRADICTS THIS FACT IS NOT MADE FOR MAN.


A morality which contradicts the nature of man is not made for him. But
      you will say that man's nature is depraved. In what consists this
      pretended depravity? Is it because he has passions? But are not passions
      the very essence of man? Must he not seek, desire, love that which is, or
      that which he believes to be, essential to his happiness? Must he not fear
      and avoid that which he judges injurious or fatal to him? Excite his
      passions by useful objects; let him attach himself to these same objects,
      divert him by sensible and known motives from that which can do him or
      others harm, and you will make of him a reasonable and virtuous being. A
      man without passions would be equally indifferent to vice and to virtue.


Holy doctors! you constantly tell us that man's nature is perverted; you
      tell us that the way of all flesh is corrupt; you tell us that nature
      gives us but inordinate inclinations. In this case you accuse your God,
      who has not been able or willing to keep this nature in its original
      perfection. If this nature became corrupted, why did not this God repair
      it? The Christian assures me that human nature is repaired, that the death
      of his God has reestablished it in its integrity. How comes it then, that
      human nature, notwithstanding the death of a God, is still depraved? Is
      it, then, a pure loss that your God died? What becomes of His omnipotence
      and His victory over the Devil, if it is true that the Devil still holds
      the empire which, according to you, he has always exercised in the world?


Death, according to Christian theology, is the penalty of sin. This
      opinion agrees with that of some savage Negro nations, who imagine that
      the death of a man is always the supernatural effect of the wrath of the
      Gods. The Christians firmly believe that Christ has delivered them from
      sin, while they see that, in their religion as in the others, man is
      subject to death. To say that Jesus Christ has delivered us from sin, is
      it not claiming that a judge has granted pardon to a guilty man, while we
      see him sent to torture?
