---
id: ch178
label: "Ch. 178: AN ATHEIST HAS MORE MOTIVES FOR ACTING UPRIGHTLY, MORE"
type: chapter
description: "AN ATHEIST HAS MORE MOTIVES FOR ACTING UPRIGHTLY, MORE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXVIII.—AN ATHEIST HAS MORE MOTIVES FOR ACTING UPRIGHTLY, MORE
      CONSCIENCE, THAN A RELIGIOUS PERSON.


It is asked what motives has an atheist for doing right. He can have the
      motive of pleasing himself and his fellow-creatures; of living happily and
      tranquilly; of making himself loved and respected by men, whose existence
      and whose dispositions are better known than those of a being impossible
      to understand. Can he who fears not the Gods, fear anything? He can fear
      men, their contempt, their disrespect, and the punishments which the laws
      inflict; finally, he can fear himself; he can be afraid of the remorse
      that all those experience whose conscience reproaches them for having
      deserved the hatred of their fellow-beings. Conscience is the inward
      testimony which we render to ourselves for having acted in such a manner
      as to deserve the esteem or the censure of those with whom we associate.
      This conscience is based upon the knowledge which we have of men, and of
      the sentiments which our actions must awaken in them. A religious person's
      conscience persuades him that he has pleased or displeased his God, of
      whom he has no idea, and whose obscure and doubtful intentions are
      explained to him only by suspicious men, who know no more of the essence
      of Divinity than he does, and who do not agree upon what can please or
      displease God. In a word, the conscience of a credulous man is guided by
      men whose own conscience is in error, or whose interest extinguishes
      intelligence.


Can an atheist have conscience? What are his motives for abstaining from
      secret vices and crimes of which other men are ignorant, and which are
      beyond the reach of laws? He can be assured by constant experience that
      there is no vice which, in the nature of things, does not bring its own
      punishment. If he wishes to preserve himself, he will avoid all those
      excesses which can be injurious to his health; he would not desire to live
      and linger, thus becoming a burden to himself and others. In regard to
      secret crimes, he would avoid them through fear of being ashamed of
      himself, from whom he can not hide. If he has reason, he will know the
      price of the esteem that an honest man should have for himself. He will
      know, besides, that unexpected circumstances can unveil to the eyes of
      others the conduct which he feels interested in concealing. The other
      world gives no motive for doing well to him who finds no motive for it
      here.
