---
id: ch176
label: "Ch. 176: FATAL CONSEQUENCES OF PIETY"
type: chapter
description: "FATAL CONSEQUENCES OF PIETY"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXVI.—FATAL CONSEQUENCES OF PIETY.


Even by the confession of the most ardent defenders of religion and of its
      usefulness, nothing is more rare than sincere conversions; to which we
      might add, nothing is more useless to society. Men do not become disgusted
      with the world until the world is disgusted with them; a woman gives
      herself to God only when the world no longer wants her. Her vanity finds
      in religious devotion a role which occupies her and consoles her for the
      ruin of her charms. She passes her time in the most trifling practices,
      parties, intrigues, invectives, and slander; zeal furnishes her the means
      of distinguishing herself and becoming an object of consideration in the
      religious circle. If the bigots have the talent to please God and His
      priests, they rarely possess that of pleasing society or of rendering
      themselves useful to it. Religion for a devotee is a veil which covers and
      justifies all his passions, his pride, his bad humor, his anger, his
      vengeance, his impatience, his bitterness. Religion arrogates to itself a
      tyrannical superiority which banishes from commerce all gentleness,
      gaiety, and joy; it gives the right to censure others; to capture and to
      exterminate the infidels for the glory of God; it is very common to be
      religious and to have none of the virtues or the qualities necessary to
      social life.
