---
id: ch177
label: "Ch. 177: THE SUPPOSITION OF ANOTHER LIFE IS NEITHER CONSOLING TO MAN"
type: chapter
description: "THE SUPPOSITION OF ANOTHER LIFE IS NEITHER CONSOLING TO MAN"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXVII.—THE SUPPOSITION OF ANOTHER LIFE IS NEITHER CONSOLING TO MAN
      NOR NECESSARY TO MORALITY.


We are assured that the dogma of another life is of the greatest
      importance to the peace of society; it is imagined that without it men
      would have no motives for doing good. Why do we need terrors and fables to
      teach any reasonable man how he ought to conduct himself upon earth? Does
      not each one of us see that he has the greatest interest in deserving the
      approbation, esteem, and kindness of the beings which surround him, and in
      avoiding all that can cause the censure, the contempt, and the resentment
      of society? No matter how short the duration of a festival, of a
      conversation, or of a visit may be, does not each one of us wish to act a
      befitting part in it, agreeable to himself and to others? If life is but a
      passage, let us try to make it easy; it can not be so if we lack the
      regards of those who travel with us.


Religion, which is so sadly occupied with its gloomy reveries, represents
      man to us as but a pilgrim upon earth; it concludes that in order to
      travel with more safety, he should travel alone; renounce the pleasures
      which he meets and deprive himself of the amusements which could console
      him for the fatigues and the weariness of the road. A stoical and morose
      philosophy sometimes gives us counsels as senseless as religion; but a
      more rational philosophy inspires us to strew flowers on life's pathway;
      to dispel melancholy and panic terrors; to link our interests with those
      of our traveling companions; to divert ourselves by gaiety and honest
      pleasures from the pains and the crosses to which we are so often exposed.
      We are made to feel, that in order to travel pleasantly, we should abstain
      from that which could become injurious to ourselves, and to avoid with
      great care that which could make us odious to our associates.
