---
id: ch172
label: "Ch. 172: RELIGION AND ITS SUPERNATURAL MORALITY ARE FATAL TO THE"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION AND ITS SUPERNATURAL MORALITY ARE FATAL TO THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXII.—RELIGION AND ITS SUPERNATURAL MORALITY ARE FATAL TO THE
      PEOPLE, AND OPPOSED TO MAN'S NATURE.


We can judge of the merit of a system of morals but by its conformity with
      man's nature. According to this comparison, we have a right to reject it,
      if we find it detrimental to the welfare of mankind. Whoever has seriously
      meditated upon religion and its supernatural morality, whoever has weighed
      its advantages and disadvantages, will become convinced that they are both
      injurious to the interests of the human race, or directly opposed to man's
      nature.


"People, to arms! Your God's cause is at stake! Heaven is outraged! Faith
      is in danger! Down upon infidelity, blasphemy, and heresy!"


By the magical power of these valiant words, which the people never
      understand, the priests in all ages were the leaders in the revolts of
      nations, in dethroning kings, in kindling civil wars, and in imprisoning
      men. When we chance to examine the important objects which have excited
      the Celestial wrath and produced so many ravages upon the earth, it is
      found that the foolish reveries and the strange conjectures of some
      theologian who did not understand himself, or, the pretensions of the
      clergy, have severed all ties of society and inundated the human race in
      its own blood and tears.
