---
id: ch175
label: "Ch. 175: RELIGION PARALYZES MORALITY"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION PARALYZES MORALITY"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXV.—RELIGION PARALYZES MORALITY.


Religion, which claims to be the firmest support of morality, evidently
      deprives it of its true motor, to substitute imaginary motors,
      inconceivable chimeras, which, being obviously contrary to common sense,
      can not be firmly believed by any one. Everybody assures us that he
      believes firmly in a God who rewards and punishes; everybody claims to be
      persuaded of the existence of a hell and of a Paradise; however, do we see
      that these ideas render men better or counterbalance in the minds of the
      greatest number of them the slightest interest? Each one assures us that
      he is afraid of God's judgments, although each one gives vent to his
      passions when he believes himself sure of escaping the judgments of men.
      The fear of invisible powers is rarely as great as the fear of visible
      powers. Unknown or distant sufferings make less impression upon people
      than the erected gallows, or the example of a hanged man. There is
      scarcely any courtier who fears God's anger more than the displeasure of
      his master. A pension, a title, a ribbon, are sufficient to make one
      forget the torments of hell and the pleasures of the celestial court. A
      woman's caresses expose him every day to the displeasure of the Most High.
      A joke, a banter, a bon-mot, make more impression upon the man of the
      world than all the grave notions of his religion. Are we not assured that
      a true repentance is sufficient to appease Divinity? However, we do not
      see that this true repentance is sincerely expressed; at least, we very
      rarely see great thieves, even in the hour of death, restore the goods
      which they know they have unjustly acquired. Men persuade themselves, no
      doubt, that they will submit to the eternal fire, if they can not
      guarantee themselves against it. But as settlements can be made with
      Heaven by giving the Church a portion of their fortunes, there are very
      few religious thieves who do not die perfectly quieted about the manner in
      which they gained their riches in this world.
