---
id: ch170
label: "Ch. 170: CONFESSION, THAT GOLDEN MINE FOR THE PRIESTS, HAS DESTROYED"
type: chapter
description: "CONFESSION, THAT GOLDEN MINE FOR THE PRIESTS, HAS DESTROYED"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXX.—CONFESSION, THAT GOLDEN MINE FOR THE PRIESTS, HAS DESTROYED
      THE TRUE PRINCIPLES OF MORALITY.


He who first proclaimed to the nations that, when man had wronged man, he
      must ask God's pardon, appease His wrath by presents, and offer Him
      sacrifices, obviously subverted the true principles of morality. According
      to these ideas, men imagine that they can obtain from the King of Heaven,
      as well as from the kings of the earth, permission to be unjust and
      wicked, or at least pardon for the evil which they might commit.


Morality is founded upon the relations, the needs, and the constant
      interests of the inhabitants of the earth; the relations which subsist
      between men and God are either entirely unknown or imaginary. The religion
      associating God with men has visibly weakened or destroyed the ties which
      unite men.


Mortals imagine that they can, with impunity, injure each other by making
      a suitable reparation to the Almighty Being, who is supposed to have the
      right to remit all the injuries done to His creatures. Is there anything
      more liable to encourage wickedness and to embolden to crime, than to
      persuade men that there exists an invisible being who has the right to
      pardon injustice, rapine, perfidy, and all the outrages they can inflict
      upon society? Encouraged by these fatal ideas, we see the most perverse
      men abandon themselves to the greatest crimes, and expect to repair them
      by imploring Divine mercy; their conscience rests in peace when a priest
      assures them that Heaven is quieted by sincere repentance, which is very
      useless to the world; this priest consoles them in the name of Deity, if
      they consent in reparation of their faults to divide with His ministers
      the fruits of their plunderings, of their frauds, and of their wickedness.
      Morality united to religion, becomes necessarily subordinate to it. In the
      mind of a religious person, God must be preferred to His creatures; "It is
      better to obey Him than men!" The interests of the Celestial Monarch must
      be above those of weak mortals. But the interests of Heaven are evidently
      the interests of the ministers of Heaven; from which it follows evidently,
      that in all religions, the priests, under pretext of Heaven's interest's,
      or of God's glory, will be able to dispense with the duties of human
      morals when they do not agree with the duties which God is entitled to
      impose.


Besides, He who has the power to pardon crimes, has He not the right to
      order them committed?
