---
id: ch181
label: "Ch. 181: OPINIONS RARELY INFLUENCE CONDUCT"
type: chapter
description: "OPINIONS RARELY INFLUENCE CONDUCT"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXXI.—OPINIONS RARELY INFLUENCE CONDUCT.


There is nothing more rare in the world than consistent men. Their
      opinions do not influence their conduct, except when they conform to their
      temperament, their passions, and to their interests. Religious opinions,
      according to daily experience, produce much more evil than good; they are
      injurious, because they very often agree with the passions of tyrants,
      fanatics, and priests; they produce no effect, because they have not the
      power to balance the present interests of the majority of men. Religious
      principles are always put aside when they are opposed to ardent desires;
      without being incredulous, they act as if they believed nothing. We risk
      being deceived when we judge the opinions of men by their conduct or their
      conduct by their opinions. A very religious man, notwithstanding the
      austere and cruel principles of a bloody religion, will sometimes be, by a
      fortunate inconsistency, humane, tolerant, moderate; in this case the
      principles of his religion do not agree with the mildness of his
      disposition. A libertine, a debauchee, a hypocrite, an adulterer, or a
      thief will often show us that he has the clearest ideas of morals. Why do
      they not practice them? It is because neither their temperament, their
      interests, nor their habits agree with their sublime theories. The rigid
      principles of Christian morality, which so many attempt to pass off as
      Divine, have but very little influence upon the conduct of those who
      preach them to others. Do they not tell us every day to do what they
      preach, and not what they practice?


The religious partisans generally designate the incredulous as libertines.
      It may be that many incredulous people are immoral; this immorality is due
      to their temperament, and not to their opinions. But what has their
      conduct to do with these opinions? Can not an immoral man be a good
      physician, a good architect, a good geometer, a good logician, a good
      metaphysician? With an irreproachable conduct, one can be ignorant upon
      many things, and reason very badly. When truth is presented, it matters
      not from whom it comes. Let us not judge men by their opinions, or
      opinions by men; let us judge men by their conduct; and their opinions by
      their conformity with experience, reason, and their usefulness for
      mankind.
