---
id: ch184
label: "Ch. 184: CAN WE, OR SHOULD WE, LOVE OR NOT LOVE GOD?"
type: chapter
description: "CAN WE, OR SHOULD WE, LOVE OR NOT LOVE GOD?"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXXIV.—CAN WE, OR SHOULD WE, LOVE OR NOT LOVE GOD?


The Christian Doctors have made their God so little worthy of love, that
      several among them have thought it their duty not to love Him; this is a
      blasphemy which makes less sincere doctors tremble. Saint Thomas, having
      asserted that we are under obligation to love God as soon as we can use
      our reason, the Jesuit Sirmond replied to him that that was very soon; the
      Jesuit Vasquez claims that it is sufficient to love God in the hour of
      death; Hurtado says that we should love God at all times; Henriquez is
      content with loving Him every five years; Sotus, every Sunday. "Upon what
      shall we rely?" asks Father Sirmond, who adds: "that Suarez desires that
      we should love God sometimes. But at what time? He allows you to judge of
      it; he knows nothing about it himself; for he adds: 'What a learned doctor
      does not know, who can know?'" The same Jesuit Sirmond continues, by
      saying: "that God does not command us to love Him with human affection,
      and does not promise us salvation but on condition of giving Him our
      hearts; it is enough to obey Him and to love Him, by fulfilling His
      commandments; that this is the only love which we owe Him, and He has not
      commanded so much to love Him as not to hate Him." [See "Apology, Des
      Lettres Provinciales," Tome II.] This doctrine appears heretical, ungodly,
      and abominable to the Jansenists, who, by the revolting severity which
      they attribute to their God, render Him still less lovable than their
      adversaries, the Jesuits. The latter, in order to make converts, represent
      God in such a light as to give confidence to the most perverse mortals.
      Thus, nothing is less established among the Christians than the important
      question, whether we can or should love or not love God. Among their
      spiritual guides some pretend that we must love God with all the heart,
      notwithstanding all His severity; others, like the Father Daniel, think
      that an act of pure love of God is the most heroic act of Christian
      virtue, and that human weakness can scarcely reach so high. The Jesuit
      Pintereau goes still further; he says: "The deliverance from the grievous
      yoke of Divine love is a privilege of the new alliance."
