---
id: ch185
label: "Ch. 185: THE VARIOUS AND CONTRADICTORY IDEAS WHICH EXIST EVERYWHERE"
type: chapter
description: "THE VARIOUS AND CONTRADICTORY IDEAS WHICH EXIST EVERYWHERE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXXV.—THE VARIOUS AND CONTRADICTORY IDEAS WHICH EXIST EVERYWHERE
      UPON GOD AND RELIGION, PROVE THAT THEY ARE BUT IDLE FANCIES.


It is always the character of man which decides upon the character of his
      God; each one creates a God for himself, and in his own image. The
      cheerful man who indulges in pleasures and dissipation, can not imagine
      God to be an austere and rebukeful being; he requires a facile God with
      whom he can make an agreement. The severe, sour, bilious man wants a God
      like himself; one who inspires fear; and regards as perverse those that
      accept only a God who is yielding and easily won over. Heresies, quarrels,
      and schisms are necessary. Can men differently organized and modified by
      diverse circumstances, agree in regard to an imaginary being which exists
      but in their own brains? The cruel and interminable disputes continually
      arising among the ministers of the Lord, have not a tendency to attract
      the confidence of those who take an impartial view of them. How can we
      help our incredulity, when we see principles about which those who teach
      them to others, never agree? How can we avoid doubting the existence of a
      God, the idea of whom varies in such a remarkable way in the mind of His
      ministers? How can we avoid rejecting totally a God who is full of
      contradictions? How can we rely upon priests whom we see continually
      contending, accusing each other of being infidels and heretics, rending
      and persecuting each other without mercy, about the way in which they
      understand the pretended truths which they reveal to the world?
