---
id: ch187
label: "Ch. 187: PRIESTS, MORE THAN UNBELIEVERS, ACT FROM INTEREST"
type: chapter
description: "PRIESTS, MORE THAN UNBELIEVERS, ACT FROM INTEREST"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXXVII.—PRIESTS, MORE THAN UNBELIEVERS, ACT FROM INTEREST.


The apologists of religion repeat to us every day that the passions alone
      create unbelievers. "It is," they say, "pride, and a desire to distinguish
      themselves, that make atheists; they seek also to efface the idea of God
      from their minds, because they have reason to fear His rigorous
      judgments." Whatever may be the motives which cause men to be irreligious,
      the thing in question is whether they have found truth. No man acts
      without motives; let us first examine the arguments—we shall examine
      the motives afterward—and we shall find that they are more
      legitimate, and more sensible, than those of many credulous devotees who
      allow themselves to be guided by masters little worthy of men's
      confidence.


You say, O priests of the Lord! that the passions cause unbelievers; you
      pretend that they renounce religion through interest, or because it
      interferes with their irregular inclinations; you assert that they attack
      your Gods because they fear their punishments. Ah! yourselves in defending
      this religion and its chimeras, are you, then, really exempt from passions
      and interests? Who receive the fees of this religion, on whose behalf the
      priests are so zealous? It is the priests. To whom does religion procure
      power, credit, honors, wealth? To the priests! In all countries, who make
      war upon reason, science, truth, and philosophy and render them odious to
      the sovereigns and to the people? Who profit by the ignorance of men and
      their vain prejudices? The priests! You are, O priests, rewarded, honored,
      and paid for deceiving mortals, and you punish those who undeceive them.
      The follies of men procure you blessings, offerings, expiations; the most
      useful truths bring to those who announce them, chains, sufferings,
      stakes. Let the world judge between us.
