---
id: ch189
label: "Ch. 189: PREJUDICES ARE BUT FOR A TIME, AND NO POWER IS DURABLE"
type: chapter
description: "PREJUDICES ARE BUT FOR A TIME, AND NO POWER IS DURABLE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXXIX.—PREJUDICES ARE BUT FOR A TIME, AND NO POWER IS DURABLE
      EXCEPT IT IS BASED UPON TRUTH, REASON, AND EQUITY.


No man on earth is truly interested in sustaining error; sooner or later
      it is compelled to surrender to truth. General interest tends to the
      enlightenment of mortals; even the passions sometimes contribute to the
      breaking of some of the chains of prejudice. Have not the passions of some
      sovereigns destroyed, within the past two centuries in some countries of
      Europe, the tyrannical power which a haughty Pontiff formerly exercised
      over all the princes of his sect? Politics, becoming more enlightened, has
      despoiled the clergy of an immense amount of property which credulity had
      accumulated in their hands. Should not this memorable example make even
      the priests realize that prejudices are but for a time, and that truth
      alone is capable of assuring a substantial well-being?


Have not the ministers of the Lord seen that in pampering the sovereigns,
      in forging Divine rights for them, and in delivering to them the people,
      bound hand and foot, they were making tyrants of them? Have they not
      reason to fear that these gigantic idols, whom they have raised to the
      skies, will crush them also some day? Do not a thousand examples prove
      that they ought to fear that these unchained lions, after having devoured
      nations, will in turn devour them?


We will respect the priests when they become citizens. Let them make use,
      if they can, of Heaven's authority to create fear in those princes who
      incessantly desolate the earth; let them deprive them of the right of
      being unjust; let them recognize that no subject of a State enjoys living
      under tyranny; let them make the sovereigns feel that they themselves are
      not interested in exercising a power which, rendering them odious, injures
      their own safety, their own power, their own grandeur; finally, let the
      priests and the undeceived kings recognize that no power is safe that is
      not based upon truth, reason, and equity.
