---
id: ch180
label: "Ch. 180: THE MORALITY ACQUIRED BY PHILOSOPHY IS SUFFICIENT TO VIRTUE"
type: chapter
description: "THE MORALITY ACQUIRED BY PHILOSOPHY IS SUFFICIENT TO VIRTUE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXX.—THE MORALITY ACQUIRED BY PHILOSOPHY IS SUFFICIENT TO VIRTUE.


Any man who reflects can not fail of knowing his duties, of discovering
      the relations which subsist between men, of meditating upon his own
      nature, of discerning his needs, his inclinations, and his desires, and of
      perceiving what he owes to the beings necessary to his own happiness.
      These reflections naturally lead to the knowledge of the morality which is
      the most essential for society. Every man who loves to retire within
      himself in order to study and seek for the principles of things, has no
      very dangerous passions; his greatest passion will be to know the truth,
      and his greatest ambition to show it to others. Philosophy is beneficial
      in cultivating the heart and the mind. In regard to morals, has not he who
      reflects and reasons the advantage over him who does not reason?


If ignorance is useful to priests and to the oppressors of humanity, it is
      very fatal to society. Man, deprived of intelligence, does not enjoy the
      use of his reason; man, deprived of reason and intelligence, is a savage,
      who is liable at any moment to be led into crime. Morality, or the science
      of moral duties, is acquired but by the study of man and his relations. He
      who does not reflect for himself does not know true morals, and can not
      walk the road of virtue. The less men reason, the more wicked they are.
      The barbarians, the princes, the great, and the dregs of society, are
      generally the most wicked because they are those who reason the least. The
      religious man never reflects, and avoids reasoning; he fears examination;
      he follows authority; and very often an erroneous conscience makes him
      consider it a holy duty to commit evil. The incredulous man reasons,
      consults experience, and prefers it to prejudice. If he has reasoned
      justly, his conscience becomes clear; he finds more real motives for
      right-doing than the religious man, who has no motives but his chimeras,
      and who never listens to reason. Are not the motives of the incredulous
      man strong enough to counterbalance his passions? Is he blind enough not
      to recognize the interests which should restrain him? Well! he will be
      vicious and wicked; but even then he will be no worse and no better than
      many credulous men who, notwithstanding religion and its sublime precepts,
      continue to lead a life which this very religion condemns. Is a credulous
      murderer less to be feared than a murderer who does not believe anything?
      Is a religious tyrant any less a tyrant than an irreligious one?
