---
id: ch182
label: "Ch. 182: REASON LEADS MEN TO IRRELIGION AND TO ATHEISM, BECAUSE"
type: chapter
description: "REASON LEADS MEN TO IRRELIGION AND TO ATHEISM, BECAUSE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CLXXXII.—REASON LEADS MEN TO IRRELIGION AND TO ATHEISM, BECAUSE
      RELIGION IS ABSURD, AND THE GOD OF THE PRIESTS IS A MALICIOUS AND
      FEROCIOUS BEING.


Every man who reasons soon becomes incredulous, because reasoning proves
      to him that theology is but a tissue of falsehoods; that religion is
      contrary to all principles of common sense; that it gives a false color to
      all human knowledge. The rational man becomes incredulous, because he sees
      that religion, far from rendering men happier, is the first cause of the
      greatest disorders, and of the permanent calamities with which the human
      race is afflicted. The man who seeks his well-being and his own
      tranquillity, examines his religion and is undeceived, because he finds it
      inconvenient and useless to pass his life in trembling at phantoms which
      are made but to intimidate silly women or children. If, sometimes,
      libertinage, which reasons but little, leads to irreligion, the man who is
      regular in his morals can have very legitimate motives for examining his
      religion, and for banishing it from his mind. Too weak to intimidate the
      wicked, in whom vice has become deeply rooted, religious terrors afflict,
      torment, and burden imaginative minds. If souls have courage and
      elasticity, they shake off a yoke which they bear unwillingly. If weak or
      timorous, they wear the yoke during their whole life, and they grow old,
      trembling, or at least they live under burdensome uncertainty.


The priests have made of God such a malicious, ferocious being, so ready
      to be vexed, that there are few men in the world who do not wish at the
      bottom of their hearts that this God did not exist. We can not live happy
      if we are always in fear. You worship a terrible God, O religious people!
      Alas! And yet you hate Him; you wish that He was not. Can we avoid wishing
      the absence or the destruction of a master, the idea of whom can but
      torment the mind? It is the dark colors in which the priests paint the
      Deity which revolt men, moving them to hate and reject Him.
