---
id: ch192
label: "Ch. 192: THE RETRACTION OF AN UNBELIEVER AT THE HOUR OF DEATH, PROVES"
type: chapter
description: "THE RETRACTION OF AN UNBELIEVER AT THE HOUR OF DEATH, PROVES"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXCII.—THE RETRACTION OF AN UNBELIEVER AT THE HOUR OF DEATH, PROVES
      NOTHING AGAINST INCREDULITY.


The adherents of credulity often accuse the unbelievers of bad faith
      because they sometimes waver in their principles, changing opinions during
      sickness, and retracting them at the hour of death. When the body is
      diseased, the faculty of reasoning is generally disturbed also. The infirm
      and decrepit man, in approaching his end, sometimes perceives himself that
      reason is leaving him, he feels that prejudice returns. There are diseases
      which have a tendency to lessen courage, to make pusillanimous, and to
      enfeeble the brain; there are others which, in destroying the body, do not
      affect the reason. However, an unbeliever who retracts in sickness, is not
      more rare or more extraordinary than a devotionist who permits himself,
      while in health, to neglect the duties that his religion prescribes for
      him in the most formal manner.


Cleomenes, King of Sparta, having shown little respect for the Gods during
      his reign, became superstitious in his last days; with the view of
      interesting Heaven in his favor, he called around him a multitude of
      sacrificing priests. One of his friends expressing his surprise, Cleomenes
      said: "What are you astonished at? I am no longer what I was, and not
      being the same, I can not think in the same way."


The ministers of religion in their daily conduct, often belie the rigorous
      principles which they teach to others, so that the unbelievers in their
      turn think they have a right to accuse them of bad faith. If some
      unbelievers contradict, in sight of death or during sickness, the opinions
      which they entertained in health, do not the priests in health belie
      opinions of the religion which they hold? Do we see a great multitude of
      humble, generous prelates devoid of ambition, enemies of pomp and
      grandeur, the friends of poverty? In short, do we see the conduct of many
      Christian priests corresponding with the austere morality of Christ, their
      God and their model?
