---
id: ch198
label: "Ch. 198: CONTINUATION"
type: chapter
description: "CONTINUATION"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXCVIII.—CONTINUATION.


Under pretext of instructing and enlightening men, religion really holds
      them in ignorance, and deprives them even of the desire of understanding
      the objects which interest them the most. There exists for the people no
      other rule of conduct than that which their priests indicate to them.
      Religion takes the place of everything; but being in darkness itself, it
      has a greater tendency to misguide mortals, than to guide them in the way
      of science and happiness. Philosophy, morality, legislation, and politics
      are to them enigmas. Man, blinded by religious prejudices, finds it
      impossible to understand his own nature, to cultivate his reason, to make
      experiments; he fears truth as soon as it does not agree with his
      opinions. Everything tends to render the people devout, but all is opposed
      to their being humane, reasonable, and virtuous. Religion seems to have
      for its object only to blunt the feeling and to dull the intelligence of
      men.


The war which always existed between the priests and the best minds of all
      ages, comes from this, that the wise men perceived the fetters which
      superstition wished to place upon the human mind, which it fain would keep
      in eternal infancy, that it might be occupied with fables, burdened with
      terrors, and frightened by phantoms which would prevent it from
      progressing. Incapable of perfecting itself, theology opposed
      insurmountable barriers to the progress of true knowledge; it seemed to be
      occupied but with the care to keep the nations and their chiefs in the
      most profound ignorance of their true interests, of their relations, of
      their duties, of the real motives which can lead them to prosperity; it
      does but obscure morality; renders its principles arbitrary, subjects it
      to the caprices of the Gods, or of their ministers; it converts the art of
      governing men into a mysterious tyranny which becomes the scourge of
      nations; it changes the princes into unjust and licentious despots, and
      the people into ignorant slaves, who corrupt themselves in order to obtain
      the favor of their masters.
