---
id: ch195
label: "Ch. 195: EVERY RATIONAL SYSTEM IS NOT MADE FOR THE MULTITUDE"
type: chapter
description: "EVERY RATIONAL SYSTEM IS NOT MADE FOR THE MULTITUDE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXCV.—EVERY RATIONAL SYSTEM IS NOT MADE FOR THE MULTITUDE.


We may be asked if atheism can suit the multitude? I reply, that every
      system which demands discussion is not for the multitude. What use is
      there, then, in preaching atheism? It can at least make those who reason,
      feel that nothing is more extravagant than to make ourselves uneasy, and
      nothing more unjust than to cause anxiety to others on account of
      conjectures, destitute of all foundation. As to the common man, who never
      reasons, the arguments of an atheist are no better suited to him than a
      philosopher's hypothesis, an astronomer's observations, a chemist's
      experiments, a geometer's calculations, a physician's examinations, an
      architect's designs, or a lawyer's pleadings, who all labor for the people
      without their knowledge.


The metaphysical arguments of theology, and the religious disputes which
      have occupied for so long many profound visionists, are they made any more
      for the common man than the arguments of an atheist? More than this, the
      principles of atheism, founded upon common sense, are they not more
      intelligible than those of a theology which we see bristling with
      insolvable difficulties, even for the most active minds? The people in
      every country have a religion which they do not understand, which they do
      not examine, and which they follow but by routine; their priests alone
      occupy themselves with the theology which is too sublime for them. If, by
      accident, the people should lose this unknown theology, they could console
      them selves for the loss of a thing which is not only entirely useless,
      but which produces among them very dangerous ebullitions.


It would be very foolish to write for the common man or to attempt to cure
      his prejudices all at once. We write but for those who read and reason;
      the people read but little, and reason less. Sensible and peaceable people
      enlighten themselves; their light spreads itself gradually, and in time
      reaches the people. On the other hand, those who deceive men, do they not
      often take the trouble themselves of undeceiving them?
