---
id: ch196
label: "Ch. 196: FUTILITY AND DANGER OF THEOLOGY. WISE COUNSELS TO PRINCES"
type: chapter
description: "FUTILITY AND DANGER OF THEOLOGY. WISE COUNSELS TO PRINCES"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CXCVI.—FUTILITY AND DANGER OF THEOLOGY. WISE COUNSELS TO PRINCES.


If theology is a branch of commerce useful to theologians, it has been
      demonstrated to be superfluous and injurious to the rest of society. The
      interests of men will succeed in opening their eyes sooner or later. The
      sovereigns and the people will some day discover the indifference and the
      contempt that a futile science deserves which serves but to trouble men
      without making them better. They will feel the uselessness of many
      expensive practices, which do not at all contribute to public welfare;
      they will blush at many pitiful quarrels, which will cease to disturb the
      tranquillity of the States as soon as they cease to attach any importance
      to them.


Princes! instead of taking part in the senseless contentions of your
      priests, instead of espousing foolishly their impertinent quarrels,
      instead of striving to bring all your subjects to uniform opinions, occupy
      yourselves with their happiness in this world, and do not trouble
      yourselves about the fate which awaits them in another. Govern them
      justly, give them good laws, respect their liberty and their property,
      superintend their education, encourage them in their labors, reward their
      talents and their virtues, repress their licentiousness, and do not
      trouble yourselves upon what they think about objects useless to them and
      to you. Then you will no longer need fictions to make yourselves obeyed;
      you will become the only guides of your subjects; their ideas will be
      uniform about the feelings of love and respect which will be your due.
      Theological fables are useful but to tyrants, who do not understand the
      art of ruling over reasonable beings.
