---
id: ch206
label: "Ch. 206: RELIGION IS PANDORA'S BOX, AND THIS FATAL BOX IS OPEN"
type: chapter
description: "RELIGION IS PANDORA'S BOX, AND THIS FATAL BOX IS OPEN"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CCVI.—RELIGION IS PANDORA'S BOX, AND THIS FATAL BOX IS OPEN.


Religion has in every age kept the human mind in darkness and held it in
      ignorance of its true relations, of its real duties and its true
      interests. It is but in removing its clouds and phantoms that we may find
      the sources of truth, reason, morality, and the actual motives which
      inspire virtue. This religion puts us on the wrong track for the causes of
      our evils, and the natural remedies which we can apply. Far from curing
      them, it can but multiply them and render them more durable.


Let us, then, say, with the celebrated Lord Bolingbroke, in his posthumous
      works: "Theology is the Box of Pandora; and if it is impossible to close
      it, it is at least useful to give warning that this fatal box is open."


---


I believe, my dear friends, that I have given you a sufficient
      preventative against all these follies. Your reason will do more than my
      discourses, and I sincerely wish that we had only to complain of being
      deceived! But human blood has flowed since the time of Constantine for the
      establishment of these horrible impositions. The Roman, the Greek, and the
      Protestant churches by vain, ambitious, and hypocritical disputes have
      ravaged Europe, Asia, and Africa. Add to these men, whom these quarrels
      murdered, the multitudes of monks and of nuns, who became sterile by their
      profession, and you will perceive that the Christian religion has
      destroyed half of the human race.


I conclude with the desire that we may return to Nature, whose declared
      enemy the Christian religion is, and which necessarily instructs us to do
      unto others as we would wish them to do unto us. Then the universe will be
      composed of good citizens, just fathers, obedient children, tender
      friends. Nature has given us this Religion, in giving us Reason. May
      fanaticism pervert it no more! I die filled with these desires more than
      with hope.


ETREPIGNY, March 15, 1732


JOHN MESLIER


## ABSTRACT OF THE TESTAMENT OF JOHN MESLIER


### By Voltaire;


## OR, SENTIMENTS OF THE CURATE OF ETREPIGNY ADDRESSED TO HIS PARISHIONERS.
