---
id: ch203
label: "Ch. 203: HOW THEOLOGY HAS FETTERED HUMAN MORALS AND RETARDED THE"
type: chapter
description: "HOW THEOLOGY HAS FETTERED HUMAN MORALS AND RETARDED THE"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CCIII.—HOW THEOLOGY HAS FETTERED HUMAN MORALS AND RETARDED THE
      PROGRESS OF ENLIGHTENMENT, OF REASON, AND OF TRUTH.


How many subterfuges and mental gymnastics all the ancient and modern
      thinkers have employed, in order to avoid falling out with the ministers
      of the Gods, who in all ages were the true tyrants of thought! How
      Descartes, Malebranche, Leibnitz, and many others have been compelled to
      invent hypotheses and evasions in order to reconcile their discoveries
      with the reveries and the blunders which religion had rendered sacred!
      With what prevarications have not the greatest philosophers guarded
      themselves even at the risk of being absurd, inconsistent, and
      unintelligible whenever their ideas did not correspond with the principles
      of theology! Vigilant priests were always ready to extinguish systems
      which could not be made to tally with their interests. Theology in every
      age has been the bed of Procrustes upon which this brigand extended his
      victims; he cut off the limbs when they were too long, or stretched them
      by horses when they were shorter than the bed upon which he placed them.


What sensible man who has a love for science, and is interested in the
      welfare of humanity, can reflect without sorrow and pain upon the loss of
      so many profound, laborious, and subtle heads, who, for many centuries,
      have foolishly exhausted themselves upon idle fancies that proved to be
      injurious to our race? What light could have been thrown into the minds of
      many famous thinkers, if, instead of occupying themselves with a useless
      theology, and its impertinent disputes, they had turned their attention
      upon intelligible and truly important objects. Half of the efforts that it
      cost the genius that was able to forge their religious opinions, half of
      the expense which their frivolous worship cost the nations, would have
      sufficed to enlighten them perfectly upon morality, politics, philosophy,
      medicine, agriculture, etc. Superstition nearly always absorbs the
      attention, the admiration, and the treasures of the people; they have a
      very expensive religion; but they have for their money, neither light,
      virtue, nor happiness.
