---
id: ch204
label: "Ch. 204: CONTINUATION"
type: chapter
description: "CONTINUATION"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CCIV.—CONTINUATION.


Some ancient and modern philosophers have had the courage to accept
      experience and reason as their guides, and to shake off the chains of
      superstition. Lucippe, Democritus, Epicurus, Straton, and some other
      Greeks, dared to tear away the thick veil of prejudice, and to deliver
      philosophy from theological fetters. But their systems, too simple, too
      sensible, and too stripped of wonders for the lovers of fancy, were
      obliged to surrender to the fabulous conjectures of Plato, Socrates, and
      Zeno. Among the moderns, Hobbes, Spinoza, Bayle, and others have followed
      the path of Epicurus, but their doctrine found but few votaries in a world
      still too much infatuated with fables to listen to reason.


In all ages one could not, without imminent danger, lay aside the
      prejudices which opinion had rendered sacred. No one was permitted to make
      discoveries of any kind; all that the most enlightened men could do was to
      speak and write with hidden meaning; and often, by a cowardly
      complaisance, to shamefully ally falsehood with truth. A few of them had a
      double doctrine—one public and the other secret. The key of this
      last having been lost, their true sentiments often became unintelligible
      and, consequently, useless to us. How could modern philosophers who, being
      threatened with the most cruel persecution, were called upon to renounce
      reason and to submit to faith—that is to say, to priestly authority—I
      say, how could men thus fettered give free flight to their genius, perfect
      reason, or hasten human progress? It was but in fear and trembling that
      the greatest men obtained glimpses of truth; they rarely had the courage
      to announce it; those who dared to do it have generally been punished for
      their temerity. Thanks to religion, it was never permitted to think aloud
      or to combat the prejudices of which man is everywhere the victim or the
      dupe.
