---
id: ch205
label: "Ch. 205: WE COULD NOT REPEAT TOO OFTEN HOW EXTRAVAGANT AND FATAL"
type: chapter
description: "WE COULD NOT REPEAT TOO OFTEN HOW EXTRAVAGANT AND FATAL"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CCV.—WE COULD NOT REPEAT TOO OFTEN HOW EXTRAVAGANT AND FATAL
      RELIGION IS.


Every man who has the boldness to announce truths to the world, is sure to
      receive the hatred of the priests; the latter loudly call upon the powers
      that be, for assistance; they need the assistance of kings to sustain
      their arguments and their Gods. These clamors show the weakness of their
      cause.


"They are in embarrassment when they cry for help."


It is not permitted to err in the matter of religion; on every other
      subject we can be deceived with impunity; we pity those who go astray, and
      we have some liking for the persons who discover truths new to us. But as
      soon as theology supposes itself concerned, be it in errors or
      discoveries, a holy zeal is kindled; the sovereigns exterminate; the
      people fly into frenzy; and the nations are all stirred up without knowing
      why. Is there anything more afflicting than to see public and individual
      welfare depend upon a futile science, which is void of principles, which
      has no standing ground but imagination, and which presents to the mind but
      words void of sense? What good is a religion which no one understands;
      which continually torments those who trouble themselves about it; which is
      incapable of rendering men better; and which often gives them the credit
      of being unjust and wicked? Is there a more deplorable folly, and one that
      ought more to be abated, than that which, far from doing any good to the
      human race, does but blind it, cause transports, and render it miserable,
      depriving it of truth, which alone can soften the rigor of fate?
