---
id: ch200
label: "Ch. 200: ALL RELIGIONS, ANCIENT AND MODERN, HAVE MUTUALLY BORROWED TH"
type: chapter
description: "ALL RELIGIONS, ANCIENT AND MODERN, HAVE MUTUALLY BORROWED THEIR"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

## CC.—ALL RELIGIONS, ANCIENT AND MODERN, HAVE MUTUALLY BORROWED THEIR
      ABSTRACT REVERIES AND THEIR RIDICULOUS PRACTICES.


The religions of these ancient priests have disappeared, or, rather, they
      have changed their form. Although our modern theologians regard the
      ancient priests as impostors, they have taken care to gather up the
      scattered fragments of their religious systems, the whole of which does
      not exist any longer for us; we will find in our modern religions, not
      only the metaphysical dogmas which theology has but dressed in another
      form, but we still find remarkable remains of their superstitious
      practices, of their theurgy, of their magic, of their enchantments.


Christians are still commanded to regard with respect the monuments of the
      legislators, the priests, and the prophets of the Hebrew religion, which,
      according to appearances, has borrowed from Egypt the fantastic notions
      with which we see it filled. Thus the extravagances invented by frauds or
      idolatrous visionists, are still regarded as sacred opinions by the
      Christians!


If we but look at history, we see striking resemblances in all religions.
      Everywhere on earth we find religious ideas periodically afflicting and
      rejoicing the people; everywhere we see rites, practices often abominable,
      and formidable mysteries occupying the mind, and becoming objects of
      meditation. We see the different superstitions borrowing from each other
      their abstract reveries and their ceremonies. Religions are generally
      unformed rhapsodies combined by new Doctors of Divinity, who, in composing
      them, have used the materials of their predecessors, reserving the right
      of adding or subtracting what suits or does not suit their present views.
      The religion of Egypt served evidently as a basis for the religion of
      Moses, who expunged from it the worship of idols. Moses was but an
      Egyptian schismatic, Christianity is but a reformed Judaism. Mohammedanism
      is composed of Judaism, of Christianity, and of the ancient religion of
      Arabia.
