---
description: "Part One, Chapter XIX"
id: ch-019
label: "PART ONE — XIX"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

[019-001]"They're coming back!"

[019-002]It was with amazement that the inhabitants of Fresnillo learned that

[019-003]the rebel attack on [[zacatecas|Zacatecas]] had failed completely.

[019-004]"They're coming back!"

[019-005]The rebels were a maddened mob, sunburnt, filthy, naked. Their high

[019-006]wide-brimmed straw hats hid their faces. The "high hats" came back as

[019-007]happily as they had marched forth a few days before, pillaging every

[019-008]hamlet along the road, every ranch, even the poorest hut.

[019-009]"Who'll buy this thing?" one of them asked. He had carried his spoils

[019-010]long: he was tired. The sheen of the nickel on the typewriter, a new

[019-011]machine, attracted every glance. Five times that morning the Oliver had

[019-012]changed hands. The first sale netted the owner ten pesos; presently it

[019-013]had sold for eight; each time it changed hands, it was two pesos

[019-014]cheaper. To be sure, it was a heavy burden; nobody could carry it for

[019-015]more than a half-hour.

[019-016]"I'll give you a quarter for it!" Quail said.

[019-017]"Yours!" cried the owner, handing it over quickly, as though he feared

[019-018]Quail might change his mind. Thus for the sum of twenty-five cents,

[019-019]Quail was afforded the pleasure of taking it in his hands and throwing

[019-020]it with all his might against the wall.

[019-021]It struck with a crash. This gave the signal to all who carried any

[019-022]cumbersome objects to get rid of them by smashing them against the

[019-023]rocks. Objects of all sorts, crystal, china, faience, porcelain, flew

[019-024]through the air. Heavy, plated mirrors, brass candlesticks, fragile,

[019-025]delicate statues, Chinese vases, any object not readily convertible

[019-026]into cash fell by the wayside in fragments.

[019-027][[demetrio-macias|Demetrio]] did not share the untoward exaltation. After all, they were

[019-028]retreating defeated. He called Montanez and Pancracio aside and said:

[019-029]"These fellows have no guts. It's not so hard to take a town. It's like

[019-030]this. First, you open up, this way...." He sketched a vast gesture,

[019-031]spreading his powerful arms. "Then you get close to them, like

[019-032]this...." He brought his arms together, slowly. "Then slam! Bang!

[019-033]Whack! Crash!" He beat his hands against his chest.

[019-034]Anastasio and Pancracio, convinced by this simple, lucid explanation

[019-035]answered:

[019-036]"That's God's truth! They've no guts! That's the trouble with them!"

[019-037]Demetrio's men camped in a corral.

[019-038]"Do you remember Camilla?" Demetrio asked with a sigh as he settled on

[019-039]his back on the manure pile where the rest were already stretched out.

[019-040]"Camilla? What girl do you mean, Demetrio?"

[019-041]"The girl that used to feed me up there at the ranch!"

[019-042]Anastasio made a gesture implying: "I don't care a damn about the women

[019-043]... Camilla or anyone else...."

[019-044]"I've not forgotten," Demetrio went on, drawing on his cigarette. "Yes,

[019-045]I was feeling like hell! I'd just finished drinking a glass of water.

[019-046]God, but it was cool.... 'Don't you want any more?' she asked me. I was

[019-047]half dead with fever ... and all the time I saw that glass of water,

[019-048]blue ... so blue ... and I heard her little voice, 'Don't you want any

[019-049]more?' That voice tinkled in my ears like a silver hurdy-gurdy! Well,

[019-050]Pancracio, what about it? Shall we go back to the ranch?"

[019-051]"Demetrio, we're friends, aren't we? Well then, listen. You may not

[019-052]believe it, but I've had a lot of experience with women. Women! Christ,

[019-053]they're all right for a while, granted! Though even that's going pretty

[019-054]far. Demetrio, you should see the scars they've given me ... all over

[019-055]my body, not to speak of my soul! To hell with women. They're the

[019-056]devil, that's what they are! You may have noticed I steer clear of

[019-057]them. You know why. And don't think I don't know what I'm talking

[019-058]about. I've had a hell of a lot of experience and that's no lie!"

[019-059]"What do you say, Pancracio? When are we going back to the ranch?"

[019-060]Demetrio insisted, blowing gray clouds of tobacco smoke into the air.

[019-061]"Say the day, I'm game. You know I left my woman there too!"

[019-062]"Your woman, hell!" Quail said, disgruntled and sleepy.

[019-063]"All right, then, our woman! It's a good thing you're kindhearted so we

[019-064]all can enjoy her when you bring her over," Manteca murmured.

[019-065]"That's right, Pancracio, bring one-eyed Maria Antonia. We're all

[019-066]getting pretty cold around here," Meco shouted from a distance.

[019-067]The crowd broke into peals of laughter. Pancracio and Manteca vied with

[019-068]each other in calling forth oaths and obscenity.
