---
description: "Part One, Chapter XIII"
id: ch-013
label: "PART ONE — XIII"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

[013-001]I was born in Limon, close by Moyahua, right in the heart of the

[013-002]Juchipila canyon. I had my house and my cows and a patch of land, see:

[013-003]I had everything I wanted. Well, I suppose you know how we farmers make

[013-004]a habit of going over to town every week to hear Mass and the sermon

[013-005]and then to market to buy our onions and tomatoes and in general

[013-006]everything they want us to buy at the ranch. Then you pick up some

[013-007]friends and go to Primitivo Lopez' saloon for a bit of a drink before

[013-008]dinner; well, you sit there drinking and you've got to be sociable, so

[013-009]you drink more than you should and the liquor goes to your head and you

[013-010]laugh and you're damned happy and if you feel like it, you sing and

[013-011]shout and kick up a bit of a row. That's quite all right, anyhow, for

[013-012]we're not doing anyone any harm. But soon they start bothering you and

[013-013]the policeman walks up and down and stops occasionally, with his ear to

[013-014]the door. To put it in a nutshell, the chief of police and his gang are

[013-015]a lot of joykillers who decide they want to put a stop to your fun,

[013-016]see? But by God! You've got guts, you've got red blood in your veins

[013-017]and you've got a soul, too, see? So you lose your temper, you stand up

[013-018]to them and tell them to go to the Devil.

[013-019]"Now if they understand you, everything's all right; they leave you

[013-020]alone and that's all there is to it; but sometimes they try to talk you

[013-021]down and hit you and--well, you know how it is, a fellow's

[013-022]quick-tempered and he'll be damned if he'll stand for someone ordering

[013-023]him around and telling him what's what. So before you know it, you've

[013-024]got your knife out or your gun leveled, and then off you go for a wild

[013-025]run in the sierra, until they've forgotten the corpse, see?

[013-026]"All right: that's just about what happened to Monico. The fellow was a

[013-027]greater bluffer than the rest. He couldn't tell a rooster from a hen,

[013-028]not he. Well, I spit on his beard because he wouldn't mind his own

[013-029]business. That's all, there's nothing else to tell.

[013-030]"Then, just because I did that, he had the whole God-damned Federal

[013-031]Government against me. You must have heard something about that story

[013-032]in Mexico City--about the killing of Madero and some other fellow,

[013-033]Felix or Felipe Diaz, or something--I don't know. Well, this man Monico

[013-034]goes in person to [[zacatecas|Zacatecas]] to get an army to capture me. They said

[013-035]that I was a Maderista and that I was going to rebel. But a man like me

[013-036]always has friends. Somebody came and warned me of what was coming to

[013-037]me, so when the soldiers reached Limon I was miles and miles away.

[013-038]Trust me! Then my compadre Anastasio who killed somebody came and

[013-039]joined me, and Pancracio and Quail and a lot of friends and

[013-040]acquaintances came after him. Since then we've been sort of collecting,

[013-041]see? You know for yourself, we get along as best we can...."

[013-042]For a while, both men sat meditating in silence. Then:

[013-043]"Look here, Chief," said Luis Cervantes. "You know that some of

[013-044]Natera's men are at Juchipila, quite near here. I think we should join

[013-045]them before they capture Zacatecas. All we need do is speak to the

[013-046]General."

[013-047]"I'm no good at that sort of thing. And I don't like the idea of

[013-048]accepting orders from anybody very much."

[013-049]"But you've only a handful of men down here; you'll only be an

[013-050]unimportant chieftain. There's no argument about it, the [[mexican-revolution|revolution]] is

[013-051]bound to win. After it's all over they'll talk to you just as Madero

[013-052]talked to all those who had helped him: 'Thank you very much, my

[013-053]friends, you can go home now....'"

[013-054]"Well that's all I want, to be let alone so I can go home."

[013-055]"Wait a moment, I haven't finished. Madero said: 'You men have made me

[013-056]President of the Republic. You have run the risk of losing your lives

[013-057]and leaving your wives and children destitute; now I have what I

[013-058]wanted, you can go back to your picks and shovels, you can resume your

[013-059]hand-to-mouth existence, you can go half-naked and hungry just as you

[013-060]did before, while we, your superiors, will go about trying to pile up a

[013-061]few million pesos....'"

[013-062][[demetrio-macias|Demetrio]] nodded and, smiling, scratched his head.

[013-063]"You said a mouthful, Louie," Venancio the barber put in

[013-064]enthusiastically. "A mouthful as big as a church!"

[013-065]"As I was saying," Luis Cervantes resumed, "when the revolution is

[013-066]over, everything is over. Too bad that so many men have been killed,

[013-067]too bad there are so many widows and orphans, too bad there was so much

[013-068]bloodshed.

[013-069]"Of course, you are not selfish; you say to yourself: 'All I want to do

[013-070]is go back home.' But I ask you, is it fair to deprive your wife and

[013-071]kids of a fortune which God himself places within reach of your hand?

[013-072]Is it fair to abandon your motherland in this solemn moment when she

[013-073]most needs the self-sacrifice of her sons, when she most needs her

[013-074]humble sons to save her from falling again in the clutches of her

[013-075]eternal oppressors, executioners, and caciques? You must not forget

[013-076]that the thing a man holds most sacred on earth is his motherland."

[013-077]Macias smiled, his eyes shining.

[013-078]"Will it be all right if we go with Natera?"

[013-079]"Not only all right," Venancio said insinuatingly, "but I think it

[013-080]absolutely necessary."

[013-081]"Now Chief," Cervantes pursued, "I took a fancy to you the first time I

[013-082]laid eyes on you and I like you more and more every day because I

[013-083]realize what you are worth. Please let me be utterly frank. You do not

[013-084]yet realize your lofty noble function. You are a modest man without

[013-085]ambitions, you do not wish to realize the exceedingly important role

[013-086]you are destined to play in the revolution. It is not true that you

[013-087]took up arms simply because of Senor Monico. You are under arms to

[013-088]protest against the evils of all the caciques who are overrunning the

[013-089]whole nation. We are the elements of a social movement which will not

[013-090]rest until it has enlarged the destinies of our motherland. We are the

[013-091]tools Destiny makes use of to reclaim the sacred rights of the people.

[013-092]We are not fighting to dethrone a miserable murderer, we are fighting

[013-093]against tyranny itself. What moves us is what men call ideals; our

[013-094]action is what men call fighting for a principle. A principle! That's

[013-095]why Villa and Natera and Carranza are fighting; that's why we, every

[013-096]man of us, are fighting."

[013-097]"Yes ... yes ... exactly what I've been thinking myself," said Venancio

[013-098]in a climax of enthusiasm.

[013-099]"Hey, there, Pancracio," Macias called, "pull down two more beers."

[013-100]xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?


[013-101]The Project Gutenberg E-text of The Underdogs, by Mariano Azuela
