---
description: "Part One, Chapter XX"
id: ch-020
label: "PART ONE — XX"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

[020-001]"Villa is coming!"

[020-002]The news spread like lightning. Villa--the magic word! The Great Man,

[020-003]the salient profile, the unconquerable warrior who, even at a distance,

[020-004]exerts the fascination of a reptile, a boa constrictor.

[020-005]"Our Mexican Napoleon!" exclaimed Luis Cervantes.

[020-006]"Yes! The Aztec Eagle! He buried his beak of steel in the head of

[020-007]Huerta the serpent!" Solis, Natera's chief of staff, remarked somewhat

[020-008]ironically, adding: "At least, that's how I expressed it in a speech I

[020-009]made at Ciudad Juarez!"

[020-010]The two sat at the bar of the saloon, drinking beer. The "high hats,"

[020-011]wearing mufflers around their necks and thick rough leather shoes on

[020-012]their feet, ate and drank endlessly. Their gnarled hands loomed across

[020-013]table, across bar. All their talk was of Villa and his men. The tales

[020-014]Natera's followers related won gasps of astonishment from [[demetrio-macias|Demetrio]]'s

[020-015]men. Villa! Villa's battles! Ciudad Juarez ... Tierra Blanca ...

[020-016]Chihuahua ... Torreon....

[020-017]The bare facts, the mere citing of observation and experience meant

[020-018]nothing. But the real story, with its extraordinary contrasts of high

[020-019]exploits and abysmal cruelties was quite different. Villa, indomitable

[020-020]lord of the sierra, the eternal victim of all governments ... Villa

[020-021]tracked, hunted down like a wild beast ... Villa the reincarnation of

[020-022]the old legend; Villa as Providence, the bandit, that passes through

[020-023]the world armed with the blazing torch of an ideal: to rob the rich and

[020-024]give to the poor. It was the poor who built up and imposed a legend

[020-025]about him which Time itself was to increase and embellish as a shining

[020-026]example from generation to generation.

[020-027]"Look here, friend," one of Natera's men told Anastasio, "if General

[020-028]Villa takes a fancy to you, he'll give you a ranch on the spot. But if

[020-029]he doesn't, he'll shoot you down like a dog! God! You ought to see

[020-030]Villa's troops! They're all northerners and dressed like lords! You

[020-031]ought to see their wide-brimmed Texas hats and their brand-new outfits

[020-032]and their four-dollar shoes, imported from the U. S. A."

[020-033]As they retailed the wonders of Villa and his men, Natera's men gazed

[020-034]at one another ruefully, aware that their own hats were rotten from

[020-035]sunlight and moisture, that their own shirts and trousers were tattered

[020-036]and barely fit to cover their grimy, lousy bodies.

[020-037]"There's no such a thing as hunger up there. They carry boxcars full of

[020-038]oxen, sheep, cows! They've got cars full of clothing, trains full of

[020-039]guns, ammunition, food enough to make a man burst!"

[020-040]Then they spoke of Villa's airplanes.

[020-041]"Christ, those planes! You know when they're close to you, be damned if

[020-042]you know what the hell they are! They look like small boats, you know,

[020-043]or tiny rafts ... and then pretty soon they begin to rise, making a

[020-044]hell of a row. Something like an automobile going sixty miles an hour.

[020-045]Then they're like great big birds that don't even seem to move

[020-046]sometimes. But there's a joker! The God-damn things have got some

[020-047]American fellow inside with hand grenades by the thousand. Now you try

[020-048]and figure what that means! The fight is on, see? You know how a farmer

[020-049]feeds corn to his chickens, huh? Well, the American throws his lead

[020-050]bombs at the enemy just like that. Pretty soon the whole damn field is

[020-051]nothing but a graveyard ... dead men all over the dump ... dead men

[020-052]here ... dead men there ... dead men everywhere!"

[020-053]Anastasio Montanez questioned the speaker more particularly. It was not

[020-054]long before he realized that all this high praise was hearsay and that

[020-055]not a single man in Natera's army had ever laid eyes on Villa.

[020-056]"Well, when you get down to it, I guess it doesn't mean so much! No

[020-057]man's got much more guts than any other man, if you ask me. All you

[020-058]need to be a good fighter is pride, that's all. I'm not a professional

[020-059]soldier even though I'm dressed like hell, but let me tell you. I'm not

[020-060]forced to do this kind of bloody job, because I own ..."

[020-061]"Because I own over twenty oxen, whether you believe it or not!" Quail

[020-062]said, mocking Anastasio.

[020-063]xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?


[020-064]The Project Gutenberg E-text of The Underdogs, by Mariano Azuela
