---
description: "Part Two, Chapter VIII"
id: ch-029
label: "PART TWO — VIII"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

[029-001]The sun had set, the town was lost in the drab melancholy of its

[029-002]ancient streets amid the frightened silence of its inhabitants, who had

[029-003]retired very early, when Luis Cervantes reached Primitivo's general

[029-004]store, his arrival interrupting a party that promised great doings.

[029-005][[demetrio-macias|Demetrio]] was engaged in getting drunk with his old comrades. The entire

[029-006]space before the bar was occupied. War Paint and Blondie had tied up

[029-007]their horses outside; but the other officers had stormed in brutally,

[029-008]horses and all. Embroidered hats with enormous and concave brims bobbed

[029-009]up and down everywhere. The horses wheeled about, prancing; tossing

[029-010]their restive heads; their fine breed showing in their black eyes,

[029-011]their small ears and dilating nostrils. Over the infernal din of the

[029-012]drunkards, the heavy breathing of the horses, the stamp of their hoofs

[029-013]on the tiled floor, and occasionally a quick, nervous whinny rang out.

[029-014]A trivial episode was being commented upon when Luis Cervantes came in.

[029-015]A man, dressed in civilian clothes, with a round, black, bloody hole in

[029-016]his forehead, lay stretched out in the middle of the street, his mouth

[029-017]gaping. Opinion was at first divided but finally all concurred with

[029-018]Blondie's sound reasoning. The poor dead devil lying out there was the

[029-019]church sexton.... But what an idiot! His own fault, of course! Who in

[029-020]the name of hell could be so foolish as to dress like a city dude, with

[029-021]trousers, coat, cap, and all? Pancracio simply could not bear the sight

[029-022]of a city man in front of him! And that was that!

[029-023]Eight musicians, playing wind instruments, interrupted their labors at

[029-024]Cervantes' command. Their faces were round and red as suns, their eyes

[029-025]popping, for they had been blowing on their brass instruments since

[029-026]dawn.

[029-027]"General," Luis said pushing his way through the men on horseback, "a

[029-028]messenger has arrived with orders to proceed immediately to the pursuit

[029-029]and capture of Orozco and his men."

[029-030]Faces that had been dark and gloomy were now illumined with joy.

[029-031]"To Jalisco, boys!" cried Blondie, pounding on the counter.

[029-032]"Make ready, all you darling Jalisco girls of my heart, for I'm coming

[029-033]along too!" Quail shouted, twisting back the brim of his hat.

[029-034]The enthusiasm and rejoicing were general. Demetrio's friends, in the

[029-035]excitement of drunkenness, offered their services. Demetrio was so

[029-036]happy that he could scarcely speak. They were going to fight Orozco and

[029-037]his men! At last, they would pit themselves against real men! At last

[029-038]they would stop shooting down the Federals like so many rabbits or wild

[029-039]turkeys.

[029-040]"If I could get hold of Orozco alive," Blondie said, "I'd rip off the

[029-041]soles of his feet and make him walk twenty-four hours over the sierra!"

[029-042]"Was that the guy who killed Madero?" asked Meco.

[029-043]"No," Blondie replied solemnly, "but once when I was a waiter at 'El

[029-044]Monico,' up in Chihuahua, he hit me in the face!"

[029-045]"Give Camilla the roan mare," Demetrio ordered Pancracio, who was

[029-046]already saddling the horses.

[029-047]"Camilla can't go!" said War Paint promptly.

[029-048]"Who in hell asked for your opinion?" Demetrio retorted angrily.

[029-049]"It's true, isn't it, Camilla? You were sore all over, weren't you? And

[029-050]you've got a fever right now?"

[029-051]"Well--anything Demetrio says."

[029-052]"Don't be a fool! say 'No,' come on, say 'No,"' War Paint whispered

[029-053]nervously into Camilla's ear.

[029-054]"I'll tell you, War Paint.... It's funny, but I'm beginning to fall for

[029-055]him.... Would you believe it!" Camilla whispered back.

[029-056]War Paint turned purple, her cheeks swelled. Without a word she went

[029-057]out to get her horse that Blondie was saddling.
