---
description: "Chapter XXV"
id: ch25
label: "Chapter XXV"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## CHAPTER XXV

[025-001]A damn’d cramp piece of penmanship as ever I saw in my life!

[025-002]SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER

[025-003]When the Templar reached the hall of the castle, he found De Bracy already
there. “Your love-suit,” said De Bracy, “hath, I suppose,
been disturbed, like mine, by this obstreperous summons. But you have come
later and more reluctantly, and therefore I presume your interview has proved
more agreeable than mine.”

[025-004]“Has your suit, then, been unsuccessfully paid to the Saxon
heiress?” said the Templar.

[025-005]“By the bones of Thomas a Becket,” answered De Bracy, “the
Lady Rowena must have heard that I cannot endure the sight of women’s
tears.”

[025-006]“Away!” said the Templar; “thou a leader of a Free Company,
and regard a woman’s tears! A few drops sprinkled on the torch of love,
make the flame blaze the brighter.”

[025-007]“Gramercy for the few drops of thy sprinkling,” replied De Bracy;
“but this damsel hath wept enough to extinguish a beacon-light. Never was
such wringing of hands and such overflowing of eyes, since the days of St
Niobe, of whom Prior Aymer told us. [30](3192617847664551881_82-h-57.htm.html#linknote-30) A water-fiend
hath possessed the fair Saxon.”

[025-008]“A legion of fiends have occupied the bosom of the Jewess,” replied
the Templar; “for, I think no single one, not even Apollyon himself,
could have inspired such indomitable pride and resolution.—But where is
Front-de-Bœuf? That horn is sounded more and more clamorously.”

[025-009]“He is negotiating with the Jew, I suppose,” replied De Bracy,
coolly; “probably the howls of Isaac have drowned the blast of the bugle.
Thou mayst know, by experience, Sir Brian, that a Jew parting with his
treasures on such terms as our friend Front-de-Bœuf is like to offer, will
raise a clamour loud enough to be heard over twenty horns and trumpets to boot.
But we will make the vassals call him.”

[025-010]They were soon after joined by Front-de-Bœuf, who had been disturbed in his
tyrannic cruelty in the manner with which the reader is acquainted, and had
only tarried to give some necessary directions.

[025-011]“Let us see the cause of this cursed clamour,” said
Front-de-Bœuf—“here is a letter, and, if I mistake not, it is in

[025-012]Saxon.”

[025-013]He looked at it, turning it round and round as if he had had really some hopes
of coming at the meaning by inverting the position of the paper, and then
handed it to De Bracy.

[025-014]“It may be magic spells for aught I know,” said De Bracy, who
possessed his full proportion of the ignorance which characterised the chivalry
of the period. “Our chaplain attempted to teach me to write,” he
said, “but all my letters were formed like spear-heads and sword-blades,
and so the old shaveling gave up the task.”

[025-015]“Give it me,” said the Templar. “We have that of the priestly
character, that we have some knowledge to enlighten our valour.”

[025-016]“Let us profit by your most reverend knowledge, then,” said De
Bracy; “what says the scroll?”

[025-017]“It is a formal letter of defiance,” answered the Templar;
“but, by our Lady of Bethlehem, if it be not a foolish jest, it is the
most extraordinary cartel that ever was sent across the drawbridge of a
baronial castle.”

[025-018]“Jest!” said Front-de-Bœuf, “I would gladly know who dares
jest with me in such a matter!—Read it, Sir Brian.”

[025-019]The Templar accordingly read it as follows:—“I, Wamba, the son of
Witless, Jester to a noble and free-born man, Cedric of Rotherwood, called the
Saxon,—And I, Gurth, the son of Beowulph, the swineherd—-”

[025-020]“Thou art mad,” said Front-de-Bœuf, interrupting the reader.

[025-021]“By St Luke, it is so set down,” answered the Templar. Then
resuming his task, he went on,—“I, Gurth, the son of Beowulph,
swineherd unto the said Cedric, with the assistance of our allies and
confederates, who make common cause with us in this our feud, namely, the good
knight, called for the present ‘Le Noir Faineant’, and the stout
yeoman, Robert Locksley, called Cleave-the-Wand. Do you, Reginald Front
de-Bœuf, and your allies and accomplices whomsoever, to wit, that whereas you
have, without cause given or feud declared, wrongfully and by mastery seized
upon the person of our lord and master the said Cedric; also upon the person of
a noble and freeborn damsel, the Lady Rowena of Hargottstandstede; also upon
the person of a noble and freeborn man, Athelstane of Coningsburgh; also upon
the persons of certain freeborn men, their ‘cnichts’; also upon
certain serfs, their born bondsmen; also upon a certain Jew, named Isaac of
York, together with his daughter, a Jewess, and certain horses and mules: Which
noble persons, with their ‘cnichts’ and slaves, and also with the
horses and mules, Jew and Jewess beforesaid, were all in peace with his
majesty, and travelling as liege subjects upon the king’s highway;
therefore we require and demand that the said noble persons, namely, Cedric of
Rotherwood, Rowena of Hargottstandstede, Athelstane of Coningsburgh, with their
servants, ‘cnichts’, and followers, also the horses and mules, Jew
and Jewess aforesaid, together with all goods and chattels to them pertaining,
be, within an hour after the delivery hereof, delivered to us, or to those whom
we shall appoint to receive the same, and that untouched and unharmed in body
and goods. Failing of which, we do pronounce to you, that we hold ye as robbers
and traitors, and will wager our bodies against ye in battle, siege, or
otherwise, and do our utmost to your annoyance and destruction. Wherefore may
God have you in his keeping.—Signed by us upon the eve of St
Withold’s day, under the great trysting oak in the Hart-hill Walk, the
above being written by a holy man, Clerk to God, our Lady, and St Dunstan, in
the Chapel of Copmanhurst.”

[025-022]At the bottom of this document was scrawled, in the first place, a rude sketch
of a cock’s head and comb, with a legend expressing this hieroglyphic to
be the sign-manual of Wamba, son of Witless. Under this respectable emblem
stood a cross, stated to be the mark of Gurth, the son of Beowulph. Then was
written, in rough bold characters, the words, “Le Noir Faineant”.
And, to conclude the whole, an arrow, neatly enough drawn, was described as the
mark of the yeoman Locksley.

[025-023]The knights heard this uncommon document read from end to end, and then gazed
upon each other in silent amazement, as being utterly at a loss to know what it
could portend. De Bracy was the first to break silence by an uncontrollable fit
of laughter, wherein he was joined, though with more moderation, by the
Templar. Front-de-Bœuf, on the contrary, seemed impatient of their ill-timed
jocularity.

[025-024]“I give you plain warning,” he said, “fair sirs, that you had
better consult how to bear yourselves under these circumstances, than give way
to such misplaced merriment.”

[025-025]“Front-de-Bœuf has not recovered his temper since his late
overthrow,” said De Bracy to the Templar; “he is cowed at the very
idea of a cartel, though it come but from a fool and a swineherd.”

[025-026]“By St Michael,” answered Front-de-Bœuf, “I would thou
couldst stand the whole brunt of this adventure thyself, De Bracy. These
fellows dared not have acted with such inconceivable impudence, had they not
been supported by some strong bands. There are enough of outlaws in this forest
to resent my protecting the deer. I did but tie one fellow, who was taken
redhanded and in the fact, to the horns of a wild stag, which gored him to
death in five minutes, and I had as many arrows shot at me as there were
launched against yonder target at Ashby.—Here, fellow,” he added,
to one of his attendants, “hast thou sent out to see by what force this
precious challenge is to be supported?”

[025-027]“There are at least two hundred men assembled in the woods,”
answered a squire who was in attendance.

[025-028]“Here is a proper matter!” said Front-de-Bœuf, “this comes
of lending you the use of my castle, that cannot manage your undertaking
quietly, but you must bring this nest of hornets about my ears!”

[025-029]“Of hornets?” said De Bracy; “of stingless drones rather; a
band of lazy knaves, who take to the wood, and destroy the venison rather than
labour for their maintenance.”

[025-030]“Stingless!” replied Front-de-Bœuf; “fork-headed shafts of a
cloth-yard in length, and these shot within the breadth of a French crown, are
sting enough.”

[025-031]“For shame, Sir Knight!” said the Templar. “Let us summon our
people, and sally forth upon them. One knight—ay, one man-at-arms, were
enough for twenty such peasants.”

[025-032]“Enough, and too much,” said De Bracy; “I should only be
ashamed to couch lance against them.”

[025-033]“True,” answered Front-de-Bœuf; “were they black Turks or
Moors, Sir Templar, or the craven peasants of France, most valiant De Bracy;
but these are English yeomen, over whom we shall have no advantage, save what
we may derive from our arms and horses, which will avail us little in the
glades of the forest. Sally, saidst thou? we have scarce men enough to defend
the castle. The best of mine are at York; so is all your band, De Bracy; and we
have scarcely twenty, besides the handful that were engaged in this mad
business.”

[025-034]“Thou dost not fear,” said the Templar, “that they can
assemble in force sufficient to attempt the castle?”

[025-035]“Not so, Sir Brian,” answered Front-de-Bœuf. “These outlaws
have indeed a daring captain; but without machines, scaling ladders, and
experienced leaders, my castle may defy them.”

[025-036]“Send to thy neighbours,” said the Templar, “let them
assemble their people, and come to the rescue of three knights, besieged by a
jester and a swineherd in the baronial castle of Reginald
Front-de-Bœuf!”

[025-037]“You jest, Sir Knight,” answered the baron; “but to whom
should I send?—Malvoisin is by this time at York with his retainers, and
so are my other allies; and so should I have been, but for this infernal
enterprise.”

[025-038]“Then send to York, and recall our people,” said De Bracy.
“If they abide the shaking of my standard, or the sight of my Free
Companions, I will give them credit for the boldest outlaws ever bent bow in
green-wood.”

[025-039]“And who shall bear such a message?” said Front-de-Bœuf;
“they will beset every path, and rip the errand out of his bosom.—I
have it,” he added, after pausing for a moment—“Sir Templar,
thou canst write as well as read, and if we can but find the writing materials
of my chaplain, who died a twelvemonth since in the midst of his Christmas
carousals—”

[025-040]“So please ye,” said the squire, who was still in attendance,
“I think old Urfried has them somewhere in keeping, for love of the
confessor. He was the last man, I have heard her tell, who ever said aught to
her, which man ought in courtesy to address to maid or matron.”

[025-041]“Go, search them out, Engelred,” said Front-de-Bœuf; “and
then, Sir Templar, thou shalt return an answer to this bold challenge.”

[025-042]“I would rather do it at the sword’s point than at that of the
pen,” said Bois-Guilbert; “but be it as you will.”

[025-043]He sat down accordingly, and indited, in the French language, an epistle of the
following tenor:—“Sir Reginald Front-de-Bœuf, with his noble and
knightly allies and confederates, receive no defiances at the hands of slaves,
bondsmen, or fugitives. If the person calling himself the Black Knight have
indeed a claim to the honours of chivalry, he ought to know that he stands
degraded by his present association, and has no right to ask reckoning at the
hands of good men of noble blood. Touching the prisoners we have made, we do in
Christian charity require you to send a man of religion, to receive their
confession, and reconcile them with God; since it is our fixed intention to
execute them this morning before noon, so that their heads being placed on the
battlements, shall show to all men how lightly we esteem those who have
bestirred themselves in their rescue. Wherefore, as above, we require you to
send a priest to reconcile them to God, in doing which you shall render them
the last earthly service.”

[025-044]This letter being folded, was delivered to the squire, and by him to the
messenger who waited without, as the answer to that which he had brought.

[025-045]The yeoman having thus accomplished his mission, returned to the head-quarters
of the allies, which were for the present established under a venerable
oak-tree, about three arrow-flights distant from the castle. Here Wamba and
Gurth, with their allies the Black Knight and Locksley, and the jovial hermit,
awaited with impatience an answer to their summons. Around, and at a distance
from them, were seen many a bold yeoman, whose silvan dress and weatherbeaten
countenances showed the ordinary nature of their occupation. More than two
hundred had already assembled, and others were fast coming in. Those whom they
obeyed as leaders were only distinguished from the others by a feather in the
cap, their dress, arms, and equipments being in all other respects the same.

[025-046]Besides these bands, a less orderly and a worse armed force, consisting of the
Saxon inhabitants of the neighbouring township, as well as many bondsmen and
servants from Cedric’s extensive estate, had already arrived, for the
purpose of assisting in his rescue. Few of these were armed otherwise than with
such rustic weapons as necessity sometimes converts to military purposes.
Boar-spears, scythes, flails, and the like, were their chief arms; for the
Normans, with the usual policy of conquerors, were jealous of permitting to the
vanquished Saxons the possession or the use of swords and spears. These
circumstances rendered the assistance of the Saxons far from being so
formidable to the besieged, as the strength of the men themselves, their
superior numbers, and the animation inspired by a just cause, might otherwise
well have made them. It was to the leaders of this motley army that the letter
of the Templar was now delivered.

[025-047]Reference was at first made to the chaplain for an exposition of its contents.

[025-048]“By the crook of St Dunstan,” said that worthy ecclesiastic,
“which hath brought more sheep within the sheepfold than the crook of
e’er another saint in Paradise, I swear that I cannot expound unto you
this jargon, which, whether it be French or Arabic, is beyond my guess.”

[025-049]He then gave the letter to Gurth, who shook his head gruffly, and passed it to
Wamba. The Jester looked at each of the four corners of the paper with such a
grin of affected intelligence as a monkey is apt to assume upon similar
occasions, then cut a caper, and gave the letter to Locksley.

[025-050]“If the long letters were bows, and the short letters broad arrows, I
might know something of the matter,” said the brave yeoman; “but as
the matter stands, the meaning is as safe, for me, as the stag that’s at
twelve miles distance.”

[025-051]“I must be clerk, then,” said the Black Knight; and taking the
letter from Locksley, he first read it over to himself, and then explained the
meaning in Saxon to his confederates.

[025-052]“Execute the noble Cedric!” exclaimed Wamba; “by the rood,
thou must be mistaken, Sir Knight.”

[025-053]“Not I, my worthy friend,” replied the knight, “I have
explained the words as they are here set down.”

[025-054]“Then, by St Thomas of Canterbury,” replied Gurth, “we will
have the castle, should we tear it down with our hands!”

[025-055]“We have nothing else to tear it with,” replied Wamba; “but
mine are scarce fit to make mammocks of freestone and mortar.”

[025-056]“’Tis but a contrivance to gain time,” said Locksley;
“they dare not do a deed for which I could exact a fearful
penalty.”

[025-057]“I would,” said the Black Knight, “there were some one among
us who could obtain admission into the castle, and discover how the case stands
with the besieged. Methinks, as they require a confessor to be sent, this holy
hermit might at once exercise his pious vocation, and procure us the
information we desire.”

[025-058]“A plague on thee, and thy advice!” said the pious hermit; “I
tell thee, Sir Slothful Knight, that when I doff my friar’s frock, my
priesthood, my sanctity, my very Latin, are put off along with it; and when in
my green jerkin, I can better kill twenty deer than confess one
Christian.”

[025-059]“I fear,” said the Black Knight, “I fear greatly, there is no
one here that is qualified to take upon him, for the nonce, this same character
of father confessor?”

[025-060]All looked on each other, and were silent.

[025-061]“I see,” said Wamba, after a short pause, “that the fool must
be still the fool, and put his neck in the venture which wise men shrink from.
You must know, my dear cousins and countrymen, that I wore russet before I wore
motley, and was bred to be a friar, until a brain-fever came upon me and left
me just wit enough to be a fool. I trust, with the assistance of the good
hermit’s frock, together with the priesthood, sanctity, and learning
which are stitched into the cowl of it, I shall be found qualified to
administer both worldly and ghostly comfort to our worthy master Cedric, and
his companions in adversity.”

[025-062]“Hath he sense enough, thinkst thou?” said the Black Knight,
addressing Gurth.

[025-063]“I know not,” said Gurth; “but if he hath not, it will be the
first time he hath wanted wit to turn his folly to account.”

[025-064]“On with the frock, then, good fellow,” quoth the Knight,
“and let thy master send us an account of their situation within the
castle. Their numbers must be few, and it is five to one they may be accessible
by a sudden and bold attack. Time wears—away with thee.”

[025-065]“And, in the meantime,” said Locksley, “we will beset the
place so closely, that not so much as a fly shall carry news from thence. So
that, my good friend,” he continued, addressing Wamba, “thou mayst
assure these tyrants, that whatever violence they exercise on the persons of
their prisoners, shall be most severely repaid upon their own.”

[025-066]“Pax vobiscum,” said Wamba, who was now muffled in his religious
disguise.

[025-067]And so saying he imitated the solemn and stately deportment of a friar, and
departed to execute his mission.
