---
description: "Chapter XXXI"
id: ch31
label: "Chapter XXXI"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## CHAPTER XXXI

[031-001]Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,
Or, close the wall up with our English dead.
———And you, good yeomen,
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture—let us swear
That you are worth your breeding.

[031-002]KING HENRY V

[031-003]Cedric, although not greatly confident in Ulrica’s message, omitted not
to communicate her promise to the Black Knight and Locksley. They were well
pleased to find they had a friend within the place, who might, in the moment of
need, be able to facilitate their entrance, and readily agreed with the Saxon
that a storm, under whatever disadvantages, ought to be attempted, as the only
means of liberating the prisoners now in the hands of the cruel Front-de-Bœuf.

[031-004]“The royal blood of Alfred is endangered,” said Cedric.

[031-005]“The honour of a noble lady is in peril,” said the Black Knight.

[031-006]“And, by the Saint Christopher at my baldric,” said the good
yeoman, “were there no other cause than the safety of that poor faithful
knave, Wamba, I would jeopard a joint ere a hair of his head were hurt.”

[031-007]“And so would I,” said the Friar; “what, sirs! I trust well
that a fool—I mean, d’ye see me, sirs, a fool that is free of his
guild and master of his craft, and can give as much relish and flavour to a cup
of wine as ever a flitch of bacon can—I say, brethren, such a fool shall
never want a wise clerk to pray for or fight for him at a strait, while I can
say a mass or flourish a partisan.” And with that he made his heavy
halberd to play around his head as a shepherd boy flourishes his light crook.

[031-008]“True, Holy Clerk,” said the Black Knight, “true as if Saint
Dunstan himself had said it.—And now, good Locksley, were it not well
that noble Cedric should assume the direction of this assault?”

[031-009]“Not a jot I,” returned Cedric; “I have never been wont to
study either how to take or how to hold out those abodes of tyrannic power,
which the Normans have erected in this groaning land. I will fight among the
foremost; but my honest neighbours well know I am not a trained soldier in the
discipline of wars, or the attack of strongholds.”

[031-010]“Since it stands thus with noble Cedric,” said Locksley, “I
am most willing to take on me the direction of the archery; and ye shall hang
me up on my own Trysting-tree, an the defenders be permitted to show themselves
over the walls without being stuck with as many shafts as there are cloves in a
gammon of bacon at Christmas.”

[031-011]“Well said, stout yeoman,” answered the Black Knight; “and if
I be thought worthy to have a charge in these matters, and can find among these
brave men as many as are willing to follow a true English knight, for so I may
surely call myself, I am ready, with such skill as my experience has taught me,
to lead them to the attack of these walls.”

[031-012]The parts being thus distributed to the leaders, they commenced the first
assault, of which the reader has already heard the issue.

[031-013]When the barbican was carried, the Sable Knight sent notice of the happy event
to Locksley, requesting him at the same time, to keep such a strict observation
on the castle as might prevent the defenders from combining their force for a
sudden sally, and recovering the outwork which they had lost. This the knight
was chiefly desirous of avoiding, conscious that the men whom he led, being
hasty and untrained volunteers, imperfectly armed and unaccustomed to
discipline, must, upon any sudden attack, fight at great disadvantage with the
veteran soldiers of the Norman knights, who were well provided with arms both
defensive and offensive; and who, to match the zeal and high spirit of the
besiegers, had all the confidence which arises from perfect discipline and the
habitual use of weapons.

[031-014]The knight employed the interval in causing to be constructed a sort of
floating bridge, or long raft, by means of which he hoped to cross the moat in
despite of the resistance of the enemy. This was a work of some time, which the
leaders the less regretted, as it gave Ulrica leisure to execute her plan of
diversion in their favour, whatever that might be.

[031-015]When the raft was completed, the Black Knight addressed the
besiegers:—“It avails not waiting here longer, my friends; the sun
is descending to the west—and I have that upon my hands which will not
permit me to tarry with you another day. Besides, it will be a marvel if the
horsemen come not upon us from York, unless we speedily accomplish our purpose.
Wherefore, one of ye go to Locksley, and bid him commence a discharge of arrows
on the opposite side of the castle, and move forward as if about to assault it;
and you, true English hearts, stand by me, and be ready to thrust the raft
endlong over the moat whenever the postern on our side is thrown open. Follow
me boldly across, and aid me to burst yon sallyport in the main wall of the
castle. As many of you as like not this service, or are but ill armed to meet
it, do you man the top of the outwork, draw your bow-strings to your ears, and
mind you quell with your shot whatever shall appear to man the
rampart—Noble Cedric, wilt thou take the direction of those which
remain?”

[031-016]“Not so, by the soul of Hereward!” said the Saxon; “lead I
cannot; but may posterity curse me in my grave, if I follow not with the
foremost wherever thou shalt point the way—The quarrel is mine, and well
it becomes me to be in the van of the battle.”

[031-017]“Yet, bethink thee, noble Saxon,” said the knight, “thou hast
neither hauberk, nor corslet, nor aught but that light helmet, target, and
sword.”

[031-018]“The better!” answered Cedric; “I shall be the lighter to
climb these walls. And,—forgive the boast, Sir Knight,—thou shalt
this day see the naked breast of a Saxon as boldly presented to the battle as
ever ye beheld the steel corslet of a Norman.”

[031-019]“In the name of God, then,” said the knight, “fling open the
door, and launch the floating bridge.”

[031-020]The portal, which led from the inner-wall of the barbican to the moat, and
which corresponded with a sallyport in the main wall of the castle, was now
suddenly opened; the temporary bridge was then thrust forward, and soon flashed
in the waters, extending its length between the castle and outwork, and forming
a slippery and precarious passage for two men abreast to cross the moat. Well
aware of the importance of taking the foe by surprise, the Black Knight,
closely followed by Cedric, threw himself upon the bridge, and reached the
opposite side. Here he began to thunder with his axe upon the gate of the
castle, protected in part from the shot and stones cast by the defenders by the
ruins of the former drawbridge, which the Templar had demolished in his retreat
from the barbican, leaving the counterpoise still attached to the upper part of
the portal. The followers of the knight had no such shelter; two were instantly
shot with cross-bow bolts, and two more fell into the moat; the others
retreated back into the barbican.

[031-021]The situation of Cedric and of the Black Knight was now truly dangerous, and
would have been still more so, but for the constancy of the archers in the
barbican, who ceased not to shower their arrows upon the battlements,
distracting the attention of those by whom they were manned, and thus affording
a respite to their two chiefs from the storm of missiles which must otherwise
have overwhelmed them. But their situation was eminently perilous, and was
becoming more so with every moment.

[031-022]“Shame on ye all!” cried De Bracy to the soldiers around him;
“do ye call yourselves cross-bowmen, and let these two dogs keep their
station under the walls of the castle?—Heave over the coping stones from
the battlements, an better may not be—Get pick-axe and levers, and down
with that huge pinnacle!” pointing to a heavy piece of stone carved-work
that projected from the parapet.

[031-023]At this moment the besiegers caught sight of the red flag upon the angle of the
tower which Ulrica had described to Cedric. The stout yeoman Locksley was the
first who was aware of it, as he was hasting to the outwork, impatient to see
the progress of the assault.

[031-024]“Saint George!” he cried, “Merry Saint George for
England!—To the charge, bold yeomen!—why leave ye the good knight
and noble Cedric to storm the pass alone?—make in, mad priest, show thou
canst fight for thy rosary,—make in, brave yeomen!—the castle is
ours, we have friends within—See yonder flag, it is the appointed
signal—Torquilstone is ours!—Think of honour, think of
spoil—One effort, and the place is ours!”

[031-025]With that he bent his good bow, and sent a shaft right through the breast of
one of the men-at-arms, who, under De Bracy’s direction, was loosening a
fragment from one of the battlements to precipitate on the heads of Cedric and
the Black Knight. A second soldier caught from the hands of the dying man the
iron crow, with which he heaved at and had loosened the stone pinnacle, when,
receiving an arrow through his head-piece, he dropped from the battlements into
the moat a dead man. The men-at-arms were daunted, for no armour seemed proof
against the shot of this tremendous archer.

[031-026]“Do you give ground, base knaves!” said De Bracy;
“‘Mount joye Saint Dennis!’—Give me the lever!”

[031-027]And, snatching it up, he again assailed the loosened pinnacle, which was of
weight enough, if thrown down, not only to have destroyed the remnant of the
drawbridge, which sheltered the two foremost assailants, but also to have sunk
the rude float of planks over which they had crossed. All saw the danger, and
the boldest, even the stout Friar himself, avoided setting foot on the raft.
Thrice did Locksley bend his shaft against De Bracy, and thrice did his arrow
bound back from the knight’s armour of proof.

[031-028]“Curse on thy Spanish steel-coat!” said Locksley, “had
English smith forged it, these arrows had gone through, an as if it had been
silk or sendal.” He then began to call out, “Comrades! friends!
noble Cedric! bear back, and let the ruin fall.”

[031-029]His warning voice was unheard, for the din which the knight himself occasioned
by his strokes upon the postern would have drowned twenty war-trumpets. The
faithful Gurth indeed sprung forward on the planked bridge, to warn Cedric of
his impending fate, or to share it with him. But his warning would have come
too late; the massive pinnacle already tottered, and De Bracy, who still heaved
at his task, would have accomplished it, had not the voice of the Templar
sounded close in his ears:—

[031-030]“All is lost, De Bracy, the castle burns.”

[031-031]“Thou art mad to say so!” replied the knight.

[031-032]“It is all in a light flame on the western side. I have striven in vain
to extinguish it.”

[031-033]With the stern coolness which formed the basis of his character, Brian de
Bois-Guilbert communicated this hideous intelligence, which was not so calmly
received by his astonished comrade.

[031-034]“Saints of Paradise!” said De Bracy; “what is to be done? I
vow to Saint Nicholas of Limoges a candlestick of pure gold—”

[031-035]“Spare thy vow,” said the Templar, “and mark me. Lead thy men
down, as if to a sally; throw the postern-gate open—There are but two men
who occupy the float, fling them into the moat, and push across for the
barbican. I will charge from the main gate, and attack the barbican on the
outside; and if we can regain that post, be assured we shall defend ourselves
until we are relieved, or at least till they grant us fair quarter.”

[031-036]“It is well thought upon,” said De Bracy; “I will play my
part—Templar, thou wilt not fail me?”

[031-037]“Hand and glove, I will not!” said Bois-Guilbert. “But haste
thee, in the name of God!”

[031-038]De Bracy hastily drew his men together, and rushed down to the postern-gate,
which he caused instantly to be thrown open. But scarce was this done ere the
portentous strength of the Black Knight forced his way inward in despite of De
Bracy and his followers. Two of the foremost instantly fell, and the rest gave
way notwithstanding all their leader’s efforts to stop them.

[031-039]“Dogs!” said De Bracy, “will ye let TWO men win our only pass
for safety?”

[031-040]“He is the devil!” said a veteran man-at-arms, bearing back from
the blows of their sable antagonist.

[031-041]“And if he be the devil,” replied De Bracy, “would you fly
from him into the mouth of hell?—the castle burns behind us,
villains!—let despair give you courage, or let me forward! I will cope
with this champion myself.”

[031-042]And well and chivalrous did De Bracy that day maintain the fame he had acquired
in the civil wars of that dreadful period. The vaulted passage to which the
postern gave entrance, and in which these two redoubted champions were now
fighting hand to hand, rung with the furious blows which they dealt each other,
De Bracy with his sword, the Black Knight with his ponderous axe. At length the
Norman received a blow, which, though its force was partly parried by his
shield, for otherwise never more would De Bracy have again moved limb,
descended yet with such violence on his crest, that he measured his length on
the paved floor.

[031-043]“Yield thee, De Bracy,” said the Black Champion, stooping over him,
and holding against the bars of his helmet the fatal poniard with which the
knights dispatched their enemies, (and which was called the dagger of
mercy,)—“yield thee, Maurice de Bracy, rescue or no rescue, or thou
art but a dead man.”

[031-044]“I will not yield,” replied De Bracy faintly, “to an unknown
conqueror. Tell me thy name, or work thy pleasure on me—it shall never be
said that Maurice de Bracy was prisoner to a nameless churl.”

[031-045]The Black Knight whispered something into the ear of the vanquished.

[031-046]“I yield me to be true prisoner, rescue or no rescue,” answered the
Norman, exchanging his tone of stern and determined obstinacy for one of deep
though sullen submission.

[031-047]“Go to the barbican,” said the victor, in a tone of authority,
“and there wait my further orders.”

[031-048]“Yet first, let me say,” said De Bracy, “what it imports thee
to know. Wilfred of Ivanhoe is wounded and a prisoner, and will perish in the
burning castle without present help.”

[031-049]“Wilfred of Ivanhoe!” exclaimed the Black
Knight—“prisoner, and perish!—The life of every man in the
castle shall answer it if a hair of his head be singed—Show me his
chamber!”

[031-050]“Ascend yonder winding stair,” said De Bracy; “it leads to
his apartment—Wilt thou not accept my guidance?” he added, in a
submissive voice.

[031-051]“No. To the barbican, and there wait my orders. I trust thee not, De
Bracy.”

[031-052]During this combat and the brief conversation which ensued, Cedric, at the head
of a body of men, among whom the Friar was conspicuous, had pushed across the
bridge as soon as they saw the postern open, and drove back the dispirited and
despairing followers of De Bracy, of whom some asked quarter, some offered vain
resistance, and the greater part fled towards the court-yard. De Bracy himself
arose from the ground, and cast a sorrowful glance after his conqueror.
“He trusts me not!” he repeated; “but have I deserved his
trust?” He then lifted his sword from the floor, took off his helmet in
token of submission, and, going to the barbican, gave up his sword to Locksley,
whom he met by the way.

[031-053]As the fire augmented, symptoms of it became soon apparent in the chamber,
where Ivanhoe was watched and tended by the Jewess Rebecca. He had been
awakened from his brief slumber by the noise of the battle; and his attendant,
who had, at his anxious desire, again placed herself at the window to watch and
report to him the fate of the attack, was for some time prevented from
observing either, by the increase of the smouldering and stifling vapour. At
length the volumes of smoke which rolled into the apartment—the cries for
water, which were heard even above the din of the battle made them sensible of
the progress of this new danger.

[031-054]“The castle burns,” said Rebecca; “it burns!—What can
we do to save ourselves?”

[031-055]“Fly, Rebecca, and save thine own life,” said Ivanhoe, “for
no human aid can avail me.”

[031-056]“I will not fly,” answered Rebecca; “we will be saved or
perish together—And yet, great God!—my father, my father—what
will be his fate!”

[031-057]At this moment the door of the apartment flew open, and the Templar presented
himself,—a ghastly figure, for his gilded armour was broken and bloody,
and the plume was partly shorn away, partly burnt from his casque. “I
have found thee,” said he to Rebecca; “thou shalt prove I will keep
my word to share weal and woe with thee—There is but one path to safety,
I have cut my way through fifty dangers to point it to thee—up, and
instantly follow me!” [38](3192617847664551881_82-h-57.htm.html#linknote-38)

[031-058]“Alone,” answered Rebecca, “I will not follow thee. If thou
wert born of woman—if thou hast but a touch of human charity in
thee—if thy heart be not hard as thy breastplate—save my aged
father—save this wounded knight!”

[031-059]“A knight,” answered the Templar, with his characteristic calmness,
“a knight, Rebecca, must encounter his fate, whether it meet him in the
shape of sword or flame—and who recks how or where a Jew meets with
his?”

[031-060]“Savage warrior,” said Rebecca, “rather will I perish in the
flames than accept safety from thee!”

[031-061]“Thou shalt not choose, Rebecca—once didst thou foil me, but never
mortal did so twice.”

[031-062]So saying, he seized on the terrified maiden, who filled the air with her
shrieks, and bore her out of the room in his arms in spite of her cries, and
without regarding the menaces and defiance which Ivanhoe thundered against him.
“Hound of the Temple—stain to thine Order—set free the
damsel! Traitor of Bois-Guilbert, it is Ivanhoe commands thee!—Villain, I
will have thy heart’s blood!”

[031-063]“I had not found thee, Wilfred,” said the Black Knight, who at that
instant entered the apartment, “but for thy shouts.”

[031-064]“If thou be’st true knight,” said Wilfred, “think not
of me—pursue yon ravisher—save the Lady Rowena—look to the
noble Cedric!”

[031-065]“In their turn,” answered he of the Fetterlock, “but thine is
first.”

[031-066]And seizing upon Ivanhoe, he bore him off with as much ease as the Templar had
carried off Rebecca, rushed with him to the postern, and having there delivered
his burden to the care of two yeomen, he again entered the castle to assist in
the rescue of the other prisoners.

[031-067]One turret was now in bright flames, which flashed out furiously from window
and shot-hole. But in other parts, the great thickness of the walls and the
vaulted roofs of the apartments, resisted the progress of the flames, and there
the rage of man still triumphed, as the scarce more dreadful element held
mastery elsewhere; for the besiegers pursued the defenders of the castle from
chamber to chamber, and satiated in their blood the vengeance which had long
animated them against the soldiers of the tyrant Front-de-Bœuf. Most of the
garrison resisted to the uttermost—few of them asked quarter—none
received it. The air was filled with groans and clashing of arms—the
floors were slippery with the blood of despairing and expiring wretches.

[031-068]Through this scene of confusion, Cedric rushed in quest of Rowena, while the
faithful Gurth, following him closely through the “melee”,
neglected his own safety while he strove to avert the blows that were aimed at
his master. The noble Saxon was so fortunate as to reach his ward’s
apartment just as she had abandoned all hope of safety, and, with a crucifix
clasped in agony to her bosom, sat in expectation of instant death. He
committed her to the charge of Gurth, to be conducted in safety to the
barbican, the road to which was now cleared of the enemy, and not yet
interrupted by the flames. This accomplished, the loyal Cedric hastened in
quest of his friend Athelstane, determined, at every risk to himself, to save
that last scion of Saxon royalty. But ere Cedric penetrated as far as the old
hall in which he had himself been a prisoner, the inventive genius of Wamba had
procured liberation for himself and his companion in adversity.

[031-069]When the noise of the conflict announced that it was at the hottest, the Jester
began to shout, with the utmost power of his lungs, “Saint George and the
dragon!—Bonny Saint George for merry England!—The castle is
won!” And these sounds he rendered yet more fearful, by banging against
each other two or three pieces of rusty armour which lay scattered around the
hall.

[031-070]A guard, which had been stationed in the outer, or anteroom, and whose spirits
were already in a state of alarm, took fright at Wamba’s clamour, and,
leaving the door open behind them, ran to tell the Templar that foemen had
entered the old hall. Meantime the prisoners found no difficulty in making
their escape into the anteroom, and from thence into the court of the castle,
which was now the last scene of contest. Here sat the fierce Templar, mounted
on horseback, surrounded by several of the garrison both on horse and foot, who
had united their strength to that of this renowned leader, in order to secure
the last chance of safety and retreat which remained to them. The drawbridge
had been lowered by his orders, but the passage was beset; for the archers, who
had hitherto only annoyed the castle on that side by their missiles, no sooner
saw the flames breaking out, and the bridge lowered, than they thronged to the
entrance, as well to prevent the escape of the garrison, as to secure their own
share of booty ere the castle should be burnt down. On the other hand, a party
of the besiegers who had entered by the postern were now issuing out into the
court-yard, and attacking with fury the remnant of the defenders who were thus
assaulted on both sides at once.

[031-071]Animated, however, by despair, and supported by the example of their
indomitable leader, the remaining soldiers of the castle fought with the utmost
valour; and, being well-armed, succeeded more than once in driving back the
assailants, though much inferior in numbers. Rebecca, placed on horseback
before one of the Templar’s Saracen slaves, was in the midst of the
little party; and Bois-Guilbert, notwithstanding the confusion of the bloody
fray, showed every attention to her safety. Repeatedly he was by her side, and,
neglecting his own defence, held before her the fence of his triangular
steel-plated shield; and anon starting from his position by her, he cried his
war-cry, dashed forward, struck to earth the most forward of the assailants,
and was on the same instant once more at her bridle rein.

[031-072]Athelstane, who, as the reader knows, was slothful, but not cowardly, beheld
the female form whom the Templar protected thus sedulously, and doubted not
that it was Rowena whom the knight was carrying off, in despite of all
resistance which could be offered.

[031-073]“By the soul of Saint Edward,” he said, “I will rescue her
from yonder over-proud knight, and he shall die by my hand!”

[031-074]“Think what you do!” cried Wamba; “hasty hand catches frog
for fish—by my bauble, yonder is none of my Lady Rowena—see but her
long dark locks!—Nay, an ye will not know black from white, ye may be
leader, but I will be no follower—no bones of mine shall be broken unless
I know for whom.—And you without armour too!—Bethink you, silk
bonnet never kept out steel blade.—Nay, then, if wilful will to water,
wilful must drench.—‘Deus vobiscum’, most doughty
Athelstane!”—he concluded, loosening the hold which he had hitherto
kept upon the Saxon’s tunic.

[031-075]To snatch a mace from the pavement, on which it lay beside one whose dying
grasp had just relinquished it—to rush on the Templar’s band, and
to strike in quick succession to the right and left, levelling a warrior at
each blow, was, for Athelstane’s great strength, now animated with
unusual fury, but the work of a single moment; he was soon within two yards of
Bois-Guilbert, whom he defied in his loudest tone.

[031-076]“Turn, false-hearted Templar! let go her whom thou art unworthy to
touch—turn, limb of a hand of murdering and hypocritical robbers!”

[031-077]“Dog!” said the Templar, grinding his teeth, “I will teach
thee to blaspheme the holy Order of the Temple of Zion;” and with these
words, half-wheeling his steed, he made a demi-courbette towards the Saxon, and
rising in the stirrups, so as to take full advantage of the descent of the
horse, he discharged a fearful blow upon the head of Athelstane.

[031-078]Well said Wamba, that silken bonnet keeps out no steel blade. So trenchant was
the Templar’s weapon, that it shore asunder, as it had been a willow
twig, the tough and plaited handle of the mace, which the ill-fated Saxon
reared to parry the blow, and, descending on his head, levelled him with the
earth.

[031-079]“‘Ha! Beau-seant!’” exclaimed Bois-Guilbert,
“thus be it to the maligners of the Temple-knights!” Taking
advantage of the dismay which was spread by the fall of Athelstane, and calling
aloud, “Those who would save themselves, follow me!” he pushed
across the drawbridge, dispersing the archers who would have intercepted them.
He was followed by his Saracens, and some five or six men-at-arms, who had
mounted their horses. The Templar’s retreat was rendered perilous by the
numbers of arrows shot off at him and his party; but this did not prevent him
from galloping round to the barbican, of which, according to his previous plan,
he supposed it possible De Bracy might have been in possession.

[031-080]“De Bracy! De Bracy!” he shouted, “art thou there?”

[031-081]“I am here,” replied De Bracy, “but I am a prisoner.”

[031-082]“Can I rescue thee?” cried Bois-Guilbert.

[031-083]“No,” replied De Bracy; “I have rendered me, rescue or no
rescue. I will be true prisoner. Save thyself—there are hawks
abroad—put the seas betwixt you and England—I dare not say
more.”

[031-084]“Well,” answered the Templar, “an thou wilt tarry there,
remember I have redeemed word and glove. Be the hawks where they will, methinks
the walls of the Preceptory of Templestowe will be cover sufficient, and
thither will I, like heron to her haunt.”

[031-085]Having thus spoken, he galloped off with his followers.

[031-086]Those of the castle who had not gotten to horse, still continued to fight
desperately with the besiegers, after the departure of the Templar, but rather
in despair of quarter than that they entertained any hope of escape. The fire
was spreading rapidly through all parts of the castle, when Ulrica, who had
first kindled it, appeared on a turret, in the guise of one of the ancient
furies, yelling forth a war-song, such as was of yore raised on the field of
battle by the scalds of the yet heathen Saxons. Her long dishevelled grey hair
flew back from her uncovered head; the inebriating delight of gratified
vengeance contended in her eyes with the fire of insanity; and she brandished
the distaff which she held in her hand, as if she had been one of the Fatal
Sisters, who spin and abridge the thread of human life. Tradition has preserved
some wild strophes of the barbarous hymn which she chanted wildly amid that
scene of fire and of slaughter:—

[031-087]1.
Whet the bright steel,
Sons of the White Dragon!
Kindle the torch,
Daughter of Hengist!
The steel glimmers not for the carving of the banquet,
It is hard, broad, and sharply pointed;
The torch goeth not to the bridal chamber,
It steams and glitters blue with sulphur.
Whet the steel, the raven croaks!
Light the torch, Zernebock is yelling!
Whet the steel, sons of the Dragon!
Kindle the torch, daughter of Hengist!  
  
2.
The black cloud is low over the thane’s castle
The eagle screams—he rides on its bosom.
Scream not, grey rider of the sable cloud,
Thy banquet is prepared!
The maidens of Valhalla look forth,
The race of Hengist will send them guests.
Shake your black tresses, maidens of Valhalla!
And strike your loud timbrels for joy!
Many a haughty step bends to your halls,
Many a helmed head.  
  
3.
Dark sits the evening upon the thanes castle,
The black clouds gather round;
Soon shall they be red as the blood of the valiant!
The destroyer of forests shall shake his red crest against

[031-088]them.

[031-089]He, the bright consumer of palaces,
Broad waves he his blazing banner,
Red, wide and dusky,
Over the strife of the valiant:
His joy is in the clashing swords and broken bucklers;
He loves to lick the hissing blood as it bursts warm from the
wound!  
  
4.
All must perish!
The sword cleaveth the helmet;
The strong armour is pierced by the lance;
Fire devoureth the dwelling of princes,
Engines break down the fences of the battle.
All must perish!
The race of Hengist is gone—
The name of Horsa is no more!
Shrink not then from your doom, sons of the sword!
Let your blades drink blood like wine;
Feast ye in the banquet of slaughter,
By the light of the blazing halls!
Strong be your swords while your blood is warm,
And spare neither for pity nor fear,
For vengeance hath but an hour;
Strong hate itself shall expire
I also must perish! [39](3192617847664551881_82-h-57.htm.html#linknote-39)

[031-090]The towering flames had now surmounted every obstruction, and rose to the
evening skies one huge and burning beacon, seen far and wide through the
adjacent country. Tower after tower crashed down, with blazing roof and rafter;
and the combatants were driven from the court-yard. The vanquished, of whom
very few remained, scattered and escaped into the neighbouring wood. The
victors, assembling in large bands, gazed with wonder, not unmixed with fear,
upon the flames, in which their own ranks and arms glanced dusky red. The
maniac figure of the Saxon Ulrica was for a long time visible on the lofty
stand she had chosen, tossing her arms abroad with wild exultation, as if she
reined empress of the conflagration which she had raised. At length, with a
terrific crash, the whole turret gave way, and she perished in the flames which
had consumed her tyrant. An awful pause of horror silenced each murmur of the
armed spectators, who, for the space of several minutes, stirred not a finger,
save to sign the cross. The voice of Locksley was then heard, “Shout,
yeomen!—the den of tyrants is no more! Let each bring his spoil to our
chosen place of rendezvous at the Trysting-tree in the Harthill-walk; for there
at break of day will we make just partition among our own bands, together with
our worthy allies in this great deed of vengeance.”
