---
description: "Chapter 7 of Part X"
id: part-x-ch-7
label: "Part X — Chapter 7"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

[046-001]For the next three days I hung about the Exchange Hotel in a state of mind which need not be described. I saw no one I knew except a couple of Clitherland subalterns who happened to be dining in the Hotel. They cheerily enquired when I was coming out to the Camp. Evidently they were inquisitive about me, without suspecting anything extraordinary, so I inferred that Orderly Room had been keeping my strange behaviour secret. On Tuesday my one-legged friend, the Deputy-Assistant-Adjutant, came to see me. We managed to avoid mentioning everything connected with my “present situation,” and he regaled me with the gossip of the Camp as though nothing were wrong. But when he was departing he handed me an official document which instructed me to proceed to Crewe next day for a Special [[medical-board|Medical Board]]. A railway warrant was enclosed with it.

[046-002]Here was a chance of turning aside from the road to Court-Martialdom, and it would be inaccurate were I to say that I never gave the question two thoughts. Roughly speaking, two thoughts were exactly what I did give to it. One thought urged that I might just as well chuck the whole business and admit that my gesture had been futile. The other one reminded me that this was an inevitable conjuncture in my progress, and that such temptations must be resisted inflexibly. Not that I ever admitted the possibility of my accepting the invitation to Crewe; but I did become conscious that acceptance would be much pleasanter than refusal. Submission being impossible, I called in pride and obstinacy to aid me, throttled my warm feelings toward my well-wishers at Clitherland Camp, and burnt my boats by tearing up both railway warrant and Medical Board instructions.

[046-003]On Wednesday I tried to feel glad that I was cutting the Medical Board, and applied my mind to Palgrave’s Golden Treasury of Songs and Lyrics. I was learning by heart as many poems as possible, my idea being that they would be a help to me in prison, where, I imagined, no books would be allowed. I suppose I ought to try and get used to giving up tobacco, I thought, but I went on smoking just the same (the alternative being to smoke as many pipes as I could while I’d got the chance).

[046-004]On Thursday morning I received an encouraging letter from the M.P. who urged me to keep my spirits up and was hoping to raise the question of my statement in the House next week. Early in the afternoon the Colonel called to see me. He found me learning Keats’ “Ode to a Nightingale.” “I cannot see what flowers are at my feet, / Nor what soft.﻿ ﻿…” What soft was it, I wondered, reopening the book. But here was the Colonel, apparently unincensed, shaking my hand, and sitting down opposite me, though already looking fussed and perplexed. He wasn’t a lively-minded man at the best of times, and he didn’t pretend to understand the motives which had actuated me. But with patient commonsense arguments, he did his best to persuade me to stop wanting to stop the War. Fortified by the M.P.’s letter in my pocket, I managed to remain respectfully obdurate, while expressing my real regret for the trouble I was causing him. What appeared to worry him most was the fact that I’d cut the Medical Board. “Do you realize, [[sassoon-siegfried|Sherston]], that it had been specially arranged for you and that an R.A.[[military-cross|M.C.]] Colonel came all the way from [[london|London]] for it?” he ejaculated ruefully, wiping the perspiration from his forehead. The poor man﻿—whose existence was dominated by documentary instructions from “higher quarters,” had probably been blamed for my nonappearance; and to disregard such an order was, to one with his habit of mind, like a reversal of the order of nature. As the interview dragged itself along, I began to feel quite optimistic about the progress I was making. The Colonel’s stuttering arguments in support of “crushing Prussian militarism” were those of a middle-aged civilian; and as the overworked superintendent of a reinforcement manufactory, he had never had time to ask himself why North Welshmen were being shipped across to [[france|France]] to be gassed, machine-gunned, and high explosived by Germans. It was absolutely impossible, he asserted, for the War to end until it ended﻿—well, until it ended as it ought to end. Did I think it right that so many men should have been sacrificed for no purpose? “And surely it stands to reason, Sherston, that you must be wrong when you set your own opinion against the practically unanimous feeling of the whole British Empire.” There was no answer I could make to that, so I remained silent and waited for the British Empire idea to blow over. In conclusion he said, “Well, I’ve done all I can for you. I told Mersey Defences that you missed your Board through a misunderstanding of the instructions, but I’m afraid the affair will soon go beyond my control. I beg you to try and reconsider your refusal by tomorrow, and to let us know at once if you do.”

[046-005]He looked at me, almost irately, and departed without another word. When his bulky figure had vanished I felt that my isolation was perceptibly increasing. All I needed to do was to wait until the affair had got beyond his control. I wished I could have a talk with Tyrrell. But even he wasn’t infallible, for in all our discussions about my plan of campaign he had never foreseen that my senior officers would treat me with this kindly tolerance which was so difficult to endure.

[046-006]During the next two days my mind groped and worried around the same purgatorial limbo so incessantly that the whole business began to seem unreal and distorted. Sometimes the wording of my thoughts became incoherent and even nonsensical. At other times I saw everything with the haggard clarity of insomnia.

[046-007]So on Saturday afternoon I decided that I really must go and get some fresh air, and I took the electric train to Formby. How much longer would this ghastly show go on, I wondered, as the train pulled up at Clitherland Station. All I wanted now was that the thing should be taken out of my own control, as well as the Colonel’s. I didn’t care how they treated me as long as I wasn’t forced to argue about it any more. At Formby I avoided the Golf Course (remembering, with a gleam of haggard humour, how [[aunt-evelyn|Aunt Evelyn]] had urged me to bring my “golf sticks,” as she called them). Wandering along the sand dunes I felt outlawed, bitter, and baited. I wanted something to smash and trample on, and in a paroxysm of exasperation I performed the time-honoured gesture of shaking my clenched fists at the sky. Feeling no better for that, I ripped the M.C. ribbon off my tunic and threw it into the mouth of the Mersey. Weighted with significance though this action was, it would have felt more conclusive had the ribbon been heavier. As it was, the poor little thing fell weakly onto the water and floated away as though aware of its own futility. One of my point-to-point cups would have served my purpose more satisfyingly, and they’d meant much the same to me as my Military Cross.

[046-008]Watching a big boat which was steaming along the horizon, I realized that protesting against the prolongation of the War was about as much use as shouting at the people on board that ship.

---

[046-009]Next morning I was sitting in the hotel smoking-room in a state of stubborn apathy. I had got just about to the end of my tether. Since it was Sunday and my eighth day in Liverpool I might have chosen this moment for reviewing the past week, though I had nothing to congratulate myself on except the fact that I’d survived seven days without hauling down my flag. It is possible that I meditated some desperate counterattack which might compel the authorities to treat me harshly, but I had no idea how to do it. “Damn it all, I’ve half a mind to go to [[religion|church]],” I thought, although as far as I could see there was more real religion to be found in the Golden Treasury than in a church which only approved of military-aged men when they were in khaki. Sitting in a sacred edifice wouldn’t help me, I decided. And then I was taken completely by surprise; for there was [[david-cromlech|David Cromlech]], knobby-faced and gawky as ever, advancing across the room. His arrival brought instantaneous relief, which I expressed by exclaiming: “Thank God you’ve come!”

[046-010]He sat down without saying anything. He too was pleased to see me, but retained that air of anxious concern with which his eyes had first encountered mine. As usual he looked as if he’d slept in his uniform. Something had snapped inside me and I felt rather silly and hysterical. “David, you’ve got an enormous black smudge on your forehead,” I remarked. Obediently he moistened his handkerchief with his tongue and proceeded to rub the smudge off, tentatively following my instructions as to its whereabouts. During this operation his face was vacant and childish, suggesting an earlier time when his nurse had performed a similar service for him. “How on earth did you manage to roll up from the Isle of Wight like this?” I enquired. He smiled in a knowing way. Already he was beginning to look less as though he were visiting an invalid; but I’d been so much locked up with my own thoughts lately that for the next few minutes I talked nineteen to the dozen, telling him what a hellish time I’d had, how terribly kind the depot officers had been to me, and so on. “When I started this anti-war stunt I never dreamt it would be such a long job, getting myself run in for a court martial,” I concluded, laughing with somewhat hollow gaiety.

[046-011]In the meantime David sat moody and silent, his face twitching nervously and his fingers twiddling one of his tunic buttons. “Look here, George,” he said, abruptly, scrutinizing the button as though he’d never seen such a thing before, “I’ve come to tell you that you’ve got to drop this anti-war business.” This was a new idea, for I wasn’t yet beyond my sense of relief at seeing him. “But I can’t drop it,” I exclaimed. “Don’t you realize that I’m a man with a message? I thought you’d come to see me through the court martial as ‘prisoner’s friend.’ ” We then settled down to an earnest discussion about the “political errors and insincerities for which the fighting men were being sacrificed.” He did most of the talking, while I disagreed defensively. But even if our conversation could be reported in full, I am afraid that the verdict of posterity would be against us. We agreed that the world had gone mad; but neither of us could see beyond his own experience, and we weren’t life-learned enough to share the patient selfless stoicism through which men of maturer age were acquiring anonymous glory. Neither of us had the haziest idea of what the politicians were really up to (though it is possible that the politicians were only feeling their way and trusting in providence and the output of munitions to solve their problems). Nevertheless we argued as though the secret confabulations of Cabinet Ministers in various countries were as clear as daylight to us, and our assumption was that they were all wrong, while we, who had been in the trenches, were farseeing and infallible. But when I said that the War ought to be stopped and it was my duty to do my little bit to stop it, David replied that the War was bound to go on till one side or the other collapsed, and the Pacifists were only meddling with what they didn’t understand. “At any rate Thornton Tyrrell’s a jolly fine man and knows a bloody sight more about everything than you do,” I exclaimed. “Tyrrell’s only a doctrinaire,” replied David, “though I grant you he’s a courageous one.” Before I had time to ask what the hell he knew about doctrinaires, he continued, “No one except people who’ve been in the real fighting have any right to interfere about the War; and even they can’t get anything done about it. All they can do is to remain loyal to one another. And you know perfectly well that most of the conscientious objectors are nothing but skrimshankers.” I retorted that I knew nothing of the sort, and mentioned a young doctor who’d played Rugby [[football|Football]] for Scotland and was now in prison although he could have been doing hospital work if he’d wanted to. David then announced that he’d been doing a bit of [[barbed-wire|wire]]-pulling on my behalf and that I should soon find that my Pacifist M.P. wouldn’t do me as much good as I expected. This put my back up. David had no right to come butting in about my private affairs. “If you’ve really been trying to persuade the authorities not to do anything nasty to me,” I remarked, “that’s about the hopefullest thing I’ve heard. Go on doing it and exercise your usual tact, and you’ll get me two years’ hard labour for certain, and with any luck they’ll decide to shoot me as a sort of deserter.” He looked so aggrieved at this that I relented and suggested that we’d better have some lunch. But David was always an absentminded eater, and on this occasion he prodded disapprovingly at his food and then bolted it down as if it were medicine.

[046-012]A couple of hours later we were wandering aimlessly along the shore at Formby, and still jabbering for all we were worth. I refused to accept his well-meaning assertion that no one at the Front would understand my point of view and that they would only say that I’d got cold feet. “And even if they do say that,” I argued, “the main point is that by backing out of my statement I shall be betraying my real convictions and the people who are supporting me. Isn’t that worse cowardice than being thought cold-footed by officers who refuse to think about anything except the gentlemanly traditions of the Regiment? I’m not doing it for fun, am I? Can’t you understand that this is the most difficult thing I’ve ever done in my life? I’m not going to be talked out of it just when I’m forcing them to make a martyr of me.” “They won’t make a martyr of you,” he replied. “How do you know that?” I asked. He said that the Colonel at Clitherland had told him to tell me that if I continued to refuse to be “medically-boarded” they would shut me up in a lunatic asylum for the rest of the War. Nothing would induce them to court martial me. It had all been arranged with some big bug at the War Office in the last day or two. “Why didn’t you tell me before?” I asked. “I kept it as a last resort because I was afraid it might upset you,” he replied, tracing a pattern on the sand with his stick. “I wouldn’t believe this from anyone but you. Will you swear on the Bible that you’re telling the truth?” He swore on an imaginary Bible that nothing would induce them to court martial me and that I should be treated as insane. “All right then, I’ll give way.” As soon as the words were out of my mouth I sat down on an old wooden breakwater.

[046-013]So that was the end of my grand gesture. I ought to have known that the blighters would do me down somehow, I thought, scowling heavily at the sea. It was appropriate that I should behave in a glumly dignified manner, but already I was aware that an enormous load had been lifted from my mind. In the train David was discreetly silent. He got out at Clitherland. “Then I’ll tell Orderly Room they can fix up a Board for you tomorrow,” he remarked, unable to conceal his elation. “You can tell them anything you bloody well please!” I answered ungratefully. But as soon as I was alone I sat back and closed my eyes with a sense of exquisite relief. I was unaware that David had, probably, saved me from being sent to prison by telling me a very successful lie. No doubt I should have done the same for him if our positions had been reversed.

---

[046-014]It was obvious that the less I said to the Medical Board the better. All the necessary explanations of my mental condition were contributed by David, who had been detailed to give evidence on my behalf. He had a long interview with the doctors while I waited in an anteroom. Listening to their muffled mumblings, I felt several years younger than I’d done two days before. I was now an irresponsible person again, absolved from any obligation to intervene in world affairs. In fact the present performance seemed rather ludicrous, and when David emerged, solemn and concerned, to usher me in, I entered the “Bird Room” assuring myself that I should not ask Jean Jacques Rousseau if birds confabulated or no. The Medical Board consisted of a Colonel, a Major, and a Captain. The Captain was a civilian in uniform, and a professional neurologist. The others were elderly Regular Army doctors, and I am inclined to think that their acquaintance with Army Forms exceeded their knowledge of neurology.

[046-015]While David fidgeted about in the anteroom, I was replying respectfully to the stereotyped questions of the Colonel, who seemed slightly suspicious and much mystified by my attitude to the War. Was it on religious grounds that I objected to fighting, he inquired. “No, sir; not particularly,” I replied. “Fighting on religious grounds” sounded like some sort of a joke about the Crusades. “Do you consider yourself qualified to decide when the War should stop?” was his next question. Realizing that he was only trying to make me talk rubbish, I evaded him by admitting that I hadn’t thought about my qualifications, which wasn’t true. “But your friend tells us that you were very good at bombing. Don’t you still dislike the Germans?” I have forgotten how I answered that conundrum. It didn’t matter what I said to him, as long as I behaved politely. While the interrogations continued, I felt that sooner or later I simply must repeat that couplet out loud﻿ ﻿… “if birds confabulate or no.” Probably it would be the best thing I could do, for it would prove conclusively and comfortably that I was a harmless lunatic. Once I caught the neurologist’s eye, which signalled sympathetic understanding, I thought. Anyhow, the Colonel (having demonstrated his senior rank by asking me an adequate number of questions) willingly allowed the Captain to suggest that they couldn’t do better than send me to Slateford [[hospital|Hospital]]. So it was decided that I was suffering from shell-shock. The Colonel then remarked to the Major that he supposed there was nothing more to be done now. I repeated the couplet under my breath. “Did you say anything?” asked the Colonel, frowning slightly. I disclaimed having said anything and was permitted to rejoin David.

[046-016]When we were walking back to my hotel I overheard myself whistling cheerfully, and commented on the fact. “Honestly, David, I don’t believe I’ve whistled for about six weeks!” I gazed up at the blue sky, grateful because, at that moment, it seemed as though I had finished with the War.

[046-017]Next morning I went to Edinburgh. David, who had been detailed to act as my escort, missed the train and arrived at Slateford War Hospital several hours later than I did. And with my arrival at Slateford War Hospital this volume can conveniently be concluded.
