---
description: "Chapter 3 of Part IX"
id: part-ix-ch-3
label: "Part IX — Chapter 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

[038-001][[nutwood-manor|Nutwood Manor]] was everything that a wounded officer could wish for. From the first I was conscious of a kindly welcome. It was the most perfect house I’d ever stayed in. Also, to put the matter plainly, it was the first time I’d ever stayed with an Earl. “Gosh! This is a slice of luck,” I thought. A reassuring manservant conducted me upstairs. My room was called “The Clematis Room”; I noticed the name on the door. Leaning my elbows on the windowsill, I gazed down at the yew hedges of a formal garden; woods and meadows lay beyond and below, glorious with green and luminous in evening light; far away stood the Sussex Downs, and it did my heart good to see them. Everything in the pretty room was an antithesis to ugliness and discomfort. Beside the bed there was a bowl of white lilac and a Bible. Opening it at random to try my luck, I put my finger on the following verse from the Psalms: “The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart.” Rather an odd coincidence, I thought, that the word “war” should turn up like that; but the Old Testament’s full of fighting.﻿ ﻿… While I was changing into my best khaki uniform I could hear quiet feet and murmurous voices moving about the house; doors closed discreetly on people about to dress for dinner. Still almost incredulous at my good fortune I went downstairs, to be greeted by a silver-haired and gracious hostess, and introduced to three other officers, all outwardly healthy and gentlemanly-looking. I was presented to Lord Asterisk, over eighty and crippled with rheumatism, but resolutely holding on to a life which had been devoted to useful public service. Respectfully silent, I listened to his urbane eloquence and felt sufficiently at my ease to do justice to a very good dinner. The port wine went its round; and afterwards, in the drawing-room, I watched Lady Asterisk working at some embroidery while one of the officers played Gluck and Handel on the piano. Nothing could have been more tranquil and harmonious than my first evening at Nutwood Manor. Nevertheless I failed to fall asleep in the Clematis Room. Lying awake didn’t matter much at first; there was plenty to ruminate about; the view across the Weald at sunset had revived my memories of “the good old days when I hunted with the Ringwell.” I had escaped from the exasperating boredom of hospital life, and now for a few weeks I could forget about the War.﻿ ﻿… But the War insisted on being remembered, and by 3 a.m. it had become so peremptory that I could almost believe that some of my friends out in [[france|France]] must be waiting to go over the top. One by one, I thought of as many of them as I could remember.﻿ ﻿…

[038-002]I’d overheard Lady Asterisk talking about spiritualism to one of the officers; evidently she was a strong believer in the “unseen world.” Perhaps it was this which set me wondering whether, by concentrating my mind on, say, young [[ormand|Ormand]] (who was still with the [[second-battalion|Second Battalion]]) I might be able to receive some reciprocal communication. At three o’clock in the morning a sleepless mind can welcome inprobabilities and renounce its daylight scepticism. Neither voice nor vision rewarded my expectancy.

[038-003]But I was rewarded by an intense memory of men whose courage had shown me the power of the human spirit﻿—that spirit which could withstand the utmost [[attack|assault]]. Such men had inspired me to be at my best when things were very bad, and they outweighed all the failures. Against the background of the War and its brutal stupidity those men had stood glorified by the thing which sought to destroy them.﻿ ﻿…

[038-004]I went to the window and leant out. The gables of the house began to loom distinct against a clear sky. An owl hooted from the woods; cocks were crowing from distant farms; on the mantelpiece a little clock ticked busily. Oppressed by the comfort of my surroundings, I felt an impulse to dress and go out for a walk. But Arras and the Somme were a long way off; I couldn’t walk there and I didn’t want to; but they beckoned me with their bombardments and the reality of the men who endured them. I wanted to be there again for a few hours, because the trenches really were more interesting than Lady Asterisk’s rose-garden. Seen from a distance, the War had a sombre and unforgettable fascination for its bondsmen. I would have liked to go and see what was happening, and perhaps take part in some exciting little exploit. I couldn’t gainsay certain intense emotional experiences which I’d lived through in France. But I also wanted to be back at Nutwood Manor for breakfast﻿ ﻿… Returning to my bed I switched on the yellow shaded light. Yes; this was the Clematis Room, and nothing could be less like the dugout where I’d sat a month ago talking about Sussex with Ralph Wilmot. Through the discurtained window the sky was deep nocturnal blue. I turned out the lamp, and the window became a patch of greyish white, with treetops dark and still in the strange quietude before dawn. I heard the cuckoo a long way off. Then a blackbird went scolding along the garden.

---

[038-005]I awoke to a cloudless Sabbath morning. After breakfast Lady Asterisk led me into the garden and talked very kindly for a few minutes.

[038-006]“I am sure you have had a very trying time at the front,” she said, “but you must not allow yourself to be worried by unpleasant memories. We want our soldier-guests to forget the War while they are with us.”

[038-007]I replied, mumbling, that in such surroundings it wouldn’t be easy to worry about anything; and then the old Earl came out on to the terrace, pushing the wheeled apparatus which enabled him to walk.

[038-008]Often during the next three weeks I was able to forget about the War; often I took refuge in the assuasive human happiness which Nutwood Manor’s hospitality offered me. But there were times when my mental mechanism was refractory, and I reverted to my resolution to keep the smoke-drifted battle memories true and intense, unmodified by the comforts of convalescence. I wasn’t going to be bluffed back into an easygoing tolerant state of mind, I decided, as I opened a daily paper one morning and very deliberately read a despatch from “War Correspondents’ Headquarters.”

[038-009]“I have sat with some of our lads, fighting battles over again, and discussing battles to be,” wrote some amiable man who had apparently mistaken the War for a football match between [[england|England]] and Germany. “One officer﻿—a mere boy﻿—told me how he’d run up against eleven Huns in an advanced [[letter|post]]. He killed two with a Mills bomb (‘Grand weapon, the Mills!’ he laughed, his clear eyes gleaming with excitement), wounded another with his revolver, and marched the remainder back to our own lines.﻿ ﻿…” I opened one of the illustrated weeklies and soon found an article on “War Pictures at the Royal Academy.” After a panegyric about “Forward the Guns!” (a patriotic masterpiece by a lady who had been to the Military Tournament in prewar days) the following sentence occurred: “I think I like Mr. Blank’s Contalmaison picture best. He almost makes one feel that he must have been there. The Nth Division are going over the second line, I expect﻿—the tips of their bayonets give one this impression﻿—and it is a picture which makes one’s pulse beat a lot faster.﻿ ﻿…”

[038-010]“The tips of their bayonets give one that impression.”﻿ ﻿… Obviously the woman journalist who wrote those words was deriving enjoyment from the War, though she may not have been aware of the fact. I wondered why it was necessary for the Western Front to be “attractively advertised” by such intolerable twaddle. What was this camouflage War which was manufactured by the press to aid the imaginations of people who had never seen the real thing? Many of them probably said that the papers gave them a sane and vigorous view of the overwhelming tragedy. “Naturally,” they would remark, “the lads from the front are inclined to be a little morbid about it; one expects that, after all they’ve been through. Their close contact with the War has diminished their realization of its spiritual aspects.” Then they would add something about “the healing of Nations.” Such people needed to have their noses rubbed in a few rank physical facts, such as what a company of men smelt like after they’d been in action for a week.﻿ ﻿… The gong rang for luncheon, and Lady Asterisk left off reading a book by Tagore (whose mystical philosophies had hitherto seemed to me nebulous and unsatisfying).

---

[038-011]It must not be supposed that I was ungrateful for my good luck. For several days on end I could feel obliviously contented, and in weaker moments there was an absurd hope that the War might be over before next autumn. Rambling among woods and meadows, I could “take sweet counsel” with the [[landscape|countryside]]; sitting on a grassy bank and lifting my face to the sun, I could feel an intensity of thankfulness such as I’d never known before the War; listening to the little brook that bubbled out of a copse and across a rushy field, I could discard my personal relationship with the military machine and its ant-like armies. On my way home I would pass old Mr. Jukes leaning on his garden gate, or an ancient labourer mending gaps in a hedge. I would stop to gaze at the loveliness of apple-blossom when the sun came out after a shower. And the protective hospitality of Nutwood Manor was almost bewildering when compared with an average twenty-four hours in a front-line trench.

[038-012]All this was well enough; but there was a limit to my season of sauntering; the future was a main road where I must fall into step and do something to earn my “pay and allowances.” Lady Asterisk liked to have serious helpful little talks with her officers, and one evening she encouraged me to discuss my immediate horizon. I spoke somewhat emotionally, with self-indulgence in making a fine effect rather than an impartial resolve to face facts. I suggested that I’d been trying to make up my mind about taking a job in England, admitting my longing for life and setting against it the idea of sacrifice and disregard of death. I said that most of my friends were assuring me that there was no necessity for me to go out for the third time. While I talked I saw myself as a noble suffering character whose death in action would be deeply deplored. I saw myself as an afflicted traveller who had entered Lady Asterisk’s gates to sit by the fire and rest his weary limbs. I did not complain about the War; it would have been bad form to be bitter about it at Nutwood Manor; my own “personal problem” was what I was concerned with.﻿ ﻿…

[038-013]We were alone in the library. She listened to me, her silver hair and handsome face bent slightly forward above a piece of fine embroidery. Outwardly emotionless, she symbolized the patrician privileges for whose preservation I had chucked bombs at Germans and carelessly offered myself as a target for a sniper. When I had blurted out my opinion that life was preferable to the Roll of [[honour|Honour]] she put aside her reticence like a rich cloak. “But death is nothing,” she said. “Life, after all, is only the beginning. And those who are killed in the War﻿—they help us from up there. They are helping us to win.” I couldn’t answer that; this “other world,” of which she was so certain, was something I had forgotten about since I was wounded. Expecting no answer, she went on with a sort of inflexible sympathy (almost “as if my number was already up,” as I would have expressed it), “It isn’t as though you were heir to a great name. No; I can’t see any definite reason for your keeping out of danger. But, of course, you can only decide a thing like that for yourself.”

[038-014]I went up to the Clematis Room feeling caddishly estranged and cynical; wondering whether the Germans “up there” were doing anything definite to impede the offensive operations of the Allied Powers. But Lady Asterisk wasn’t hard-hearted. She only wanted me “to do the right thing.”﻿ ﻿… I began to wish that I could talk candidly to someone. There was too much well-behaved acquiescence at Nutwood Manor; and whatever the other officers there thought about the War, they kept it to themselves; they had done their bit for the time being and were conventional and correct, as if the eye of their Colonel was upon them.

---

[038-015]Social experience at Nutwood was varied by an occasional visitor. One evening I sat next to the new arrival, a fashionable young woman whose husband (as I afterwards ascertained) was campaigning in the Cameroons. Her manner implied that she was ready to take me into her confidence, intellectually; but my responses were cumbersome and uneasy, for her conversation struck me as containing a good deal of trumped-up intensity. A fine pair of pearls dangled from her ears, and her dark blue eyes goggled emptily while she informed me that she was taking lessons in Italian. She was “dying to read Dante,” and had already started the Canto about Paolo and Francesca; adored D’Annunzio, too, and had been reading his Paolo and Francesca (in French). “Life is so wonderful﻿—so great﻿—and yet we waste it all in this dreadful War!” she exclaimed. Rather incongruously, she then regaled me with some typical gossip from high quarters in the Army. Lunching at the Ritz recently, she had talked to Colonel Repington, who had told her﻿—I really forget what, but it was excessively significant, politically, and showed that there was no need for people to worry about Allenby’s failure to advance very far at Arras. Unsusceptible to her outward attractions, I came to the conclusion that she wasn’t the stamp of woman for whom I was willing to make the supreme sacrifice.﻿ ﻿…

[038-016]Lord Asterisk had returned that evening from [[london|London]], where he’d attended a dinner at the House of Lords. The dinner had been in honour of General Smuts (for whom I must parenthetically testify my admiration). This name made me think of [[dottrell|Joe Dottrell]], who was fond of relating how, in the Boer War, he had been with a raiding party which had nocturnally surprised and almost captured the Headquarters of General Smuts. I wondered whether the anecdote would interest Lord Asterisk; but (the ladies having left the table) he was embarking on his customary after-dinner oratory, while the young officer guests sipped their port and coffee and occasionally put in a respectful remark. The old fellow was getting very feeble, I thought, as I watched the wreckage of his fine and benevolent face. He sat with his chin on his chest; his brow and nose were still firm and authoritative. Sometimes his voice became weak and querulous, but he appeared to enjoy rolling out his deliberate parliamentary periods. Talking about the War, he surprised me by asserting the futility of waiting for a definite military decision. Although he had been a Colonial Governor, he was “profoundly convinced of the uselessness of some of our Colonies,” which, he said, might just as well be handed over to the Germans. He turned to the most articulate officer at the table. “I declare to you, my dear fellow” (voice sinking to a mumble), “I declare to you” (louder), “have you any predominating awareness” (pause) “of﻿—Sierra Leone?”

[038-017]As for Belgium, he invoked the evidence of history to support him in his assertion that its “redemption” by the Allies was merely a manifestation of patriotic obliquity. The inhabitants of Belgium would be just as happy as a German Subject-State. To the vast majority of them their national autonomy meant nothing. While I was trying to remember the exact meaning of the word “autonomy,” he ended the discussion by remarking, “But I’m only an old dotard!” and we pretended to laugh naturally, as if it were quite a good joke. Then he reverted to a favourite subject of his, viz., the ineffectiveness of ecclesiastical administrative bodies. “Oh what worlds of dreary (mumble) are hidden by the hats of our episcopal dignitaries! I declare to you, my dear fellow, that it is my profound conviction that the preponderance of mankind is entirely﻿—yes, most grievously indifferent to the deliberations of that well-intentioned but obtuse body of men, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners!” Slightly sententious, perhaps; but no one could doubt that he was a dear old chap who had done his level best to leave the world in better order than he’d found it.

---

[038-018]There were times when I felt perversely indignant at the “cushiness” of my convalescent existence. These reactions were mostly caused by the few letters which came to me from the front. One of Joe Dottrell’s hastily pencilled notes could make me unreasonably hostile to the cheerful voices of croquet players and inarticulately unfriendly to the elegant student of Italian when she was putting her pearl necklace out in the sun, “because pearls do adore the sun so!”

[038-019]It wasn’t easy to feel animosity against the pleasant-mannered neighbours who dropped in to tea. Nibbling cucumber sandwiches, they conceded full military honours to any officer who had been wounded. They discussed gardening and joked about domestic difficulties; they talked about war-work and public affairs; but they appeared to be refusing to recognize the realities which were implied by a letter from an indomitable Quartermaster in France. “The [[battalion|Battalion]] has been hard at it again and had a rough time, but as usual kept their end up well﻿—much to the joy of the Staff, who have been round here today like flies round a jam-pot, congratulating the Colonel and all others concerned. I am sorry to say that the Padre got killed.﻿ ﻿… He was up with the lads in the very front and got sniped in the stomach and died immediately. I haven’t much room for his crowd as a rule, but he was the finest parson I’ve ever known, absolutely indifferent to danger. Young Brock (bombing officer﻿—he said he knew you at Clitherland) was engaging the Boche single-handed when he was badly hit in the arm, side, and leg. They amputated his left leg, but he was too far gone and we buried him today. Two other officers killed and three wounded. Poor [[sergeant|Sergeant]] Blaxton was killed. All the best get knocked over.﻿ ﻿… The boys are now trying to get to [[amiens|Amiens]] to do a bit of courting.” Morosely I regarded the Clematis Room. What earthly use was it, ordering boxes of kippers to be sent to people who were all getting done in, while everyone at home humbugged about with polite platitudes?﻿ ﻿… Birdie Mansfield wrote from Yorkshire; he had been invalided out of the Army. “I’m fed to the teeth with wandering around in mufti and getting black looks from people who pass remarks to the effect that it’s about time I joined up. Meanwhile I exist on my provisional pension (3s. a day). A few days’ touring round these munition areas would give you food for thought. The average conversation is about the high cost of beer and the ability to evade military service by bluffing the Tribunals.”

[038-020]I looked at another letter. It was from my servant (to whom I’d sent a photograph of myself and a small gramophone). “Thank you very much for the photo, which is like life itself, and the men in the Company say it is just like him. The gramophone is much enjoyed by all. I hope you will pardon my neglect in not packing the groundsheet with your kit.” What could one do about it? Nothing short of stopping the War could alter the inadequacy of kippers and gramophones or sustain my sense of unity with those to whom I sent them.

---

[038-021]On the day before I departed from Nutwood Manor I received another letter from Dottrell. It contained bad news about the Second Battalion. Viewed broadmindedly, the attack had been quite a commonplace fragment of the War. It had been a hopeless failure, and with a single exception all officers in action had become casualties. None of the bodies had been brought in. The First and Second Battalions had been quite near one another, and Dottrell had seen Ormand a day or two before the show. “He looked pretty depressed, though outwardly as jolly as ever.” Dunning had been the first to leave our trench; had shouted “Cheerio” and been killed at once. Dottrell thanked me for a box of kippers.﻿ ﻿…

[038-022]Lady Asterisk happened to be in the room when I opened the letter. With a sense of self-pitying indignation I blurted out my unpleasant information. Her tired eyes showed that the shock had brought the War close to her, but while I was adding a few details her face became self-defensively serene. “But they are safe and happy now,” she said. I did not doubt her sincerity, and perhaps they were happy now. All the same, I was incapable of accepting the deaths of Ormand and Dunning and the others in that spirit. I wasn’t a theosophist. Nevertheless I left Nutwood with gratitude for the kindness I had received there. I had now four weeks in which to formulate my plans for the future.
