---
description: "There was no train until the next day."
id: ch35
label: "Chapter 35"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[035-001] There was no train until the next day. Heston quieted him during the evening with a stiff drink of gin manufactured from alcohol taken from the medical laboratory. Eugene was silent and babbled incoherently by starts: he asked the medical student a hundred questions about the progress and action of the disease.

[035-002] “If it were double pneumonia she would have said so. Doesn’t it seem that way to you? Hey?” he demanded feverishly.

[035-003] “I should think so,” said Heston. He was a kind and quiet boy.

[035-004] Eugene went to Exeter the next morning to catch the train. All through a dreary gray afternoon it pounded across the sodden State. Then, there was a change and a terrible wait of several hours at a junction. Finally, as dark came, he was being borne again toward the hills.

[035-005] Within his berth he lay with hot sleepless eyes, staring out at the black mass of the earth, the bulk of the hills. Finally, in the hours after midnight, he dropped into a nervous doze. He was wakened by the clatter of the trucks as they began to enter the [[home-and-belonging|Altamont]] yards. Dazed, half-dressed, he was roused by the grinding halt, and a moment later was looking out through the curtains into the grave faces of Luke and [[hugh-barton|Hugh Barton]].

[035-006] “Ben’s very sick,” said Hugh Barton.

[035-007] Eugene pulled on his shoes and dropped to the floor, stuffing his collar and tie into a coat pocket.

[035-008] “Let’s go,” he said. “I’m ready.”

[035-009] They went softly down the aisle, amid the long dark snores of the sleepers. As they walked through the empty station toward Hugh Barton’s car, Eugene said to the sailor:

[035-010] “When did you get home, Luke?”

[035-011] “I came in last night,” he said. “I’ve been here only a few hours.”

[035-012] It was half-past three in the morning. The ugly station settlement lay fixed and horrible, like something in a dream. His strange and sudden return to it heightened his feeling of unreality. In one of the cars lined at the station curbing, the driver lay huddled below his blanket. In the Greek’s lunchroom a man sat sprawled faced downward on the counter. The lights were dull and weary: a few burned with slow lust in the cheap station-hotels.

[035-013] Hugh Barton, who had always been a cautious driver, shot away with a savage grinding of gears. They roared townward through the rickety slums at fifty miles an hour.

[035-014] “I’m afraid B-B-B-Ben is one sick boy,” Luke began.

[035-015] “How did it happen?” Eugene asked. “Tell me.”

[035-016] He had taken influenza, they told Eugene, from one of Daisy’s children. He had moped about, ill and feverish, for a day or two, without going to bed.

[035-017] “In that G-g-g-god dam cold barn,” Luke burst out. “If that boy dies it’s because he c-c-c-couldn’t keep warm.”

[035-018] “Never mind about that now,” Eugene cried irritably, “go on.”

[035-019] Finally he had gone to bed, and Mrs. Pert had nursed him for a day or two.

[035-020] “She was the only one who d-d-d-did a damn thing for him,” said the sailor. Eliza, at length, had called in Cardiac.

[035-021] “The d-d-damned old quack,” Luke stuttered.

[035-022] “Never mind! Never mind!” Eugene yelled. “Why dig it up now? Get on with it!”

[035-023] After a day or two, he had grown apparently convalescent, and Cardiac told him he might get up if he liked. He got up and moped about the house for a day, in a cursing rage, but the next day he lay a-bed, with a high fever. Coker at length had been called in, two days before—

[035-024] “That’s what they should have done at the start,” growled Hugh Barton over his wheel.

[035-025] “Never mind!” screamed Eugene. “Get on with it.”

[035-026] And Ben had been desperately ill, with pneumonia in both lungs, for over a day. The sad prophetic story, a brief and terrible summary of the waste, the tardiness, and the ruin of their lives, silenced them for a moment with its inexorable sense of tragedy. They had nothing to say.

[035-027] The powerful car roared up into the chill dead Square. The feeling of unreality grew upon the boy. He sought for his life, for the bright lost years, in this mean cramped huddle of brick and stone. Ben and I, here by the City Hall, the Bank, the grocery-store (he thought). Why here? In Gath or Ispahan. In Corinth or Byzantium. Not here. It is not real.

[035-028] A moment later, the big car sloped to a halt at the curb, in front of [[dixieland|Dixieland]]. A light burned dimly in the hall, evoking for him chill memories of damp and gloom. A warmer light burned in the parlor, painting the lowered shade of the tall window a warm and mellow orange.

[035-029] “Ben’s in that room upstairs,” Luke whispered, “where the light is.”

[035-030] Eugene looked up with cold dry lips to the bleak front room upstairs, with its ugly Victorian bay-window. It was next to the sleeping-porch where, but three weeks before, Ben had hurled into the darkness his savage curse at life. The light in the sickroom burned grayly, bringing to him its grim vision of struggle and naked terror.

[035-031] The three men went softly up the walk and entered the house. There was a faint clatter from the kitchen, and voices.

[035-032] “Papa’s in here,” said Luke.

[035-033] Eugene entered the parlor and found Gant seated alone before a bright coal-fire. He looked up dully and vaguely as his son entered.

[035-034] “Hello, papa,” said Eugene, going to him.

[035-035] “Hello, son,” said Gant. He kissed the boy with his bristling cropped mustache. His thin lip began to tremble petulantly.

[035-036] “Have you heard about your brother?” he snuffled. “To think that this should be put upon me, old and sick as I am. O Jesus, it’s fearful—”

[035-037] Helen came in from the kitchen.

[035-038] “Hello, Slats,” she said, heartily embracing him. “How are you, honey? He’s grown four inches more since he went away,” she jeered, sniggering. “Well, ’Gene, cheer up! Don’t look so blue. While there’s life there’s hope. He’s not gone yet, you know.” She burst into tears, hoarse, unstrung, hysterical.

[035-039] “To think that this must come upon me,” Gant sniffled, responding mechanically to her grief, as he rocked back and forth on his cane and stared into the fire. “O boo-hoo-hoo! What have I done that God should—”

[035-040] “You shut up!” she cried, turning upon him in a blaze of fury. “Shut your mouth this minute. I don’t want to hear any more from you! I’ve given my life to you! Everything’s been done for you, and you’ll be here when we’re all gone. You’re not the one who’s sick.” Her feeling toward him had, for the moment, gone rancorous and bitter.

[035-041] “Where’s mama?” Eugene asked.

[035-042] “She’s back in the kitchen,” Helen said. “I’d go back and say hello before you see Ben if I were you.” In a low brooding tone, she continued: “Well, forget about it. It can’t be helped now.”

[035-043] He found Eliza busy over several bright bubbling pots of water on the gas-stove. She bustled awkwardly about, and looked surprised and confused when she saw him.

[035-044] “Why, what on earth, boy! When’d you get in?”

[035-045] He embraced her. But beneath her matter-of-factness, he saw the terror in her heart: her dull black eyes glinted with bright knives of fear.

[035-046] “How’s Ben, mama?” he asked quietly.

[035-047] “Why-y,” she pursed her lips reflectively, “I was just saying to Doctor Coker before you came in. ‘Look here,’ I said. ‘I tell you what, I don’t believe he’s half as bad off as he looks. Now, if only we can hold on till morning, I believe there’s going to be a change for the better.’ ”

[035-048] “Mama, in heaven’s name!” Helen burst out furiously. “How can you bear to talk like that? Don’t you know that Ben’s condition is critical? Are you never going to wake up?”

[035-049] Her voice had its old cracked note of hysteria.

[035-050] “Now, I tell you, son,” said Eliza, with a white tremulous smile, “when you go in there to see him, don’t make out as if you knew he was sick. If I were you, I’d make a big joke of it all. I’d laugh just as big as you please and say, ‘See here, I thought I was coming to see a sick man. Why, pshaw!’ (I’d say) ‘there’s nothing wrong with you. Half of it’s only imagination!’ ”

[035-051] “O mama! for Christ’s sake!” said Eugene frantically. “For Christ’s sake!”

[035-052] He turned away, sick at heart, and caught at his throat with his fingers.

[035-053] Then he went softly upstairs with Luke and Helen, approaching the sickroom with a shrivelled heart and limbs which had gone cold and bloodless. They paused for a moment, whispering, before he entered. The wretched conspiracy in the face of [[death-and-mortality|death]] filled him with horror.

[035-054] “N-n-n-now, I wouldn’t stay but a m-m-m-minute,” whispered Luke. “It m-m-might make him nervous.”

[035-055] Eugene, bracing himself, followed Helen blindly into the room.

[035-056] “Look who’s come to see you,” her voice came heartily. “It’s Highpockets.”

[035-057] For a moment Eugene could see nothing, for dizziness and fear. Then, in the gray shaded light of the room, he descried Bessie Gant, the nurse, and the long yellow skull’s-head of Coker, smiling wearily at him, with big stained teeth, over a long chewed cigar. Then, under the terrible light which fell directly and brutally upon the bed alone, he saw Ben. And in that moment of searing recognition he saw, what they had all seen, that Ben was dying.

[035-058] Ben’s long thin body lay three-quarters covered by the bedding; its gaunt outline was bitterly twisted below the covers, in an attitude of struggle and torture. It seemed not to belong to him, it was somehow distorted and detached as if it belonged to a beheaded criminal. And the sallow yellow of his face had turned gray; out of this granite tint of death, lit by two red flags of fever, the stiff black furze of a three-day beard was growing. The beard was somehow horrible; it recalled the corrupt vitality of hair, which can grow from a rotting corpse. And Ben’s thin lips were lifted, in a constant grimace of torture and strangulation, above his white somehow dead-looking teeth, as inch by inch he gasped a thread of air into his lungs.

[035-059] And the [[the-senses-and-perception|sound]] of this gasping—loud, hoarse, rapid, unbelievable, filling the room, and orchestrating every moment in it—gave to the scene its final note of horror.

[035-060] Ben lay upon the bed below them, drenched in light, like some enormous insect on a naturalist’s table, fighting, while they looked at him, to save with his poor wasted body the life that no one could save for him. It was monstrous, brutal.

[035-061] As Eugene approached, Ben’s fear-bright eyes rested upon the younger brother for the first [[time-and-memory|time]] and bodilessly, without support, he lifted his tortured lungs from the pillow, seizing the boy’s wrists fiercely in the hot white circle of his hands, and gasping in strong terror like a child: “Why have you come? Why have you come home, ’Gene?”

[035-062] The boy stood white and dumb for a moment, while swarming pity and horror rose in him.

[035-063] “They gave us a vacation, Ben,” he said presently. “They had to close down on account of the flu.”

[035-064] Then he turned away suddenly into the black murk, sick with his poor lie, and unable to face the fear in Ben’s gray eyes.

[035-065] “All right, ’Gene,” said Bessie Gant, with an air of authority. “Get out of here—you and Helen both. I’ve got one crazy Gant to look after already. I don’t want two more in here.” She spoke harshly, with an unpleasant laugh.

[035-066] She was a thin woman of thirty-eight years, the wife of Gant’s nephew, Gilbert. She was of mountain stock: she was coarse, hard, and vulgar, with little pity in her, and a cold lust for the miseries of sickness and death. These inhumanities she cloaked with her professionalism, saying:

[035-067] “If I gave way to my feelings, where would the patient be?”

[035-068] When they got out into the hall again, Eugene said angrily to Helen:

[035-069] “Why have you got that death’s-head here? How can he get well with her around? I don’t like her!”

[035-070] “Say what you like—she’s a good nurse.” Then, in a low voice, she said: “What do you think?”

[035-071] He turned away, with a convulsive gesture. She burst into tears, and seized his hand.

[035-072] Luke was teetering about restlessly, breathing stentorously and smoking a cigarette, and Eliza, working her lips, stood with an attentive ear cocked to the door of the sickroom. She was holding a useless kettle of hot water.

[035-073] “Huh? Hah? What say?” asked Eliza, before anyone had said anything. “How is he?” Her eyes darted about at them.

[035-074] “Get away! Get away! Get away!” Eugene muttered savagely. His voice rose. “Can’t you get away?”

[035-075] He was infuriated by the sailor’s loud nervous breathing, his large awkward feet. He was angered still more by Eliza’s useless kettle, her futile hovering, her “huh?” and “hah?”

[035-076] “Can’t you see he’s fighting for his breath? Do you want to strangle him? It’s messy! Messy! Do you hear?” His voice rose again.

[035-077] The ugliness and discomfort of the death choked him; and the swarming [[family-and-inheritance|family]], whispering outside the door, pottering uselessly around, feeding with its terrible hunger for death on Ben’s strangulation, made him mad with alternate fits of rage and pity.

[035-078] Indecisively, after a moment, they went downstairs, still listening for sounds in the sickroom.

[035-079] “Well, I tell you,” Eliza began hopefully. “I have a feeling, I don’t know what you’d call it—” She looked about awkwardly and found herself deserted. Then she went back to her boiling pots and pans.

[035-080] Helen, with contorted face, drew him aside, and spoke to him in whispered hysteria, in the front hall.

[035-081] “Did you see that sweater she’s wearing? Did you see it? It’s filthy!” Her voice sank to a brooding whisper. “Did you know that he can’t bear to look at her? She came into the room yesterday, and he grew perfectly sick. He turned his head away and said ‘O Helen, for God’s sake, take her out of here.’ You hear that, don’t you. Do you hear? He can’t stand to have her come near him. He doesn’t want her in the room.”

[035-082] “Stop! Stop! For God’s sake, stop!” Eugene said, clawing at his throat.

[035-083] The girl was for the moment insane with hatred and hysteria.

[035-084] “It may be a terrible thing to say, but if he dies I shall hate her. Do you think I can forget the way she’s acted? Do you?” Her voice rose almost to a scream. “She’s let him die here before her very eyes. Why, only day before yesterday, when his temperature was 104, she was talking to Old Doctor Doak about a lot. Did you know that?”

[035-085] “Forget about it!” he said frantically. “She’ll always be like that! It’s not her fault. Can’t you see that? O God, how horrible! How horrible!”

[035-086] “Poor old mama!” said Helen, beginning to weep. “She’ll never get over this. She’s scared to death! Did you see her eyes? She knows, of course she knows!”

[035-087] Then suddenly, with mad brooding face, she said: “Sometimes I think I hate her! I really think I hate her.” She plucked at her large chin, absently. “Well, we mustn’t talk like this,” she said. “It’s not right. Cheer up. We’re all tired and nervous. I believe he’s going to get all right yet.”

[035-088] Day came gray and chill, with a drear reek of murk and fog. Eliza bustled about eagerly, pathetically busy, preparing breakfast. Once she hurried awkwardly upstairs with a kettle of water, and stood for a second at the door as Bessie Gant opened it, peering in at the terrible bed, with her white puckered face. Bessie Gant blocked her further entrance, and closed the door rudely. Eliza went away making flustered apologies.

[035-089] For, what the girl had said was true, and Eliza knew it. She was not wanted in the sickroom; the dying boy did not want to see her. She had seen him turn his head wearily away when she had gone in. Behind her white face dwelt this horror, but she made no confession, no complaint. She bustled around doing useless things with an eager matter-of-factness. And Eugene, choked with exasperation at one moment, because of her heavy optimism, was blind with pity the next when he saw the terrible fear and pain in her dull black eyes. He rushed toward her suddenly, as she stood above the hot stove, and seized her rough worn hand, kissing it and babbling helplessly.

[035-090] “O mama! Mama! It’s all right! It’s all right! It’s all right.”

[035-091] And Eliza, stripped suddenly of her pretenses, clung to him, burying her white face in his coat sleeve, weeping bitterly, helplessly, grievously, for the sad waste of the irrevocable years—the immortal hours of love that might never be relived, the great evil of forgetfulness and indifference that could never be righted now. Like a child she was grateful for his caress, and his heart twisted in him like a wild and broken thing, and he kept mumbling:

[035-092] “It’s all right! It’s all right! It’s all right!”—knowing that it was not, could never be, all right.

[035-093] “If I had known. Child, if I had known,” she wept, as she had wept long before at Grover’s death.

[035-094] “Brace up!” he said. “He’ll pull through yet. The worst is over.”

[035-095] “Well, I tell you,” said Eliza, drying her eyes at once, “I believe it is. I believe he passed the turning-point last night. I was saying to Bessie—”

[035-096] The light grew. Day came, bringing hope. They sat down to breakfast in the kitchen, drawing encouragement from every scrap of cheer doctor or nurse would give them. Coker departed, non-committally optimistic. Bessie Gant came down to breakfast and was professionally encouraging.

[035-097] “If I can keep his damn family out of the room, he may have some chance of getting well.”

[035-098] They laughed hysterically, gratefully, pleased with the woman’s abuse.

[035-099] “How is he this morning?” said Eliza. “Do you notice any improvement?”

[035-100] “His temperature is lower, if that’s what you mean.”

[035-101] They knew that a lower temperature in the morning was a fact of no great significance, but they took nourishment from it: their diseased emotion fed upon it—they had soared in a moment to a peak of hopefulness.

[035-102] “And he’s got a good heart,” said Bessie Gant. “If that holds out, and he keeps fighting, he’ll pull through.”

[035-103] “D-d-don’t worry about his f-f-fighting,” said Luke, in a rush of eulogy. “That b-b-boy’ll fight as long as he’s g-g-got a breath left in him.”

[035-104] “Why, yes,” Eliza began, “I remember when he was a child of seven—I know I was standing on the porch one day—the reason I remember is Old Mr. Buckner had just come by with some butter and eggs your papa had—”

[035-105] “O my God!” groaned Helen, with a loose grin. “Now we’ll get it.”

[035-106] “Whah—whah!” Luke chortled crazily, prodding Eliza in the ribs.

[035-107] “I’ll vow, boy!” said Eliza angrily. “You act like an idiot. I’d be ashamed!”

[035-108] “Whah—whah—whah!”

[035-109] Helen sniggered, nudging Eugene.

[035-110] “Isn’t he crazy, though? Tuh-tuh-tuh-tuh-tuh.” Then, with wet eyes, she drew Eugene roughly into her big bony embrace.

[035-111] “Poor old ’Gene. You always got on together, didn’t you? You’ll feel it more than any of us.”

[035-112] “He’s not b-b-buried yet,” Luke cried heartily. “That boy may be here when the rest of us are pushing d-d-daisies.”

[035-113] “Where’s Mrs. Pert?” said Eugene. “Is she in the house?”

[035-114] A strained and bitter silence fell upon them.

[035-115] “I ordered her out,” said Eliza grimly, after a moment. “I told her exactly what she was—a whore.” She spoke with the old stern judiciousness, but in a moment her face began to work and she burst into tears. “If it hadn’t been for that woman I believe he’d be well and strong today. I’ll vow I do!”

[035-116] “Mama, in heaven’s name!” Helen burst out furiously. “How dare you say a thing like that? She was the only friend he had: when he was taken sick she nursed him hand and foot. Why, the idea! The idea!” she panted in her indignation. “If it hadn’t been for Mrs. Pert he’d have been dead by now. Nobody else did anything for him. You were willing enough, I notice, to keep her here and take her money until he got sick. No, sir!” she declared with emphasis. “Personally, I like her. I’m not going to cut her now.”

[035-117] “It’s a d-d-d-damn shame!” said Luke, staunch to his goddess. “If it hadn’t been for Mrs. P-P-P-Pert and you, Ben would be S.O.L. Nobody else around here gave a damn. If he d-d-d-dies, it’s because he didn’t get the proper care when it would have done him some good. There’s always been too d-d-damn much thought of saving a nickel, and too d-d-damn little about flesh and blood!”

[035-118] “Well, forget about it!” said Helen wearily. “There’s one thing sure: I’ve done everything I could. I haven’t been to bed for two days. Whatever happens, I’ll have no regrets on that score.” Her voice was filled with a brooding ugly satisfaction.

[035-119] “I know you haven’t! I know that!” The sailor turned to Eugene in his excitement, gesticulating. “That g-g-girl’s worked her fingers to the bone. If it hadn’t been for her—” His eyes got wet; he turned his head away and blew his nose.

[035-120] “Oh, for Christ’s sake!” Eugene yelled, springing up from the table. “Stop it, won’t you! Let’s wait till later.”

---

[035-121] In this way, the terrible hours of the morning lengthened out, while they spent themselves trying to [[alcohol-and-escape|escape]] from the tragic net of frustration and loss in which they were caught. Their spirits soared to brief moments of insane joy and exultancy, and plunged into black pits of despair and hysteria. Eliza alone seemed consistently hopeful. Trembling with exacerbated nerves, the sailor and Eugene paced the lower hall, smoking incessant cigarettes, bristling as they approached each other, ironically polite when their bodies touched. Gant dozed in the parlor or in his own room, waking and sleeping by starts, moaning petulantly, detached, vaguely aware only of the meaning of events, and resentful because of the sudden indifference to him. Helen went in and out of the sickroom constantly, dominating the dying boy by the power of her vitality, infusing him with moments of hope and confidence. But when she came out, her hearty cheerfulness was supplanted by the strained blur of hysteria; she wept, laughed, brooded, loved, and hated by turns.

[035-122] Eliza went only once into the room. She intruded with a hot-water bag, timidly, awkwardly, like a child, devouring Ben’s face with her dull black eyes. But when above the loud labor of his breath his bright eyes rested on her, his clawed white fingers tightened their grip in the sheets, and he gasped strongly, as if in terror:

[035-123] “Get out! Out! Don’t want you.”

[035-124] Eliza left the room. As she walked she stumbled a little, as if her feet were numb and dead. Her white face had an ashen tinge, and her dull eyes had grown bright and staring. As the door closed behind her, she leaned against the wall and put one hand across her face. Then, in a moment, she went down to her pots again.

[035-125] Frantically, angrily, with twitching limbs they demanded calm and steady nerves from one another; they insisted that they keep away from the sickroom—but, as if drawn by some terrible magnet, they found themselves again and again outside the door, listening, on tiptoe, with caught breath, with an insatiate thirst for horror, to the hoarse noise of his gasping as he strove to force air down into his strangled and cemented lungs. And eagerly, jealously, they sought entrance to the room, waiting their turn for carrying water, towels, supplies.

[035-126] Mrs. Pert, from her refuge in the boardinghouse across the street, called Helen on the phone each half-hour, and the girl talked to her while Eliza came from the kitchen into the hall, and stood, hands folded, lips pursed, with eyes that sparkled with her hate.

[035-127] The girl cried and laughed as she talked.

[035-128] “Well … that’s all right, Fatty. … You know how I feel about it. … I’ve always said that if he had one true friend in the world, it’s you … and don’t think we’re *all* ungrateful for what you’ve done. …”

[035-129] During the pauses, Eugene could hear the voice of the other woman across the wires, sobbing.

[035-130] And Eliza said, grimly: “If she calls up again you let me talk to her. I’ll fix her!”

[035-131] “Good heavens, mama!” Helen cried angrily. “You’ve done enough already. You drove her out of the house when she’d done more for him than all his family put together.” Her big strained features worked convulsively. “Why, it’s ridiculous!”

[035-132] Within Eugene, as he paced restlessly up and down the hall or prowled through the house a-search for some entrance he had never found, a bright and stricken thing kept twisting about like a trapped bird. This bright thing, the core of him, his Stranger, kept twisting its head about, unable to look at horror, until at length it gazed steadfastly, as if under a dreadful hypnosis, into the eyes of death and darkness. And his soul plunged downward, drowning in that deep pit: he felt that he could never again escape from this smothering flood of pain and ugliness, from the eclipsing horror and pity of it all. And as he walked, he twisted his own neck about, and beat the air with his arm like a wing, as if he had received a blow in his kidneys. He felt that he might be clean and free if he could only escape into a single burning passion—hard, and hot, and glittering—of love, hatred, terror, or disgust. But he was caught, he was strangling, in the web of futility—there was no moment of hate that was not touched by a dozen shafts of pity: impotently, he wanted to seize them, cuff them, shake them, as one might a trying brat, and at the same time to caress them, love them, comfort them.

[035-133] As he thought of the dying boy upstairs, the messy ugliness of it—as they stood whimpering by while he strangled—choked him with fury and horror. The old fantasy of his childhood came back to him: he remembered his hatred of the semiprivate bathroom, his messy discomfort while he sat at stool and stared at the tub filled with dirty wash, sloppily puffed and ballooned by cold gray soapy water. He thought of this as Ben lay dying.

[035-134] Their hopes revived strongly in the forenoon when word came to them that the patient’s temperature was lower, his pulse stronger, the congestion of the lungs slightly relieved. But at one o’clock, after a fit of coughing, he grew delirious, his temperature mounted, he had increasing difficulty in getting his breath. Eugene and Luke raced to Wood’s pharmacy in Hugh Barton’s car, for an oxygen tank. When they returned, Ben had almost choked to death.

[035-135] Quickly they carried the tank into the room, and placed it near his head. Bessie Gant seized the cone, and started to put it over Ben’s mouth, commanding him to breathe it in. He fought it away tigerishly: curtly the nurse commanded Eugene to seize his hands.

[035-136] Eugene gripped Ben’s hot wrists: his heart turned rotten. Ben rose wildly from his pillows, wrenching like a child to get his hands free, gasping horribly, his eyes wild with terror:

[035-137] “No! No! ’Gene! ’Gene! No! No!”

[035-138] Eugene caved in, releasing him and turning away, white-faced, from the accusing fear of the bright dying eyes. Others held him: he was given temporary relief. Then he became delirious again.

[035-139] By four o’clock it was apparent that death was near. Ben had brief periods of consciousness, unconsciousness, and delirium—but most of the time he was delirious. His breathing was easier, he hummed snatches of popular songs, some old and forgotten, called up now from the lost and secret adyts of his childhood; but always he returned, in his quiet humming voice, to a popular song of wartime—cheap, sentimental, but now tragically moving: “Just a Baby’s Prayer at Twilight,”

> “… when lights are low.

> Poor baby’s years”

[035-140] Helen entered the darkening room.

> “Are filled with tears.”

[035-141] The fear had gone out of his eyes: above his gasping he looked gravely at her, scowling, with the old puzzled child’s stare. Then, in a moment of fluttering consciousness, he recognized her. He grinned beautifully, with the thin swift flicker of his mouth.

[035-142] “Hello, Helen! It’s Helen!” he cried eagerly.

[035-143] She came from the room with a writhen and contorted face, holding the sobs that shook her until she was halfway down the stairs.

---

[035-144] As darkness came upon the gray wet day, the family gathered in the parlor, in the last terrible congress before death, silent, waiting. Gant rocked petulantly, spitting into the fire, making a weak whining moan from time to time. One by one, at intervals, they left the room, mounting the stairs softly, and listening outside the door of the sickroom. And they heard Ben, as, with incessant humming repetition, like a child, he sang his song,

> “There’s a mother there at twilight

> Who’s glad to know—”

[035-145] Eliza sat stolidly, hands folded, before the parlor fire. Her dead white face had a curious carven look; the inflexible solidity of madness.

[035-146] “Well,” she said at length, slowly, “you never know. Perhaps this is the crisis. Perhaps—” her face hardened into granite again. She said no more.

[035-147] Coker came in and went at once, without speaking, to the sickroom. Shortly before nine o’clock Bessie Gant came down.

[035-148] “All right,” she said quietly. “You had all better come up now. This is the end.”

[035-149] Eliza got up and marched out of the room with a stolid face. Helen followed her: she was panting with hysteria, and had begun to wring her big hands.

[035-150] “Now, get hold of yourself, Helen,” said Bessie Gant warningly. “This is no time to let yourself go.”

[035-151] Eliza went steadily upstairs, making no noise. But, as she neared the room, she paused, as if listening for sounds within. Faintly, in the silence, they heard Ben’s song. And suddenly, casting away all pretense, Eliza staggered, and fell against the wall, turning her face into her hand, with a terrible wrenched cry:

[035-152] “O God! If I had known! If I had known!”

[035-153] Then, weeping with bitter unrestraint, with the contorted and ugly grimace of sorrow, mother and daughter embraced each other. In a moment they composed themselves, and quietly entered the room.

[035-154] Eugene and Luke pulled Gant to his feet and supported him up the stairs. He sprawled upon them, moaning in long quivering exhalations.

[035-155] “Mer‑ci‑ful God! That I should have to bear this in my old age. That I should—”

[035-156] “Papa! For God’s sake!” Eugene cried sharply. “Pull yourself together! It’s Ben who’s dying—not us! Let’s try to behave decently to him for once.”

[035-157] This served to quiet Gant for a moment. But as he entered the room, and saw Ben lying in the semiconscious coma that precedes death, the fear of his own death overcame him, and he began to moan again. They seated him in a chair, at the foot of the bed, and he rocked back and forth, weeping:

[035-158] “O Jesus! I can’t bear it! Why must you put this upon me? I’m old and sick, and I don’t know where the money’s to come from. How are we ever going to face this fearful and croo-el winter? It’ll cost a thousand dollars before we’re through burying him, and I don’t know where the money’s to come from.” He wept affectedly with sniffling sobs.

[035-159] “Hush! hush!” cried Helen, rushing at him. In her furious anger, she seized him and shook him. “You damned old man you, I could kill you! How dare you talk like that when your son’s dying? I’ve wasted six years of my life nursing you, and you’ll be the last one to go!” In her blazing anger, she turned accusingly on Eliza:

[035-160] “You’ve done this to him. You’re the one that’s responsible. If you hadn’t pinched every penny he’d never have been like this. Yes, and Ben would be here, too!” She panted for breath for a moment. Eliza made no answer. She did not hear her.

[035-161] “After this, I’m through! I’ve been looking for you to die—and Ben’s the one who has to go.” Her voice rose to a scream of exasperation. She shook Gant again. “Never again! Do you hear that, you selfish old man? You’ve had everything—Ben’s had nothing. And now he’s the one to go. I hate you!”

[035-162] “Helen! Helen!” said Bessie Gant quietly. “Remember where you are.”

[035-163] “Yes, that means a lot to us,” Eugene muttered bitterly.

[035-164] Then, over the ugly clamor of their dissension, over the rasp and snarl of their nerves, they heard the low mutter of Ben’s expiring breath. The light had been re-shaded: he lay, like his own shadow, in all his fierce gray lonely beauty. And as they looked and saw his bright eyes already blurred with death, and saw the feeble beating flutter of his poor thin breast, the strange wonder, the dark rich miracle of his life surged over them its enormous loveliness. They grew quiet and calm, they plunged below all the splintered wreckage of their lives, they drew together in a superb communion of love and valiance, beyond horror and confusion, beyond death.

[035-165] And Eugene’s eyes grew blind with love and wonder: an enormous organ-music sounded in his heart, he possessed them for a moment, he was a part of their loveliness, his life soared magnificently out of the slough and pain and ugliness. He thought:

[035-166] “That was not all! That really was not all!”

[035-167] Helen turned quietly to Coker, who was standing in shadow by the window, chewing upon his long unlighted cigar.

[035-168] “Is there nothing more you can do? Have you tried everything? I mean—*everything*?”

[035-169] Her voice was prayerful and low. Coker turned toward her slowly, taking the cigar between his big stained fingers. Then, gently, with his weary yellow smile, he answered: “Everything. Not all the king’s horses, not all the doctors and nurses in the world, can help him now.”

[035-170] “How long have you known this?” she said.

[035-171] “For two days,” he answered. “From the beginning.” He was silent for a moment. “For ten years!” he went on with growing energy. “Since I first saw him, at three in the morning, in the Greasy Spoon, with a doughnut in one hand and a cigarette in the other. My dear, dear girl,” he said gently as she tried to speak, “we can’t turn back the days that have gone. We can’t turn life back to the hours when our lungs were sound, our blood hot, our bodies young. We are a flash of fire—a brain, a heart, a spirit. And we are three-cents-worth of lime and iron—which we cannot get back.”

[035-172] He picked up his greasy black slouch hat, and jammed it carelessly upon his head. Then he fumbled for a match and lit the chewed cigar.

[035-173] “Has everything been done?” she said again. “I want to know! Is there anything left worth trying?”

[035-174] He made a weary gesture of his arms.

[035-175] “My dear girl!” he said. “He’s drowning! Drowning!”

[035-176] She stood frozen with the horror of his pronouncement.

[035-177] Coker looked for a moment at the gray twisted shadow on the bed. Then, quietly, sadly, with tenderness and tired wonder, he said: “Old Ben. When shall we see *his* like again?”

[035-178] Then he went quietly out, the long cigar clamped firmly in his mouth.

[035-179] In a moment, Bessie Gant, breaking harshly in upon their silence with ugly and triumphant matter-of-factness, said: “Well, it will be a relief to get this over. I’d rather be called into forty outside cases than one in which any of these damn relations are concerned. I’m dead for sleep.”

[035-180] Helen turned quietly upon her.

[035-181] “Leave the room!” she said. “This is our affair now. We have the right to be left alone.”

[035-182] Surprised, Bessie Gant stared at her for a moment with an angry, resentful face. Then she left the room.

[035-183] The only sound in the room now was the low rattling mutter of Ben’s breath. He no longer gasped; he no longer gave signs of consciousness or struggle. His eyes were almost closed; their gray flicker was dulled, coated with the sheen of insensibility and death. He lay quietly upon his back, very straight, without sign of pain, and with a curious upturned thrust of his sharp thin face. His mouth was firmly shut. Already, save for the feeble mutter of his breath, he seemed to be dead—he seemed detached, no part of the ugly mechanism of that sound which came to remind them of the terrible chemistry of flesh, to mock at illusion, at all belief in the strange passage and continuance of life.

[035-184] He was dead, save for the slow running down of the worn-out machine, save for that dreadful mutter within him of which he was no part. He was dead.

[035-185] But in their enormous silence wonder grew. They remembered the strange flitting loneliness of his life, they thought of a thousand forgotten acts and moments—and always there was something that now seemed unearthly and strange: he walked through their lives like a shadow—they looked now upon his gray deserted shell with a thrill of awful recognition, as one who remembers a forgotten and enchanted word, or as men who look upon a corpse and see for the first time a departed god.

[035-186] Luke, who had been standing at the foot of the bed, now turned to Eugene nervously, stammering in an unreal whisper of wonder and disbelief:

[035-187] “I g-g-g-guess Ben’s gone.”

[035-188] Gant had grown very quiet: he sat in the darkness at the foot of the bed, leaning forward upon his cane, escaped from the revery of his own approaching death, into the waste land of the past, blazing back sadly and poignantly the trail across the lost years that led to the birth of his strange son.

[035-189] Helen sat facing the bed, in the darkness near the windows. Her eyes rested not on Ben but on her mother’s face. All by unspoken consent stood back in the shadows and let Eliza repossess the flesh to which she had given life.

[035-190] And Eliza, now that he could deny her no longer, now that his fierce bright eyes could no longer turn from her in pain and aversion, sat near his head beside him, clutching his cold hand between her rough worn palms.

[035-191] She did not seem conscious of the life around her. She seemed under a powerful hypnosis: she sat very stiff and erect in her chair, her white face set stonily, her dull black eyes fixed upon the gray cold face.

[035-192] They sat waiting. Midnight came. A cock crew. Eugene went quietly to a window and stood looking out. The great beast of night prowled softly about the house. The walls, the windows seemed to bend inward from the thrusting pressure of the dark. The low noise in the wasted body seemed almost to have stopped. It came infrequently, almost inaudibly, with a faint fluttering respiration.

[035-193] Helen made a sign to Gant and Luke. They rose and went quietly out. At the door she paused, and beckoned to Eugene. He went to her.

[035-194] “You stay here with her,” she said. “You’re her youngest. When it’s over come and tell us.”

[035-195] He nodded, and closed the door behind her. When they had gone, he waited, listening for a moment. Then he went to where Eliza was sitting. He bent over her.

[035-196] “Mama!” he whispered. “Mama!”

[035-197] She gave no sign that she had heard him. Her face did not move; she did not turn her eyes from their fixed stare.

[035-198] “Mama!” he said more loudly. “Mama!”

[035-199] He touched her. She made no response.

[035-200] “Mama! Mama!”

[035-201] She sat there stiffly and primly like a little child.

[035-202] Swarming pity rose in him. Gently, desperately, he tried to detach her fingers from Ben’s hand. Her rough clasp on the cold hand tightened. Then, slowly, stonily, from right to left, without expression, she shook her head.

[035-203] He fell back, beaten, weeping, before that implacable gesture. Suddenly, with horror, he saw that she was watching her own death, that the unloosening grip of her hand on Ben’s hand was an act of union with her own flesh, that, for her, Ben was not dying—but that a part of *her*, of *her* life, *her* blood, her body, was dying. Part of her, the younger, the lovelier, the better part, coined in her flesh, borne and nourished and begun with so much pain there twenty-six years before, and forgotten since, was dying.

[035-204] Eugene stumbled to the other side of the bed and fell upon his knees. He began to pray. He did not believe in God, nor in Heaven or Hell, but he was afraid they might be true. He did not believe in angels with soft faces and bright wings, but he believed in the dark spirits that hovered above the heads of lonely men. He did not believe in devils or angels, but he believed in Ben’s bright demon to whom he had seen him speak so many times.

[035-205] Eugene did not believe in these things, but he was afraid they might be true. He was afraid that Ben would get lost again. He felt that no one but he could pray for Ben now: that the dark union of their spirits made only *his* prayers valid. All that he had read in books, all the tranquil wisdom he had professed so glibly in his philosophy course, and the great names of Plato and Plotinus, of Spinoza and Immanuel Kant, of Hegel and Descartes, left him now, under the mastering surge of his wild Celtic superstition. He felt that he must pray frantically as long as the little ebbing flicker of breath remained in his brother’s body.

[035-206] So, with insane singsong repetition, he began to mutter over and over again: “Whoever You Are, be good to Ben tonight. Show him the way … Whoever You Are, be good to Ben tonight. Show him the way …” He lost count of the minutes, the hours: he heard only the feeble rattle of dying breath, and his wild synchronic prayer.

[035-207] Light faded from his brain, and consciousness. Fatigue and powerful nervous depletion conquered him. He sprawled out on the floor, with his arms pillowed on the bed, muttering drowsily. Eliza, unmoving, sat across the bed, holding Ben’s hand. Eugene, mumbling, sank into an uneasy sleep.

[035-208] He awoke suddenly, conscious that he had slept, with a sharp quickening of horror. He was afraid that the little fluttering breath had now ceased entirely, that the effect of his prayer was lost. The body on the bed was almost rigid: there was no sound. Then, unevenly, without rhythm, there was a faint mutter of breath. He knew it was the end. He rose quickly and ran to the door. Across the hall, in a cold bedroom, on two wide beds, Gant, Luke, and Helen lay exhausted.

[035-209] “Come,” cried Eugene. “He’s going now.”

[035-210] They came quickly into the room. Eliza sat unmoving, oblivious of them. As they entered the room, they heard, like a faint expiring sigh, the final movement of breath.

[035-211] The rattling in the wasted body, which seemed for hours to have given over to death all of life that is worth saving, had now ceased. The body appeared to grow rigid before them. Slowly, after a moment, Eliza withdrew her hands. But suddenly, marvellously, as if his resurrection and rebirth had come upon him, Ben drew upon the air in a long and powerful respiration; his gray eyes opened. Filled with a terrible vision of all life in the one moment, he seemed to rise forward bodilessly from his pillows without support—a flame, a light, a glory—joined at length in death to the dark spirit who had brooded upon each footstep of his lonely adventure on earth; and, casting the fierce sword of his glance with utter and final comprehension upon the room haunted with its gray pageantry of cheap loves and dull consciences and on all those uncertain mummers of waste and confusion fading now from the bright window of his eyes, he passed instantly, scornful and unafraid, as he had lived, into the shades of death.

[035-212] We can believe in the nothingness of life, we can believe in the nothingness of death and of life after death—but who can believe in the nothingness of Ben? Like Apollo, who did his penance to the high god in the sad house of King Admetus, he came, a god with broken feet, into the gray hovel of this world. And he lived here a stranger, trying to recapture the music of the lost world, trying to recall the great forgotten [[language-and-speech|language]], the lost faces, the stone, the leaf, the door.

[035-213] O Artemidorus, farewell!
