---
description: "Bedtime came, and I sought my room, hoping that a bed had not been placed there for Carlos, too. My mother and María were just coming out.  “I can ..."
id: ch23
label: "Chapter XXIII"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[023-001] Bedtime came, and I sought my room, hoping that a bed had not been placed there for [[carlos|Carlos]], too. My mother and [[maria|María]] were just coming out.

[023-002] “I can sleep here alone, can’t I?” I asked the former.

[023-003] She understood the reason of my question, and replied, “No, your friend.”

[023-004] “Ah yes, the [[garden-and-flowers|flowers]],” said I, seeing María carrying in a handkerchief the ones she had put in my vase that morning; “where are you taking them?”

[023-005] “To the oratory; for, as there has not been time to arrange others there …”

[023-006] I was extremely grateful to her for her delicacy in not allowing the flowers she had destined for me to remain for the enjoyment of another. But she had left the cluster of lilies which I had brought from the mountains that afternoon, although it was in plain sight upon the table. Observing that, I gave them to her, saying: “Carry these lilies also to the altar; [[transito|Tránsito]] sent them to you by me, asking me to tell you that she had chosen you for a bridesmaid. And, as we all ought to pray for her happiness.”

[023-007] “Yes, yes,” she answered; then she turned to my mother, and added, “So she wants me to be her bridesmaid.”

[023-008] “Nothing more natural,” was the reply.

[023-009] “Oh, I have a beautiful dress for the occasion! You must tell her that I am very happy that she has chosen us—has chosen me as her bridesmaid.”

[023-010] My brothers, [[felipe|Felipe]] and the next younger, were surprised and delighted to learn that I was to sleep in their room. They slept together so that I might have Felipe’s bed; in its curtains María had hung the medallion of the Mater Dolorosa which used to be on the hangings of my own bed.

[023-011] As soon as the boys had repeated their prayers, kneeling down by the bed, they said good night, and fell asleep after laughing at the fear they were both thrown into by the jaguar’s head.

[023-012] That night the image of María was not the only thing with me; the pets of the house slept near my bed; at sunrise she would come to get them, would give them a morning kiss, and take them to the fountain, where she would wash their faces with hands as white and fragrant as the Castile roses which they used to pick for the altar and for her.
