---
description: "He was thinking of the town he had known. Not of _old_ New York--he had"
id: ch01
label: "Chapter I: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(001-001) He was thinking of the town he had known. Not of _old_ [[new-york-city|New York]]--he had

(001-002) heard of that from old, old men when he himself had still been young and

(001-003) had smiled at their garrulity. He was thinking of a _young_ New York, the

(001-004) mighty throbbing city to which he had come long ago as a lad from the New

(001-005) Hampshire mountains. A place of turbulent thoroughfares, of shouting

(001-006) drivers, hurrying crowds, the crack of whips and the clatter of wheels; an

(001-007) uproarious, thrilling town of [[business|enterprise]], adventure, [[childhood|youth]]; a city of

(001-008) pulsing energies, the center of a boundless land; a port of commerce with

(001-009) all the world, of stately ships with snowy sails; a fascinating pleasure

(001-010) town, with throngs of eager travellers hurrying from the ferry boats and

(001-011) rolling off in hansom cabs to the huge hotels on Madison Square. A city

(001-012) where [[america|American]] faces were still to be seen upon all its streets, a cleaner

(001-013) and a kindlier town, with more courtesy in its life, less of the vulgar

(001-014) scramble. A city of houses, separate homes, of quiet streets with rustling

(001-015) trees, with people on the doorsteps upon warm summer evenings and groups of

(001-016) youngsters singing as they came trooping by in the dark. A place of music

(001-017) and [[love-and-courtship|romance]]. At the old opera [[home|house]] [[downtown-new-york|downtown]], on those dazzling evenings

(001-018) when as a boy he had ushered there for the sake of hearing the music, how

(001-019) the rich joy of being alive, of being young, of being loved, had shone out

(001-020) of [[womens-roles|women]]'s eyes. Shimmering satins, dainty gloves and little jewelled

(001-021) slippers, shapely arms and shoulders, vivacious movements, nods and smiles,

(001-022) swift glances, ripples, bursts of laughter, an exciting hum of voices.

(001-023) Then silence, sudden darkness--and music, and the curtain. The great wide

(001-024) curtain slowly rising....

(001-025) But all that had passed away.

(001-026) [[roger-gale|Roger Gale]] was a rugged heavy man not quite sixty years of age. His broad,

(001-027) massive features were already deeply furrowed, and there were two big

(001-028) flecks of white in his close-curling, grayish hair. He lived in a narrow

(001-029) red brick house down on the lower west side of the town, in a neighborhood

(001-030) swiftly changing. His wife was dead. He had no sons, but three grown

(001-031) daughters, of whom the oldest, [[edith-sidney|Edith]], had been married many years. [[laura-sloane|Laura]]

(001-032) and [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] lived at [[family|home]], but they were both out this evening. It was

(001-033) Friday, Edith's evening, and as was her habit she had come from her

(001-034) apartment uptown to dine with her father and play chess. In the living

(001-035) room, a cheerful place, with its lamp light and its shadows, its

(001-036) old-fashioned high-back chairs, its sofa, its book cases, its low marble

(001-037) mantel with the gilt mirror overhead, they sat at a small oval table in

(001-038) front of a quiet fire of coals. And through the smoke of his cigar Roger

(001-039) watched his daughter.

(001-040) Edith had four children, and was soon to have another. A small demure woman

(001-041) of thirty-five, with light soft hair and clear blue eyes and limbs softly

(001-042) rounded, the contour of her features was full with approaching [[motherhood|maternity]],

(001-043) but there was a decided firmness in the lines about her little mouth. As he

(001-044) watched her now, her father's eyes, deep set and gray and with signs of

(001-045) long years of suffering in them, displayed a grave whimsical wistfulness.

(001-046) For by the way she was playing the game he saw how old she thought him. Her

(001-047) play was slow and absent-minded, and there came long periods when she did

(001-048) not make a move. Then she would recall herself and look up with a little

(001-049) affectionate smile that showed she looked upon him as too heavy with his

(001-050) age to have noticed her small lapses.

(001-051) He was grimly amused at her attitude, for he did not feel old at all. With

(001-052) that whimsical hint of a smile which had grown to be a part of him, he

(001-053) tried various moves on the board to see how far he could go without

(001-054) interrupting her reveries. He checkmated her, re-lit his cigar and waited

(001-055) until she should notice it. And when she did not notice, gravely he moved

(001-056) back his queen and let the game continue. How many hundreds of games, he

(001-057) thought, Edith must have played with him in the long years when his spirit

(001-058) was dead, for her now to take such chances. Nearly every Friday evening for

(001-059) nearly sixteen years.

(001-060) Before that, [[judith-gale|Judith]] his wife had been here. It was then that the city had

(001-061) been young, for to Roger it had always seemed as though he were just

(001-062) beginning life. Into its joys and sorrows too he had groped his way as most

(001-063) of us do, and had never penetrated deep. But he had meant to, later on.

(001-064) When in his busy city days distractions had arisen, always he had promised

(001-065) himself that sooner or later he would return to this interest or passion,

(001-066) for the world still lay before him with its enthralling interests, its

(001-067) beauties and its pleasures, its tasks and all its puzzles, intricate and

(001-068) baffling, all some day to be explored.

(001-069) This deep zest in Roger Gale had been bred in his boyhood on a farm up in

(001-070) the [[new-hampshire-farm|New Hampshire]] mountains. There his family had lived for many

(001-071) [[generational-change|generations]]. And from the old house, the huge shadowy barn and the crude

(001-072) little sawmill down the road; from animals, grown people and still more

(001-073) from other boys, from the meadows and the mountain above with its cliffs

(001-074) and caves and forests of pine, young Roger had discovered, even in those

(001-075) early years, that life was fresh, abundant, new, with countless glad

(001-076) beginnings.

(001-077) At seventeen he had come to New York. There had followed hard struggles in

(001-078) lean years, but his rugged [[medicine|health]] had buoyed him up. And there had been

(001-079) genial friendships and [[dream|dreams]] and explorations, a search for romance, the

(001-080) strange glory of love, a few furtive ventures that left him dismayed. But

(001-081) though love had seemed sordid at such times it had brought him crude

(001-082) exultations. And if his existence had grown more obscure, it had been

(001-083) somber only in patches, the main picture dazzling still. And still he had

(001-084) been just making starts.

(001-085) He had ventured into the business world, clerking now at this, now at that,

(001-086) and always looking about him for some big opportunity. It had come and he

(001-087) had seized it, despite the warnings of his friends. What a wild adventure

(001-088) it had been a bureau of news clippings, a business new and unheard of but

(001-089) he had been sure that here was growth, he had worked at it day and night,

(001-090) and the business widening fast had revealed long ramifications which went

(001-091) winding and stretching away into every phase of American life. And this

(001-092) life was like a forest, boundless and impenetrable, up-springing,

(001-093) intertwining. How much could _he_ ever know of it all?

(001-094) Then had come his marriage. Judith's family had lived long in New York, but

(001-095) some had died and others had scattered until only she was left. This house

(001-096) had been hers, but she had been poor, so she had leased it to some friends.

(001-097) It was through them he had met her here, and within a few weeks he had

(001-098) fallen in love. He had felt profound disgust for the few wild oats he had

(001-099) sown, and in his swift reaction he had overworshipped the girl, her beauty

(001-100) and her purity, until in a delicate way of her own she had hinted that he

(001-101) was going too far, that she, too, was human and a passionate lover of

(001-102) living, in spite of her low quiet voice and her demure and sober eyes.

(001-103) And what beginnings for Roger now, what a piling up of intimate joys,

(001-104) surprises, shocks of happiness. There had come disappointments, too, sudden

(001-105) severe little checks from his wife which had brought him occasional

(001-106) questionings. This love had not been quite _all_ he had dreamed, this woman

(001-107) not so ardent. He had glimpsed couples here and there that set him to

(001-108) imagining more consuming passions. Here again he had not explored very

(001-109) deep. But he had dismissed regrets like these with only a slight

(001-110) reluctance. For if they had settled down a bit with the coming of their

(001-111) children, their love had grown rich in sympathies and silent

(001-112) understandings, in humorous enjoyment of their funny little daughters'

(001-113) chattering like magpies in the genial old house. And they had looked

(001-114) happily far ahead. What a woman she had been for plans. It had not been all

(001-115) smooth sailing. There had come reverses in business, and at home one baby,

(001-116) a boy, had died. But on they had gone and the years had swept by until he

(001-117) had reached his forties. Absorbed in his growing business and in his

(001-118) thriving family, it had seemed to Roger still as though he were just

(001-119) starting out.

(001-120) But one day, quite suddenly, [[the-gale-home|the house]] had become a strange place to him

(001-121) with a strange remote figure in it, his wife. For he had learned that she

(001-122) must die. There had followed terrible weeks. Then Judith had faced their

(001-123) disaster. Little by little she had won back the old intimacy with her

(001-124) husband; and through the slow but inexorable [[modernity|progress]] of her ailment, again

(001-125) they had come together in long talks and plans for their children. At this

(001-126) same chessboard, in this room, repeatedly she would stop the game and

(001-127) smiling she would look into the future. At one such time she had said to

(001-128) him,

(001-129) "I wonder if it won't be the same with the children as it has been with us.

(001-130) No matter how long each one of them lives, won't their lives feel to them

(001-131) unfinished like ours, only just beginning? I wonder how far they will go.

(001-132) And then their children will grow up and it will be the same with them.

(001-133) Unfinished lives. Oh, dearie, what children all of us are."

(001-134) He had put his arm around her then and had held her very tight. And feeling

(001-135) the violent trembling of her husband's fierce revolt, slowly bending back

(001-136) her head and looking up into his eyes she had continued steadily:

(001-137) "And when you come after me, my dear, oh, how hungry I shall be for all you

(001-138) will tell me. For you will live on in our children's lives."

(001-139) And she had asked him to promise her that.

(001-140) But he had not kept his promise. For after Judith's [[death|dying]] he had felt

(001-141) himself terribly alone, with eternity around him, his wife slipping far

(001-142) away. And the universe had grown stark and hard, impersonal, relentless,

(001-143) cold. A storm of doubts had attacked his [[religion|faith]]. And though he had resisted

(001-144) long, for his faith in God had been rooted deep in the mountains of New

(001-145) England, in the end it had been wrenched away, and with it he had lost all

(001-146) hope that either for Judith or himself was there any existence beyond the

(001-147) grave. So death had come to Roger's soul. He had been deaf and blind to his

(001-148) children. Nights by the thousand spent alone. Like a gray level road in his

(001-149) memory now was the story of his family.

(001-150) When had his spirit begun to awaken? He could not tell, it had been so

(001-151) slow. His second daughter, Deborah, who had stayed at home with her father

(001-152) when Laura had gone away to school, had done little things continually to

(001-153) rouse his interest in life. Edith's winsome babies had attracted him when

(001-154) they came to the house. Laura had returned from school, a joyous creature,

(001-155) tall and slender, with snapping black eyes, and had soon made her presence

(001-156) felt. One day in the early afternoon, as he entered the house there had

(001-157) burst on his ears a perfect gale of laughter; and peering through the

(001-158) portières he had seen the dining-room full of young girls, a crew as wild

(001-159) as Laura herself. Hastily he had retreated upstairs. But he had enjoyed

(001-160) such glimpses. He had liked to see her fresh pretty gowns and to have her

(001-161) come in and kiss him good-night.

(001-162) Then had come a sharp heavy jolt. His business had suffered from long

(001-163) neglect, and suddenly for two anxious weeks he had found himself facing

(001-164) bankruptcy. Edith's husband, a [[law|lawyer]], had come to his aid and together

(001-165) they had pulled out of the hole. But he had been forced to mortgage the

(001-166) house. And this had brought to a climax all the feelings of guiltiness

(001-167) which had so long been stirring within him over his failure to live up to

(001-168) the promise he had made his wife.

(001-169) And so Roger had looked at his children.

(001-170) And at first to his profound surprise he had had it forced upon him that

(001-171) these were three grown women, each equipped with her own peculiar feminine

(001-172) traits and desires, the swift accumulations of lives which had expanded in

(001-173) a city that had reared to the skies in the many years of his long sleep.

(001-174) But very slowly, month by month, he had gained a second impression which

(001-175) seemed to him deeper and more real. To the eye they were grown women all,

(001-176) but inwardly they were children still, each groping for her happiness and

(001-177) each held back as he had been, either by checks within herself or by the

(001-178) gay distractions of the absorbing city. He saw each of his daughters, parts

(001-179) of himself. And he remembered what Judith had said: "You will live on in

(001-180) our children's lives." And he began to get glimmerings of a new

(001-181) immortality, made up of generations, an endless succession of other lives

(001-182) extending into the future.

(001-183) Some of all this he remembered now, in scattered fragments here and there.

(001-184) Then from somewhere far away a great bell began booming the hour, and it

(001-185) roused him from his revery. He had often heard the bell of late. A calm

(001-186) deep-toned intruder, it had first struck in upon his attention something

(001-187) over two years ago. Vaguely he had wondered about it. Soon he had found it

(001-188) was on the top of a tower a little to the north, one of the highest

(001-189) pinnacles of this tumultuous modern town. But the bell was not tumultuous.

(001-190) And as he listened it seemed to say, "There is still time, but you have not

(001-191) long."

(001-192) Edith, sitting opposite him, looked up at the sound with a stir of relief.

(001-193) Ten o'clock. It was time to go home.

(001-194) "I wonder what's keeping [[bruce|Bruce]]," she said. Bruce was still in [[rogers-office|his office]]

(001-195) downtown. As a rule on Friday evenings he came with his wife to supper

(001-196) here, but this week he had some new business on hand. Edith was vague about

(001-197) it. As she tried to explain she knitted her brows and said that Bruce was

(001-198) working too hard. And her father grunted assent.

(001-199) "Bruce ought to knock off every summer," he said, "for a good solid month,

(001-200) or better two. Can't you bring him up to the mountains this year?" He

(001-201) referred to the old New Hampshire home which he had kept as a summer place.

(001-202) But Edith smiled at the idea.

(001-203) "Yes, I could bring him," she replied, "and in a week he'd be perfectly

(001-204) crazy to get back to his office again." She compressed her lips. "I know

(001-205) what he needs--and we'll do it some day, in spite of him."

(001-206) "A suburb, eh," her father said, and his face took on a look of dislike.

(001-207) They had often talked of suburbs.

(001-208) "Yes," his daughter answered, "I've picked out the very house." He threw at

(001-209) her a glance of impatience. He knew what had started her on this line.

(001-210) Edith's friend, [[madge-deering|Madge Deering]], was living out in [[morristown|Morristown]]. All very well,

(001-211) he reflected, but her case was not at all the same. He had known Madge

(001-212) pretty well. Although the death of her husband had left her a widow at

(001-213) twenty-nine, with four small daughters to bring up, she had gone on

(001-214) determinedly. Naturally smart and able, Madge was always running to town,

(001-215) keeping up with all her friends and with every new fad and movement there,

(001-216) although she made fun of most of them. Twice she had taken her girls

(001-217) [[europe|abroad]]. But Edith was quite different. In a suburb she would draw into her

(001-218) house and never grow another inch. And Bruce, poor devil, would commute and

(001-219) take [[work-and-vocation|work]] home from the office. But Roger couldn't tell her that.

(001-220) "I'd be sorry to see you do it," he said. "I'd miss you up in the

(001-221) mountains."

(001-222) "Oh, we'd come up in the summer," she answered. "I wouldn't miss the

(001-223) mountains for worlds!"

(001-224) Then they talked of summer plans. And soon again Edith's smooth pretty

(001-225) brows were wrinkling absorbedly. It was hard in her planning not to be sure

(001-226) whether her new baby would come in May or early June. It was only the first

(001-227) of April now. While she talked her father watched her. He liked her quiet

(001-228) fearlessness in facing the ordeal ahead. Into the bewildering city he felt

(001-229) her searching anxiously to find good things for her small brood, to make

(001-230) every dollar count, to keep their little bodies strong, to guard their

(001-231) hungry little souls from many things she thought were bad. Of all his

(001-232) daughters, he told himself, she was the one most like his wife.

(001-233) While she was talking Bruce came in. Of medium height and a wiry build, his

(001-234) quick kindly smile of greeting did not conceal the fine tight lines about

(001-235) his mouth and between his eyes. His small trim moustache was black, but his

(001-236) hair already showed streaks of gray although he was not quite thirty-eight,

(001-237) and as he lit a cigarette his right hand twitched perceptibly.

(001-238) Bruce Cunningham had married just after he left law school. He had worked

(001-239) in a law office which took receiverships by the score, and through managing

(001-240) bankrupt concerns by slow degrees he had made himself a financial surgeon.

(001-241) He had set up an office of his own and was doing splendidly. But he worked

(001-242) under fearful tension. Bruce had to deal with bankrupts who had barely

(001-243) closed their eyes for weeks, men half out of their minds from the strain,

(001-244) the struggle to keep up their heads in those angry waters of finance which

(001-245) Roger vaguely pictured as a giant whirlpool. Though honest enough in his

(001-246) own affairs, Bruce showed a genial relish for all the tricks of the savage

(001-247) world which was as the breath to his nostrils. And at times he appeared so

(001-248) wise and keen he made Roger feel like a child. But again it was Bruce who

(001-249) seemed the child. He seemed to be so naïve at times, and Edith had him so

(001-250) under her thumb. Roger liked to hear Bruce's stories of business, when

(001-251) Edith would let her husband talk. But this she would not often do, for she

(001-252) said Bruce needed rest at night. She reproved him now for staying so late,

(001-253) she wrung from him the fact that he'd had no supper.

(001-254) "Well, Bruce," she exclaimed impatiently, "now isn't that just like you?

(001-255) You're going straight home--that's where you're going--"

(001-256) "To be fed up and put to bed," her husband grumbled good-naturedly. And

(001-257) while she made ready to bundle him off he turned to his father-in-law.

(001-258) "What do you think's my latest?" he asked, and he gave a low chuckle which

(001-259) Roger liked. "Last week I was a brewer, to-day I'm an engineer," he said.

(001-260) "Can you beat it? A building contractor. Me." And as he smoked his

(001-261) cigarette, in laconic phrases he explained how a huge steel construction

(001-262) concern had gone to the wall, through building skyscrapers "on spec" and

(001-263) outstripping even the growth of New York. "They got into court last week,"

(001-264) he said, "and the judge handed me the receivership. The judge and I have

(001-265) been chums for years. He has hay fever--so do I."

(001-266) "Come, Bruce, I'm ready," said his wife.

(001-267) "I've been in their office all day," he went on. "Their general manager was

(001-268) stark mad. He hadn't been out of the office since last Sunday night, he

(001-269) said. You had to ask him a question and wait--while he looked at you and

(001-270) held onto his chair. He broke down and blubbered--the poor damn fool--he'll

(001-271) be in Matteawan in a week--"

(001-272) "You'll be there yourself if you don't come home," broke in Edith's voice

(001-273) impatiently.

(001-274) "And out of that poor devil, and out of the mess his books are in, I've

(001-275) been [[education|learning]] engineering!"

(001-276) He had followed his wife out on the steps. He turned back with a quick

(001-277) appealing smile:

(001-278) "Well, good-night--see you soon--"

(001-279) "Good-night, my boy," said Roger. "Good luck to the engineering."

(001-280) "Oh, father dear," cried Edith, from the taxi down below. "Remember supper

(001-281) Sunday night--"

(001-282) "I won't forget," said Roger.

(001-283) * * * * *

(001-284) He watched them start off up the street. The night was soft, refreshing,

(001-285) and the place was quiet and personal. The house was one of a dozen others,

(001-286) some of red brick and some of brown stone, that stood in an uneven row on a

(001-287) street but a few rods in length, one side of a little triangular park

(001-288) enclosed by a low iron fence, inside of which were a few gnarled trees and

(001-289) three or four park benches. On one of these benches his eye was caught by

(001-290) the figure of an old woman there, and he stood a moment watching her, some

(001-291) memory stirring in his mind.

(001-292) Occasionally somebody passed. Otherwise it was silent here. But even in the

(001-293) silence could be felt the throes of change; the very atmosphere seemed

(001-294) charged with drastic things impending. Already the opposite house line had

(001-295) been broken near the center by a high apartment building, and another still

(001-296) higher rose like a cliff just back of the house in which Roger lived. Still

(001-297) others, and many factory lofts, reared shadowy bulks on every hand. From

(001-298) the top of one an enormous sign, a corset pictured forth in lights, flashed

(001-299) out at regular intervals; and from farther off, high up in the misty haze

(001-300) of the night, could be seen the gleaming pinnacle where hour by hour that

(001-301) great bell slowly boomed the time away. Yes, here the old was passing.

(001-302) Already the tiny parklet was like the dark bottom of a pit, with the hard

(001-303) sparkling modern town towering on every side, slowly pressing, pressing in

(001-304) and glaring down with yellow eyes.

(001-305) But Roger noticed none of these things. He watched the old woman on the

(001-306) bench and groped for the memory she had stirred. Ah, now at last he had it.

(001-307) An April night long, long ago, when he had sat where she was now, while

(001-308) here in the house his wife's first baby, Edith, had begun her life....

(001-309) Slowly he turned and went inside.
