---
description: "Roger's hearing was extremely acute. Though the room where he was sitting,"
id: ch02
label: "Chapter II: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(002-001) [[roger-gale|Roger]]'s hearing was extremely acute. Though the room where he was sitting,

(002-002) his study, was at the back of [[the-gale-home|the house]], he heard [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s key at the

(002-003) street door and he heard the door softly open and close.

(002-004) "Are you there, dearie?" Her voice from the hallway was low; and his

(002-005) answer, "Yes, child," was in the same tone, as though she were with him in

(002-006) the room. This keen sense of hearing had long been a peculiar bond between

(002-007) them. To her father, Deborah's voice was the most distinctive part of her,

(002-008) for often as he listened the memory came of her voice as a girl,

(002-009) unpleasant, hurried and stammering. But she had overcome all that. "No

(002-010) grown woman," she had declared, when she was eighteen, "has any excuse for

(002-011) a voice like mine." That was eleven years ago; and the voice she had

(002-012) acquired since, with its sweet magnetic quality, its clear and easy

(002-013) articulation, was to him an expression of Deborah's growth. As she took off

(002-014) her coat and hat in the hall she said, in the same low tone as before,

(002-015) "[[edith-sidney|Edith]] has been here, I suppose--"

(002-016) "Yes--"

(002-017) "I'm so sorry I missed her. I tried to get [[family|home]] early, but it has been a

(002-018) busy night."

(002-019) Her voice sounded tired, comfortably so, and she looked that way as she

(002-020) came in. Though only a little taller than Edith, she was of a sturdier

(002-021) build and more decided features. Her mouth was large with a humorous droop

(002-022) and her face rather broad with high cheekbones. As she put her soft black

(002-023) hair up over her high forehead, her father noticed her birthmark, a faint

(002-024) curving line of red running up from between her eyes. Imperceptible as a

(002-025) rule, it showed when she was tired. In the big school in [[tenement-district|the tenements]]

(002-026) where she had taught for many years, she gave herself hard without stint to

(002-027) her [[work-and-vocation|work]], but she had such a good time through it all. She had a way, too,

(002-028) he reflected, of always putting things in their place. As now she came in

(002-029) and kissed him and sank back on his leather lounge with a tranquil breath

(002-030) of relief, she seemed to be dropping school out of her life.

(002-031) Roger picked up his paper and continued his reading. Presently they would

(002-032) have a talk, but first he knew that she wanted to lie quite still for a

(002-033) little while. Vaguely he pictured her work that night, her [[social-class|class]]-room

(002-034) packed to bursting with small Jews and Italians, and Deborah at the

(002-035) blackboard with a long pointer in her hand. The fact that for the last two

(002-036) years she had been the principal of her school had made little impression

(002-037) upon him.

(002-038) And meanwhile, as she lay back with eyes closed, her mind still taut from

(002-039) the evening called up no simple class-room but far different places--a mass

(002-040) meeting in Carnegie Hall where she had just been speaking, some [[education|schools]]

(002-041) which she had visited out in Indiana, a block of tenements far [[downtown-new-york|downtown]] and

(002-042) the private office of the mayor. For her school had long curious arms these

(002-043) days.

(002-044) "Was [[bruce|Bruce]] here too this evening?" she asked her father presently. Roger

(002-045) finished what he was reading, then looked over to the lounge, which was in

(002-046) a shadowy corner.

(002-047) "Yes, he came in late." And he went on to tell her of Bruce's

(002-048) "engineering." At once she was interested. Rising on one elbow she

(002-049) questioned him good-humoredly, for Deborah was fond of Bruce.

(002-050) "Has he bought that automobile he wanted?"

(002-051) "No," replied her father. "Edith said they couldn't afford it."

(002-052) "Why not?"

(002-053) "This time it's the dentist's bills. Young [[betsy|Betsy]]'s teeth aren't

(002-054) straightened yet--and as soon as she's been beautified they're going to put

(002-055) the clamps on [[george-sidney|George]]."

(002-056) "Poor Georgie," Deborah murmured. At the look of pain and disapproval on

(002-057) her father's heavy face, she smiled quietly to herself. George, who was

(002-058) Edith's oldest and the worry of her days, was Roger's favorite grandson.

(002-059) "Has he been bringing home any more sick dogs?"

(002-060) "No, this time it was a rat--a white one," Roger answered. A glint of dry

(002-061) relish appeared in his eyes. "George brought it home the other night. He

(002-062) had on a pair of ragged old pants."

(002-063) "What on earth--"

(002-064) "He had traded his own breeches for the rat," said Roger placidly.

(002-065) "No! Oh, father! Really!" And she sank back laughing on the lounge.

(002-066) "His school report," said Roger, "was quite as bad as ever."

(002-067) "Of course it was," said Deborah. And she spoke so sharply that her father

(002-068) glanced at her in surprise. She was up again on one elbow, and there was an

(002-069) eager expression on her bright attractive face. "Do you know what we're

(002-070) going to do some day? We're going to put the rat in [[deborahs-school|the school]]," Deborah

(002-071) said impatiently. "We're going to take a boy like George and study him till

(002-072) we think we know just what interests him most. And if in his case it's

(002-073) animals, we'll have a regular zoo in school. And for other boys we'll have

(002-074) other things they really [[poverty|want]] to know about. And we'll keep them until five

(002-075) o'clock--when their mothers will have to drag them away." Her father looked

(002-076) bewildered.

(002-077) "But arithmetic, my dear."

(002-078) "You'll find they'll have learned their arithmetic without knowing it,"

(002-079) Deborah answered.

(002-080) "Sounds a bit wild," murmured Roger. Again to his mind came the picture of

(002-081) hordes of little Italians and Jews. "My dear, if I had _your [[childhood|children]]_ to

(002-082) teach, I don't think I'd add a zoo," he said. And with a breath of

(002-083) discomfort he turned back to his reading. He knew that he ought to question

(002-084) her, to show an interest in her work. But he had a deep aversion for those

(002-085) millions of foreign tenement people, always shoving, shoving upward through

(002-086) the filth of their surroundings. They had already spoiled his neighborhood,

(002-087) they had flowed up like an ocean tide. And so he read his paper, frowning

(002-088) guiltily down at the page. He glanced up in a little while and saw Deborah

(002-089) smiling across at him, reading his dislike of such talk. The smile which he

(002-090) sent back at her was half apologetic, half an appeal for mercy. And Deborah

(002-091) seemed to understand. She went into the living room, and there at the piano

(002-092) she was soon playing softly. Listening from his study, again the feeling

(002-093) came to him of her fresh and abundant vitality. He mused a little enviously

(002-094) on how it must feel to be strong like that, never really tired.

(002-095) And while her father thought in this wise, Deborah at the piano, leaning

(002-096) back with eyes half closed, could feel her tortured nerves relax, could

(002-097) feel her pulse stop throbbing so and the dull aching at her temples little

(002-098) by little pass away. She played like this so many nights. Soon she would be

(002-099) ready for sleep.

(002-100) * * * * *

(002-101) After she had gone to bed, Roger rose heavily from his chair. By long habit

(002-102) he went about the [[home|house]] trying the windows and turning out lights. Last he

(002-103) came to the front door. There were double outer doors with a ponderous

(002-104) system of locks and bolts and a heavy chain. Mechanically he fastened them

(002-105) all; and putting out the light in the hall, in the darkness he went up the

(002-106) stairs. He could so easily feel his way. He put his hand lightly, first on

(002-107) the foot of the banister, then on a curve in it halfway up, again on the

(002-108) sharper curve at the top and last on the knob of his bedroom door. And it

(002-109) was as though these guiding objects came out to meet him like old friends.

(002-110) In his bedroom, while he slowly undressed, his glance was caught by the

(002-111) picture upon the wall opposite his bed, a little landscape poster done in

(002-112) restful tones of blue, of two herdsmen and their cattle far up on a

(002-113) mountainside in the hour just before the dawn, tiny clear-cut silhouettes

(002-114) against the awakening eastern sky. So immense and still, this birth of the

(002-115) day--the picture always gave him the feeling of life everlasting. [[judith-gale|Judith]]

(002-116) his wife had placed it there.

(002-117) From his bed through the window close beside him he looked up at the

(002-118) cliff-like wall of the new apartment building, with tier upon tier of

(002-119) windows from which murmurous voices dropped out of the dark: now soft, now

(002-120) suddenly angry, loud; now droning, sullen, bitter, hard; now gay with

(002-121) little screams of mirth; now low and amorous, drowsy sounds. Tier upon tier

(002-122) of modern homes, all overhanging Roger's house as though presently to crush

(002-123) it down.

(002-124) But Roger was not thinking of that. He was thinking of his children--of

(002-125) Edith's approaching confinement and all her anxious hunting about to find

(002-126) what was best for her family, of Bruce and the way he was driving himself

(002-127) in the unnatural world downtown where men were at each other's throats, of

(002-128) Deborah and that school of hers in the heart of a vast foul region of

(002-129) tenement buildings swarming with strange, dirty little urchins. And last he

(002-130) thought of [[laura-sloane|Laura]], his youngest daughter, wild as a hawk, gadding about the

(002-131) Lord knew where. She even danced in restaurants! Through his children he

(002-132) felt flowing into his house the seething life of this new town. And

(002-133) drowsily he told himself he must make a real effort, and make it soon, to

(002-134) know his family better. For in spite of the storm of long ago which had

(002-135) swept away his [[religion|faith]] in God, the feeling had come to him of late that

(002-136) somewhere, in some manner, he was to meet his wife again. He rarely tried

(002-137) to think this out, for as soon as he did it became a mere wish, a hungry

(002-138) longing, nothing more. So he had learned to let it lie, deep down inside of

(002-139) him. Sometimes he vividly saw her face. After all, who could tell? And she

(002-140) would want to hear of her children. Yes, he must know them better. Some day

(002-141) soon he must begin.

(002-142) Suddenly he remembered that Laura had not yet come home. With a sigh of

(002-143) discomfort he got out of bed and went downstairs, re-lit the gas in the

(002-144) hallway, unfastened the locks and the chain at the door. He came back and

(002-145) was soon asleep. He must have dozed for an hour or two. He was roused by

(002-146) hearing the front door close and a big motor thundering. And then like a

(002-147) flash of light in the dark came Laura's rippling laughter.
