---
description: "On the next evening, Saturday, while Roger ate his dinner, Laura came to"
id: ch03
label: "Chapter III: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(003-001) On the next evening, Saturday, while [[roger-gale|Roger]] ate his dinner, [[laura-sloane|Laura]] came to

(003-002) sit with him. She herself was dining out. That she should have dressed so

(003-003) early in order to keep him company had caused her father some surprise, and

(003-004) a faint suspicion entered his mind that she had overdrawn at the bank, as

(003-005) she had the last time she sat with him like this. Her manner certainly was

(003-006) a bit strange.

(003-007) But Roger put the thought aside. Whatever she wanted, Laura was worth it.

(003-008) In a tingling fashion he felt what a glorious time she was having, what a

(003-009) gorgeous town she knew. It was difficult to realize she was his own

(003-010) daughter, this dashing stranger sitting here, playing idly with a knife and

(003-011) caressing him with her voice and her eyes. The blue evening gown she was

(003-012) wearing to-night (doubtless not yet paid for) made her figure even more

(003-013) supple and lithe, set off her splendid bosom, her slender neck, her creamy

(003-014) skin. Her hair, worn low over her temples, was brown with just a tinge of

(003-015) red. Her eyes were black, with gleaming lights; her lips were warm and

(003-016) rich, alive. He did not approve of her lips. Once when she had kissed him

(003-017) Roger had started slightly back. For his daughter's lips were rouged, and

(003-018) they had reminded him of his [[childhood|youth]]. He had asked her sister to speak to

(003-019) her. But [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] had told him she did not care to speak to people in that

(003-020) way--"especially [[womens-roles|women]]--especially sisters," she had said, with a quiet

(003-021) smile. All very well, he reflected, but somebody ought to take Laura in

(003-022) hand.

(003-023) She had been his favorite as a child, his pet, his tiny daughter. He

(003-024) remembered her on his lap like a kitten. How she had liked to cuddle there.

(003-025) And she had liked to bite his hand, a curious habit in a child. "I hurt

(003-026) daddy!" He could still recollect the gay little laugh with which she said

(003-027) that, looking up brightly into his face.

(003-028) And here she was already grown, and like a light in the sober old [[home|house]],

(003-029) fascinating while she disturbed him. He liked to hear her high pitched

(003-030) voice, gossiping in Deborah's room or in her own dainty chamber chatting

(003-031) with the adoring maid who was dressing her to go out. He loved her joyous

(003-032) thrilling laugh. And he would have missed her from [[the-gale-home|the house]] as he would

(003-033) have missed Fifth Avenue if it had been dropped from [[new-york-city|the city]]. For the

(003-034) picture Roger had formed of this daughter was more of a symbol than of a

(003-035) girl, a symbol of the ardent town, spending, wasting, dancing mad. It was

(003-036) Laura who had kept him living right up to his income.

(003-037) "Where are you dining to-night?" he asked.

(003-038) "With the Raymonds." He wondered who they were. "Oh, [[sarah-maid|Sarah]]," she added to

(003-039) the maid. "Call up Mrs. Raymond's apartment and ask what time is dinner

(003-040) to-night."

(003-041) "Are you going to dance later on?" he inquired.

(003-042) "Oh, I guess so," she replied. "On the Astor Roof, I think they said--"

(003-043) Her father went on with his dinner. These hotel dances, he had heard, ran

(003-044) well into Sunday morning. How [[judith-gale|Judith]] would have disapproved. He hesitated

(003-045) uneasily.

(003-046) "I don't especially care for this dancing into Sunday," he said. For a

(003-047) moment he did not look up from his plate. When he did he saw Laura

(003-048) regarding him.

(003-049) "Oh, do you mind? I'm sorry. I won't, after this," she answered. And Roger

(003-050) colored angrily, for the glint of amusement in Laura's mischievous black

(003-051) eyes revealed quite unmistakably that she regarded both her father and his

(003-052) feeling for the Sabbath as very dear and quaint and old. Old? Of course he

(003-053) seemed old to _her_, Roger thought indignantly. For what was Laura but a

(003-054) child? Did she ever think of anything except having a good time? Had she

(003-055) ever stopped to think out her own morals, let alone anyone else's? Was she

(003-056) any judge of what was old--or of _who_ was old? And he determined then and

(003-057) there to show her he was in his prime. Impatiently he strove to remember

(003-058) the names of her friends and ask her about them, to show a keen lively

(003-059) interest in this giddy gaddy life she led. And when that was rather a

(003-060) failure he tried his daughter next on books, books of the most modern kind.

(003-061) Stoutly he lied and said he was reading a certain Russian novel of which he

(003-062) had heard Deborah speak. But this valiant falsehood made no impression

(003-063) whatever, for Laura had never heard of the book.

(003-064) "I get so little time for reading," she murmured. And meanwhile she was

(003-065) thinking, "As soon as he finishes talking, poor dear, I'll break the news."

(003-066) Then Roger had an audacious thought. He would take her to a play, by

(003-067) [[george-sidney|George]]! Mustering his courage he led up to it by speaking of a play Deborah

(003-068) had seen, a full-fledged modern drama all centered upon the right of a

(003-069) woman "to lead her own life." And as he outlined the story, he saw he had

(003-070) caught his daughter's attention. With her pretty chin resting on one hand,

(003-071) watching him and listening, she appeared much older, and she seemed

(003-072) suddenly close to him.

(003-073) "How would you like to go with me and see it some evening?" he inquired.

(003-074) "See what, my [[love-and-courtship|love]]?" she asked him, her thoughts plainly far away; and he

(003-075) looked at her in astonishment:

(003-076) "That play I've just been speaking of!"

(003-077) "Why, daddy, I'd love to!" she exclaimed.

(003-078) "When?" he asked. And he fixed a night. He was proud of himself. Eagerly he

(003-079) began to talk of opening nights at Wallack's. Roger and Judith, when they

(003-080) were young, had been great first nighters there. And now it was Laura who

(003-081) drew him out, and as he talked on she seemed to him to be smilingly trying

(003-082) to picture it all.... "Now I'd better tell him," she thought.

(003-083) "Do you remember [[harold-sloane|Harold Sloane]]?" she asked a little strangely.

(003-084) "No," replied her father, a bit annoyed at the interruption.

(003-085) "Why--you've met him two or three times--"

(003-086) "Have I?" The queer note in her voice made him look up. Laura had risen

(003-087) from her chair.

(003-088) "I [[poverty|want]] you to know him--very soon." There was a moment's silence. "I'm

(003-089) going to marry him, dad," she said. And Roger looked at her blankly. He

(003-090) felt his limbs beginning to tremble. "I've been waiting to tell you when we

(003-091) were alone," she added in an awkward tone. And still staring up at her he

(003-092) felt a rush of tenderness and a pang of deep [[regret|remorse]]. Laura in love and

(003-093) settled for life! And what did he know of the affair? What had he ever done

(003-094) for her? Too late! He had begun too late! And this rush of emotion was so

(003-095) overpowering that while he still looked at her blindly she was the first to

(003-096) recover her poise. She came around the table and kissed him softly on the

(003-097) cheek. And now more than ever Roger felt how old his daughter thought him.

(003-098) "Who is he?" he asked hoarsely. And she answered smiling,

(003-099) "A perfectly nice young man named Sloane."

(003-100) "Don't, Laura--tell me! What does he do?"

(003-101) "He's in a broker's office--junior member of the firm, Oh, you needn't

(003-102) worry, dear, he can even afford to marry _me_."

(003-103) They heard a ring at the front door.

(003-104) "There he is now, I think," she said. "Will you see him? Would you mind?"

(003-105) "See him? No!" her father cried.

(003-106) "But just to shake hands," she insisted. "You needn't talk or say a word.

(003-107) We've only a moment, anyway." And she went swiftly out of the room.

(003-108) Roger rose in a panic and strode up and down. Before he could recover

(003-109) himself she was back with her man, or rather her boy--for the fellow, to

(003-110) her father's eyes, looked ridiculously young. Straight as an arrow,

(003-111) slender, his dress suit irreproachable, the chap nevertheless was more than

(003-112) a dandy. He looked hard, as though he trained, and his smooth and ruddy

(003-113) face had a look of shrewd self-reliance. So much of him Roger fathomed in

(003-114) the indignant cornered glance with which he welcomed him into the room.

(003-115) "Why, good evening, Mr. Gale--glad to see you again, sir!" Young Sloane

(003-116) nervously held out his hand. Roger took it and muttered something. For

(003-117) several moments, his mind in a whirl, he heard their talk and laughter and

(003-118) his own voice joining in. Laura seemed enjoying herself, her eyes brimming

(003-119) with amusement over both her victims. But at last she had compassion,

(003-120) kissed her father gaily and took her suitor out of the room.

(003-121) Soon Roger heard them leave the house. He went into his study, savagely bit

(003-122) off a cigar and gripped his evening paper as though he meant to choke it.

(003-123) The maid came in with coffee. "Coffee? No!" he snapped at her. A few

(003-124) moments later he came to his senses and found himself smoking fast and

(003-125) hard. He heartily damned this fellow Sloane for breaking into the family

(003-126) and asking poor Laura to risk her whole life--just for his own selfish

(003-127) pleasure, his whim! Yes, "whim" was the very word for it! Laura's attitude,

(003-128) too! Did she look at it seriously? Not at all! Quite plainly she saw her

(003-129) [[work-and-vocation|career]] as one long Highland fling and dance, with this Harry boy as her

(003-130) partner! Who had he danced with in his past? The fellow's past must be gone

(003-131) into, and at once, without delay!

(003-132) Here indeed was a jolt for Roger Gale, a pretty shabby trick of fate. This

(003-133) was not what he had planned, this was a little way life had of jabbing a

(003-134) man with surprises. For months he had been slowly and comfortably feeling

(003-135) his way into the lives of his children, patiently, conscientiously. But

(003-136) now without a word of warning in popped this young whipper-snapper, turning

(003-137) the whole house upside down! Another young person to be known, another life

(003-138) to be dug into, and with pick and shovel too! The job was far from

(003-139) pleasant. Would Deborah help him? Not at all. She believed in letting

(003-140) people alone--a devilish easy philosophy! Still, he wanted to tell her at

(003-141) once, if only to stir her up a bit. He did not propose to bear this alone!

(003-142) But Deborah was out to-night. Why must she always be out, he asked, in that

(003-143) infernal zoo school? But no, it was not school to-night. She was dining out

(003-144) in some café with a tall lank [[medicine|doctor]] friend of hers. Probably she was to

(003-145) marry him!

(003-146) "I'll have that news for breakfast!" Roger smote his paper savagely. Why

(003-147) couldn't Laura have waited a little? Restlessly he walked the room. Then he

(003-148) went into the hall, took his hat and a heavy stick which he used for his

(003-149) night rambles, and walked off through the neighborhood. It was the first

(003-150) Saturday evening of Spring, and on those quiet [[downtown-new-york|downtown]] streets he met

(003-151) couples strolling by. A tall thin lad and a buxom girl went into a cheap

(003-152) apartment building laughing gaily to themselves, and Roger thought of

(003-153) Laura. A group of young Italians passed, humming "Trovatore," and it put

(003-154) him in mind of the time when he had ushered at the opera. Would Laura's

(003-155) young man be willing to usher? More like him to _tango_ down the aisle!

(003-156) He reached [[washington-square|Washington Square]] feeling tired but even more restless than

(003-157) before. He climbed to the top of a motor 'bus, and on the lurching ride

(003-158) uptown he darkly reflected that times had changed. He thought of the Avenue

(003-159) he had known, with its long lines of hansom cabs, its dashing broughams and

(003-160) coupés with jingling harness, livened footmen, everything sprucely

(003-161) up-to-date. How the horses had added to the town. But they were gone, and

(003-162) in their place were these great cats, these purring motors, sliding softly

(003-163) by the 'bus. Roger had swift glimpses down into lighted limousines. In one

(003-164) a big rich looking chap with a beard had a dressy young woman in his arms.

(003-165) Lord, how he was hugging her! Laura would have a motor like that, kisses

(003-166) like that, a life like that! She was the kind to go it hard! Ahead as far

(003-167) as he could see was a dark rolling torrent of cars, lights gleaming by the

(003-168) thousand. A hubbub of gay voices, cries and little shrieks of laughter

(003-169) mingled with the blare of horns. He looked at huge shop windows softly

(003-170) lighted with displays of bedrooms richly furnished, of gorgeous women's

(003-171) apparel, silks and lacy filmy stuffs. And to Roger, in his mood of anxious

(003-172) premonition, these bedroom scenes said plainly,

(003-173) "O come, all ye faithful wives! Come let us adore him, and deck ourselves

(003-174) to please his eye, to catch his eye, to hold his eye! For marriage is a

(003-175) game these days!"

(003-176) Yes, Laura would be a spender, a spender and a speeder too! How much money

(003-177) had he, that chap? And damn him, what had he in his past? How Roger hated

(003-178) the very thought of poking into another man's life! Poking where nobody

(003-179) wanted him! He felt desperately alone. To-night they were dancing, he

(003-180) recalled, not at a party in somebody's [[family|home]], but in some flashy public

(003-181) place where girls of her kind and fancy women gaily mixed together! How

(003-182) mixed the whole city was getting, he thought, how mad and strange, gone out

(003-183) of its mind, this city of his children's lives crowding in upon him!
