---
description: "One afternoon a few days later Roger was riding in the park. He rode"
id: ch05
label: "Chapter V: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(005-001) One afternoon a few days later [[roger-gale|Roger]] was riding in the park. He rode

(005-002) "William," a large lazy cob who as he advanced in age had so subtly and

(005-003) insidiously slackened his pace from a trot to a jog that Roger barely

(005-004) noticed how slowly he was riding. As he rode along he liked to watch the

(005-005) broad winding bridle path with its bobbing procession of riders that kept

(005-006) appearing before him under the tall spreading trees. Though he knew

(005-007) scarcely anyone by name, he was a familiar figure here and he recognized

(005-008) scores of faces. To many men he nodded at passing, and to not a few

(005-009) alluring young dames, ardent creatures with bright eyes who gave him smiles

(005-010) of greeting, Roger gravely raised his hat. One was "The Silver Lady" in a

(005-011) Broadway musical show, but he thought she was "one of the Newport crowd."

(005-012) He liked to make shrewd guesses like that. There were so many kinds of

(005-013) people here. There were stout anxious ladies riding for figures and lean

(005-014) morose gentlemen riding for [[medicine|health]]. There were joyous care-free girls,

(005-015) chatting and laughing merrily. There were some gallant foreigners, and

(005-016) there were riding masters, and Roger could not tell them apart. There were

(005-017) mad boys from the Squadron who rode at a furious canter, and there were

(005-018) groups of [[childhood|children]], eager and flushed, excited and gay, with stolid grooms

(005-019) behind them. The path in several places ran close beside the main road of

(005-020) the park, and with the coming of the dusk this road took on deep purple

(005-021) hues and glistened with reflections from countless yellow motor eyes. And

(005-022) from the polished limousines, sumptuous young [[womens-roles|women]] smiled out upon the

(005-023) riders.

(005-024) At least so Roger saw this life. And after those bleak lonely years

(005-025) confronted by eternity, it was good to come here and forget, to feel

(005-026) himself for the moment a part of the thoughtless gaiety, the ease and

(005-027) luxury of the town. Here he was just on the edge of it all. Often as a

(005-028) couple passed he would wonder what they were doing that night. In the

(005-029) riding school where he kept his horse, it was a lazy pleasure to have the

(005-030) English "valet" there pull off his boots and breeches--though if anyone had

(005-031) told him so, Roger would have denied it with indignation and surprise. For

(005-032) was he not an [[america|American]]?

(005-033) It had been a wonderful tonic, a great idea of [[laura-sloane|Laura]]'s, this forcing him up

(005-034) here to ride. In one of her affectionate moods, just after a sick spell he

(005-035) had been through, his gay capricious daughter had insisted that he have his

(005-036) horse brought down from [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]]. She had promised to ride with him

(005-037) herself, and she had done so--for a week. Since then he had often met her

(005-038) here with one of her many smart young men. What a smile of greeting would

(005-039) flash on her face--when Laura happened to notice him.

(005-040) He was thinking of Laura now, and there was an anxious gleam in his eyes.

(005-041) For young [[harold-sloane|Sloane]] was coming to dinner to-night. What was he going to say to

(005-042) the fellow? [[bruce|Bruce]] had learned that Sloane played polo, owned and drove a

(005-043) racing car and was well liked in his several clubs. But what about women

(005-044) and his past? [[edith-sidney|Edith]] had urged her father to go through the lad's life with

(005-045) a fine tooth comb, and if he should find anything there to kick up no end

(005-046) of a row for the honor of the family. All of which was nothing but words,

(005-047) reflected Roger pettishly. It all came to this, that he had a most ticklish

(005-048) evening ahead! On the path as a rider greeted him, his reply was a dismal

(005-049) frown.

(005-050) * * * * *

(005-051) Laura's suitor arrived at six o'clock. In his study Roger heard the bell,

(005-052) listened a moment with beating heart, then raised himself heavily from his

(005-053) chair and went into the hallway.

(005-054) "Ah, yes! It's you!" he exclaimed, with a nervous cordiality. "Come in, my

(005-055) boy, come right in! Here, let me help you with your coat. I don't know just

(005-056) where Laura is. Ahem!" He violently cleared his throat. "Suppose while

(005-057) we're waiting we have a smoke." He kept it up back into his den. There the

(005-058) suitor refused a cigar and carefully lit a cigarette. Roger noticed again

(005-059) how young the chap was, and marriage seemed so ridiculous! All this

(005-060) feverish trouble was for something so unreal!

(005-061) "Well, sir," the candidate blurted forth, "I guess I'd better come right to

(005-062) the point. Mr. Gale, I [[poverty|want]] to marry your daughter."

(005-063) "Laura?"

(005-064) "Yes." Roger cursed himself. Why had he asked, "Laura?" Of course it was

(005-065) Laura! Would this cub be wanting [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]?

(005-066) "Well, my boy," he said thickly. "I--I wish I knew you better."

(005-067) "So do I, sir. Suppose we begin." The youth took a quick pull at his

(005-068) cigarette. He waited, stirred nervously in his seat. "You'll have some

(005-069) questions to ask, I suppose--"

(005-070) "Yes, there are questions." Roger had risen mechanically and was slowly

(005-071) walking the room. He threw out short gruff phrases. "I'm not interested in

(005-072) your past--I don't care about digging into a man--I never have and I never

(005-073) will--except as it might affect my daughter. That's the main question, I

(005-074) suppose. Can you make her happy?"

(005-075) "I think so," said Sloane, decidedly. Roger gave him a glance of

(005-076) displeasure.

(005-077) "That's a large order, young man," he rejoined.

(005-078) "Then let's take it in sections," the youngster replied. Confound his

(005-079) boyish assurance! "To begin with," he was saying, "I rather think I have

(005-080) money enough. We'd better go into that, hadn't we?"

(005-081) "Yes," said Roger indifferently. "We might as well go into it." Of course

(005-082) the chap had money enough. He was a money maker. You could hear it in his

(005-083) voice; you could see it in his jaw, in his small aggressive blonde

(005-084) moustache. Now he was telling briefly of his rich aunt in [[bridgeport|Bridgeport]], of

(005-085) the generous start she had given him, his [[work-and-vocation|work]] [[downtown-new-york|downtown]], his income.

(005-086) "Twenty-two thousand this year," he said. "We can live on that all right, I

(005-087) guess."

(005-088) "You won't starve," was the dry response. Roger walked for a moment in

(005-089) silence, then turned abruptly on young Sloane.

(005-090) "Look here, young man, I don't want to dig," he continued very huskily.

(005-091) "But I know little or nothing of what may be behind you. I don't care to

(005-092) ask you about it now--unless it can make trouble."

(005-093) "It can't make trouble." At this answer, low but sharp, Roger wheeled and

(005-094) shot a glance into those clear and twinkling eyes. And his own eyes gleamed

(005-095) with pain. Laura had been such a little thing in the days when she had been

(005-096) his pet, the days when he had known her well. What could he do about it?

(005-097) This was only the usual thing. But he felt suddenly sick of life.

(005-098) "How soon do you want to get married?" he demanded harshly.

(005-099) "Next month, if we can."

(005-100) "Where are you going?"

(005-101) "Abroad," said Sloane. Roger caught at this topic as at a straw. Soon they

(005-102) were talking of the trip, and the tension slackened rapidly. He had never

(005-103) been [[europe|abroad]] himself but had always dreamed of going there. With maps and

(005-104) books of travel [[judith-gale|Judith]] and he had planned it out. In [[dream|imagination]] they had

(005-105) lived in London and [[paris|Paris]], Munich and [[rome|Rome]], always in queer old lodgings

(005-106) looking on quaint crooked streets. He had dreamed of long delicious

(005-107) rambles, glimpses into queer old shops, vast, silent, dark cathedrals. For

(005-108) Laura how different it would be. This boy of hers knew Europe as a group

(005-109) of gorgeous new hotels.

(005-110) The moment Laura joined them, her father's eye was caught and held by the

(005-111) ring upon her finger. Roger knew rings, they were his hobby, and this huge

(005-112) yellow solitaire in its new and brilliant setting at once awakened his

(005-113) dislike. It just fitted the life they were to lead! What life? As he

(005-114) listened to his daughter he kept wondering if she were so sure. Had she

(005-115) felt no uneasiness? She must have, he decided, for all her gay excitement.

(005-116) One Laura in that smiling face; another Laura deep inside, doubting and

(005-117) uncertain, reaching for her happiness, now elated, now dismayed,

(005-118) exclaiming, "Now at last I'm starting!" Oh, what an ignorant child she was.

(005-119) He wanted to cry out to her, "You'll _always_ be just starting! You'll

(005-120) never be sure, you'll never be happy, you'll always be just beginning to

(005-121) be! And the happier you are, the more you will feel it is only a start!...

(005-122) And then-"

(005-123) More and more his spirit withdrew from these two heedless children. Later

(005-124) on, when Deborah came, he barely noticed her meeting with Sloane. And

(005-125) through dinner, while they talked of plans for the [[marriage|wedding]], the trip

(005-126) abroad, still Roger took no part at all. He felt dull and heavy. Deborah

(005-127) too, he noticed, after her first efforts to be welcoming and friendly, had

(005-128) gradually grown silent. He saw her watching Laura with a mingled look of

(005-129) affection and of whimsical dismay. Soon after dinner she left them, and

(005-130) Roger smoked with the boy for a while and learned that he was twenty-nine.

(005-131) Both had grown uneasy and rather dull with each other. It was a relief when

(005-132) again Laura joined them, dressed to go out. She and her lover left the

(005-133) [[home|house]].

(005-134) Roger sat motionless for some time. His cigar grew cold unheeded. One of

(005-135) the sorrows of his life had been that his only son had died. Bruce had been

(005-136) almost like a son. But this young man of Laura's? No.

(005-137) Later he went for his evening walk. And as though drawn by invisible

(005-138) chains he strayed far down into the ghetto. Soon he was elbowing his way

(005-139) through a maze of uproarious tenement streets as one who had been there

(005-140) many times. But he noticed little around him. He went on, as he had always

(005-141) gone, seeing and hearing this seething life only as a background to his own

(005-142) adventure. He reached his destination. Pushing his way through a swarm of

(005-143) urchins playing in front of a pawnshop, he entered and was a long time

(005-144) inside, and when he came out again at last the whole expression of his face

(005-145) had undergone a striking change. As one who had found the solace he needed

(005-146) for the moment, his pace unconsciously quickened and he looked about him

(005-147) with brighter eyes.

(005-148) Around the corner from his [[family|home]], he went into a small jewelry shop, a

(005-149) remnant of the town of [[memory|the past]]. There were no customers in the place, and

(005-150) the old Galician jeweler sat at the back playing solitaire. At sight of

(005-151) Roger he arose; and presently in a small back room, beneath the glare of a

(005-152) powerful lamp, the two were studying the ring which Roger had found in the

(005-153) ghetto that night. It was plain, just a thin worn band of gold with an

(005-154) emerald by no means large; but the setting was old and curious, and

(005-155) personal, distinctive. Somebody over in Europe had worked on it long and

(005-156) lovingly. Now as the Galician gently rubbed and polished and turned the

(005-157) ring this way and that, the light revealed crude tiny figures, a man and a

(005-158) woman under a tree. And was that a vine or a serpent? They studied it long

(005-159) and absorbedly.

(005-160) At home, up in his bedroom, Roger opened a safe which stood in one corner,

(005-161) took out a large shallow tray and sat down with it by his lamp. A strange

(005-162) array of rings was there, small and delicate, huge, bizarre; great signet

(005-163) rings and poison rings, [[love-and-courtship|love]] tokens, charms and amulets, rings which had

(005-164) been worn by wives, by mistresses, by favorite slaves and by young girls in

(005-165) convents; rings with the Madonna and rings with many other saints graven

(005-166) on large heavy stones; rings French and Russian, Polish, [[italy|Italian]], Spanish,

(005-167) Syrian. Some were many centuries old. In nine shallow metal trays they

(005-168) filled the safe in Roger's room. Although its money value was small, the

(005-169) Gale collection was well known to a scattered public of connoisseurs, and

(005-170) Roger took pride in showing it. But what had always appealed to him most

(005-171) was the romance, the mystery, stored up in these old talismans that had

(005-172) lived so many ages, travelled through so many lands, decked so many

(005-173) fingers. Roger had found every one of them in the pawnshops of [[new-york-city|New York]].

(005-174) What new recruits to America had brought them here and pawned them? From

(005-175) what old cities had they come? What passions of love and jealousy, of

(005-176) hatred, [[religion|faith]], devotion were in this glittering array? Roger's own love

(005-177) affair had been deep, but quiet and even and happy. All the wild

(005-178) adventures, the might-have-beens in his sex life, were gathered in these

(005-179) dusky trays with their richly colored glints of light.

(005-180) Of his daughters, Laura had been the one most interested in his rings, and

(005-181) so he thought of Laura now as he placed in the tray the new ring he had

(005-182) bought, the one he would have liked for her. But a vague uneasiness filled

(005-183) his mind, for he knew she had the same craving as he for what gleamed out

(005-184) of these somber trays. The old Galician jeweler had long been quite a

(005-185) friend of hers, she had often dropped in at his shop to ask him curious

(005-186) questions about his women patrons. And it was just this side of him that

(005-187) Roger did not care for. So many of those women were from a dubious

(005-188) glittering world, and the old Galician took a weird vicarious joy in many

(005-189) of the gay careers into which he sent his beloved rings, his brooches,

(005-190) earrings, necklaces, his clasps and diamond garters. And Laura loved to

(005-191) make him talk.... Yes, she was her father's child, a part of himself. He,

(005-192) too, had had his yearnings, his burning curiosities, his youthful ventures

(005-193) into the town. "You will live on in our children's lives." With her

(005-194) inheritance what would she do? Would she stop halfway as he had done, or

(005-195) would she throw all caution aside and let the flames within her rise?

(005-196) He heard a step in the doorway, and Deborah stood there smiling.

(005-197) "A new one?" she inquired. He nodded, and she bent over the tray. "Poor

(005-198) father," Deborah murmured. "I saw you eyeing [[lauras-engagement|Laura's engagement]] ring at

(005-199) dinner to-night. It wasn't like this one, was it?" He scowled:

(005-200) "I don't like what I see ahead of her. Nor do you," he said. "Be honest."

(005-201) She looked at him perplexedly.

(005-202) "We can't stop it, can we? And even if we could," she said, "I'm not quite

(005-203) sure I'd want to. It's her love affair, not yours or mine--grown out of a

(005-204) life she made for herself--curious, eager, thrilled by it all--and in the

(005-205) center of her soul the deep glad growing certainty, 'I'm going to be a

(005-206) beautiful woman--I myself, I, Laura Gale!' Oh, you don't know--nor do I.

(005-207) And so she felt her way along--eagerly, hungrily, making mistakes--and you

(005-208) and I left her to do it alone. I'm afraid we both rather neglected her,

(005-209) dad," Deborah ended sadly. "And all we can do now, I think, is to give her

(005-210) the kind of wedding she wants."

(005-211) Roger started to speak but hesitated.

(005-212) "What is it?" she inquired.

(005-213) "Queer," he answered gruffly, "how a man can neglect his children--as I

(005-214) have done, as I do still--when the one thing he wants most in life is to

(005-215) see each one of 'em happy."
