---
description: "Roger soon grew accustomed to seeing young Sloane about the house. They"
id: ch06
label: "Chapter VI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(006-001) [[roger-gale|Roger]] soon grew accustomed to seeing young [[harold-sloane|Sloane]] about [[the-gale-home|the house]]. They

(006-002) could talk together more easily, and he began to call him Harold. Harold

(006-003) asked him with [[laura-sloane|Laura]] to lunch at the Ritz to meet the aunt from [[bridgeport|Bridgeport]],

(006-004) a lady excessively stout and profound. But that ended the formalities. It

(006-005) had all been so much easier than Roger had expected. So, in its calm sober

(006-006) fashion, the old [[home|house]] took into its life this new member, these new plans,

(006-007) and the old seemed stronger for the new--for Laura and [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]

(006-008) drew together closer than they had been in many years. But only because

(006-009) they felt themselves on the eve of a still deeper and more lasting

(006-010) separation, as the family of Roger Gale divided and went different ways. At

(006-011) times he noticed it sadly. Laura, who had scarcely ever been [[family|home]] for

(006-012) dinner, now spent many evenings here. She needed her home for her [[marriage|wedding]],

(006-013) he thought. Each daughter needed it now and then. But as the years wore

(006-014) slowly on, the seasons when they needed it grew steadily wider and wider

(006-015) apart....

(006-016) Early in May, when Roger came home from [[rogers-office|his office]] one night he found

(006-017) [[ediths-children|Edith's children]] in the house. From the hallway he could hear their gay

(006-018) excited voices, and going into the [[the-dining-room|dining room]] he found them at their

(006-019) supper. Deborah was with them, and at once her father noticed how much

(006-020) younger she appeared--as she always did with these [[childhood|children]] who all

(006-021) idolized her so. She rose and followed him into the hall, and her quiet

(006-022) voice had a note of compassion.

(006-023) "Edith's baby is coming," she said.

(006-024) "Good Lord. Is anything wrong?" he asked.

(006-025) "No, no, it's all right--"

(006-026) "But I thought the child wasn't due for three weeks."

(006-027) "I know, and poor Edith is fearfully worried. It has upset all her plans.

(006-028) I'd go up and see her if I were you. Your supper is ready; and if you like

(006-029) you can have it with the children."

(006-030) There followed a happy boisterous meal, with much expectant chatter about

(006-031) the long summer so soon to begin at [[new-hampshire-farm|the farm]] up in the mountains. [[george-sidney|George]],

(006-032) whose hair was down over his eyes, rumpled it back absorbedly as he told of

(006-033) a letter he had received from his friend [[dave-royce|Dave Royce]], Roger's farmer, with

(006-034) whom George corresponded. One of the cows was to have a calf, and George

(006-035) was anxious to get there in time.

(006-036) "I've never seen a real new calf, new absolutely," he explained. "And I

(006-037) [[poverty|want]] a look at this one the very minute that he's born. Gee, I [[dream|hope]] we can

(006-038) get there in time--"

(006-039) "Gee! So do I!" cried Bobby aged nine. And then Tad, the chubby

(006-040) three-year-old who had been intently watching his brothers, slowly took the

(006-041) spoon from his mouth and in his grave sweet baby voice said very softly,

(006-042) "Gee." At her end of the table, [[elizabeth-sidney|Elizabeth]], blonde and short and rather

(006-043) plump, frowned and colored slightly. For she was eleven and she knew there

(006-044) was something dark and shameful about the way calves appear in barns. And

(006-045) so, with a quick conscious cough, she sweetly interrupted:

(006-046) "Oh, Aunt Deborah! Won't you please tell us about--about--"

(006-047) "[[About]]--about," jeered the ironical George. "About what, you little ninny?"

(006-048) Poor Elizabeth blushed desperately. She was neither quick nor resourceful.

(006-049) "Now, George," said his aunt warningly.

(006-050) "Wasn't I talking?" the boy rejoined. "And didn't [[betsy|Betsy]] butt right

(006-051) in--without even a thing to butt in about? About--about," he jeered again.

(006-052) "About [[paris|Paris]]!" cried his sister, successful at last in her frantic search

(006-053) for a proper topic of conversation. "Aunt Deborah's trip to Paris!"

(006-054) "How many times has she told it already?" her brother replied with

(006-055) withering scorn. "And anyhow, I was talking of cows!"

(006-056) "Very well," said his aunt, "we'll talk about cows, some cows I saw on a

(006-057) lovely old farm in a little village over in [[france|France]]."

(006-058) "There!" cried his young sister. "Did she ever tell of _that_ part of her

(006-059) trip?" And she made a little face at her brother.

(006-060) "I don't care," he answered doggedly. "She has told about Paris lots of

(006-061) times--and that was what _you_ wanted. Yes, you did. You said, 'About

(006-062) Paris.' Didn't she, Bob?"

(006-063) "You bet she did," young Bob agreed.

(006-064) "Now, children, children, what does it matter?"

(006-065) "All right, go ahead with your barn in France," said George with patient

(006-066) tolerance. "Did they have any Holsteins?"

(006-067) Soon the questions were popping from every side, while little Tad beamed

(006-068) from one to the other. To Tad it was all so wonderful, to be having supper

(006-069) away from home, to be here, to go to bed upstairs, to take part perhaps in

(006-070) a pillow fight.... And glancing at the glowing face and the parted lips of

(006-071) his small grandson Roger felt a current of warm new life pour into his

(006-072) soul.

(006-073) Early in the evening he went up to Edith's apartment. He found his daughter

(006-074) in her room, looking flushed and very tense. He took her arm and they

(006-075) walked for a time. A trained nurse was soaping the windows. Roger asked the

(006-076) reason for this and was told that in case the baby did not come till

(006-077) morning the [[medicine|doctor]] wanted to pull up the shades in order to [[work-and-vocation|work]] by

(006-078) daylight. "And neighbors in [[new-york-city|New York]] are such cats! You've no idea!" said

(006-079) Edith. She looked out at the numberless windows crowding close about her

(006-080) home, and she fairly bristled with scorn. "Oh, how I loathe apartments!"

(006-081) "They seem to have come to stay, my dear. In a few years more New York will

(006-082) be a city without a house," he said. "Only a palace here and there." The

(006-083) thought flashed in his mind, "But I shall be gone."

(006-084) "Then we'll move out to the country!" she cried. Still walking the floor

(006-085) with her father, she talked of the perplexities which in her feverish state

(006-086) of mind had loomed suddenly enormous. She had planned everything so nicely

(006-087) for the baby to come the first of June, but now her plans were all upset.

(006-088) She did not want the children here, it would make too much confusion. They

(006-089) had much better go up to the mountains, even though George and Elizabeth

(006-090) lost their last few weeks at school. But who could she find to take them?

(006-091) [[bruce|Bruce]] was simply rushed to death with his new receivership. Laura was

(006-092) getting her trousseau. Deborah, said Edith, had time for nothing on earth

(006-093) but school.

(006-094) "Suppose I take them," Roger ventured. But she only smiled at this. "My

(006-095) dear," he urged, "your nurse will be with me, and when we arrive there's

(006-096) the farmer's wife." But Edith impatiently shook her head. Her warm bright

(006-097) eyes seemed to picture it all, hour by hour, day and night, her children

(006-098) there without her.

(006-099) "You poor dear," she told him, "you haven't the slightest idea what it

(006-100) means. The summer train is not on yet, and you have to change three times

(006-101) on the way--with all the children--luggage, too. And there are their naps,

(006-102) and all their meals. You don't arrive till late at night. No," she decided

(006-103) firmly, "Bruce will simply have to go." She drew a breath of discomfort.

(006-104) "You go and talk to him," she said.

(006-105) "I will, my dear." Roger looked at his daughter in deep concern. Awkwardly

(006-106) his heavy hand touched her small plump shoulder, and he felt the constant

(006-107) quivering there. "Now, now," he muttered, uneasily, "it's going to be all

(006-108) right, you know--" And at that she gave him a rapid glance out of those

(006-109) warm hunted eyes, as though to ask, "What do you know of this?" And Roger

(006-110) flinched and turned to the door.

(006-111) Bruce was working at his desk, with an old briar pipe in his teeth. He

(006-112) looked up with a quick nervous smile which showed his [[fear|dread]] of the coming

(006-113) ordeal, but his voice had a carefully casual tone.

(006-114) "Does she want me now?" he asked.

(006-115) "No," said Roger. And he told of her plan for the children. "I volunteered

(006-116) myself," he added, "but she wouldn't hear to it."

(006-117) "Oh, my God, man, you wouldn't do," said Bruce, in droll disparagement.

(006-118) "You with forty-nine bottles of pasteurized milk? Suppose you smashed one?

(006-119) Where'd you be? Moving our family isn't a job; it's a science, and I've got

(006-120) my degree." He rose and his face softened. "Poor girl, she mustn't worry

(006-121) like that. I'll run in and tell her I'll do it myself--just to get it off

(006-122) her mind."

(006-123) He went to his wife. And when he came back his dark features appeared a

(006-124) little more drawn.

(006-125) "Poor devil," thought Roger, "he's scared to death--just as I used to be

(006-126) myself."

(006-127) "Pretty tough on a woman, isn't it?" Bruce muttered, smiling constrainedly.

(006-128) "Did Baird say everything's going well?" Baird was Edith's [[doctor|physician]].

(006-129) "Yes. He was here this afternoon, and he said he'd be back this evening."

(006-130) Bruce stopped with a queer little scowl of suspense. "I told her I'd see to

(006-131) the trip with the kiddies, and it seemed to relieve her a lot." His eye

(006-132) went to a pile of documents that lay on the desk before him. "It'll play

(006-133) the very devil with business, taking three days off just now. But I guess I

(006-134) can manage it somehow--"

(006-135) A muscle began to twitch on his face. He re-lit his pipe with elaborate

(006-136) care and looked over at Roger confidingly:

(006-137) "Do you know what's the matter with kids these days? It's the twentieth

(006-138) century," he said. "It's a disease. It starts in their teeth. No modern

(006-139) girl can get married unless she has had her teeth straightened for years.

(006-140) Our dentist's bill, this year alone, was over eight hundred dollars. But

(006-141) that isn't all. It gets into their young intestines, God bless 'em, and

(006-142) makes you pasteurize all they eat. It gets into their nerves and tears 'em

(006-143) up, and your only chance to save 'em is school--not a common school but a

(006-144) 'simple' school, tuition four hundred dollars a year. And you hire a

(006-145) dancing teacher besides--I mean a rhythm teacher--and let 'em shake it out

(006-146) of their feet. And after that you buy 'em clothes--not fluffy clothes, but

(006-147) 'simple' clothes, the kind which always cost the most. And then you build a

(006-148) simple home, in a simple place like [[morristown|Morristown]]. The whole idea is

(006-149) simplicity. If you can't make enough to buy it, you're lost. If you can

(006-150) make enough, just barely enough, you get so excited you lose your head--and

(006-151) do what I did Monday."

(006-152) The two men smiled at each other. Roger was very fond of Bruce.

(006-153) "What did you do Monday?" he asked.

(006-154) "I bought that car I told you about."

(006-155) "Splendid! Best thing in the world for you! Tell me all about it!"

(006-156) And while Bruce rapidly grew engrossed in telling of the car's fine points,

(006-157) Roger pictured his son-in-law upon hot summer evenings (for Bruce spent his

(006-158) summers in town) forgetting his business for a time and speeding out into

(006-159) the country. Then he thought of Edith and the tyranny of her motherhood,

(006-160) always draining her husband's purse and keeping Edith so wrapt up in her

(006-161) children and their daily needs that she had lost all interest in anything

(006-162) outside her home. What was there wrong about it? He knew that Edith prided

(006-163) herself on being like her mother. But [[judith-gale|Judith]] had always found time for her

(006-164) friends. He himself had been more as Edith was now. How quickly after

(006-165) Judith died he had dropped all friends, all interests. "That's it," he

(006-166) ruefully told himself, "Edith takes after her father." And the same curious

(006-167) feeling which he had had with Laura, came back to him with her sister. This

(006-168) daughter, too, was a part of himself. His deep instinctive craving to keep

(006-169) to himself and his family was living on in Edith, was already dominating

(006-170) her home. What a queer mysterious business it was, this tie between a man

(006-171) and his child.

(006-172) He was thinking of this when Baird arrived. [[allan-baird|Allan Baird]] was not only the

(006-173) doctor who had brought Edith's children into the world, he was besides an

(006-174) intimate friend, he had been Bruce's room-mate at college. As he came

(006-175) strolling into the room with his easy greeting of "Well, folks--" his low

(006-176) gruff voice, his muscular frame, over six feet two, and the kindly calm

(006-177) assurance in his lean strong visage, gave to Bruce and Roger the feeling of

(006-178) safety they needed. For this kind of work was his life. He had specialized

(006-179) on [[womens-roles|women]], and after over fifteen years of toilsome uphill labor he had

(006-180) become at thirty-seven one of the big gynecologists. He was taking his

(006-181) success with the quiet relish of a man who had had to work for it hard. And

(006-182) yet he had not been spoiled by success. He worked even harder than

(006-183) before--so hard, in fact, that Deborah, with whom through Bruce and Edith

(006-184) he had long ago struck up an easy bantering friendship, had sturdily set

(006-185) herself the task of prying open his eyes a bit. She had taken him to her

(006-186) school at night and to queer little foreign cafés. And Baird, with a humor

(006-187) of his own, had retaliated by dragging her to the Astor Roof and to musical

(006-188) plays.

(006-189) "If my eyes are to be opened," he had doggedly declared, "I propose to have

(006-190) some diamonds in the scenery, and a little cheery ragtime, too. You've got

(006-191) a good heart, Deborah Gale, but your head is full of tenements."

(006-192) To-night to divert Bruce's thoughts from his wife, Baird started him

(006-193) talking of his work. In six weeks Bruce had crammed his mind with the

(006-194) details of skyscraper building, and his talk was bewildering now, bristling

(006-195) with technical terms, permeated through and through with the feeling of

(006-196) strain and fierce competition. As Roger listened he had again that sharp

(006-197) and oppressive sensation of a savage modern town unrelentingly pressing,

(006-198) pressing in. Restlessly he glanced at Baird who sat listening quietly. And

(006-199) Roger thought of the likeness between their two professions. For Bruce,

(006-200) too, was a surgeon. His patients were the husbands in their distracting

(006-201) offices. Baird's were the wives and mothers in their equally distracting

(006-202) homes. Which were more tense, the husbands or wives? And, good Lord, what

(006-203) was it all about, this feverish strain of getting and spending? What were

(006-204) they spending? Their very life's blood. And what were they getting?

(006-205) Happiness? What did most of them know of real happiness? How little they

(006-206) knew, how blind they were, and yet how they laughed and chattered along,

(006-207) how engrossed in their little games. What children, oh, what children!

(006-208) "And am I any better than the rest? Do I know what I'm after--what I'm

(006-209) about?"

(006-210) He left them soon, for he felt very tired. He went to his daughter to say

(006-211) good-night. And in her room the talk he had heard became to him suddenly

(006-212) remote, that restless world of small account. For in Edith, in the one

(006-213) brief hour since her father had seen her last, there had come a great

(006-214) transformation, into her face an eager light. She was slipping down into a

(006-215) weird small world which for a brief but fearful season was to be utterly

(006-216) her own, with agony and bloody sweat, and joy and a deep mystery. Clumsily

(006-217) he took her hand. It was moist and he felt it clutch his own. He heard her

(006-218) breathing rapidly.

(006-219) "Good-night," he said in a husky tone. "I'll be so glad, my dear, so

(006-220) glad."

(006-221) For answer she gave him a hurried smile, a glance from her bright restless

(006-222) eyes. Then he went heavily from the room.

(006-223) * * * * *

(006-224) At home he found Deborah sitting alone, with a pile of school papers in her

(006-225) lap. As he entered she slowly turned her head.

(006-226) "How is Edith?" she asked him. Roger told of his visit uptown, and spoke of

(006-227) Edith's anxiety over getting the children up to the farm.

(006-228) "I'll take them myself," said Deborah.

(006-229) "But how can you get away from school?"

(006-230) "Oh, I think I can manage it. We'll leave on Friday morning and I can be

(006-231) back by Sunday night. I'll [[love-and-courtship|love]] it," Deborah answered.

(006-232) "It'll be a great relief to her," said Roger, lighting a cigar. Deborah

(006-233) resumed her work, and there was silence for a time.

(006-234) "I let George sit up with me till an hour after his bedtime," she told her

(006-235) father presently. "We started talking about white rats--you see it's still

(006-236) white rats with George--and that started us wondering about God. George

(006-237) wonders if God really knows about rats. 'Has he ever stuck his face right

(006-238) down and had a good close look at one? Has God ever watched a rat stand up

(006-239) and brush his whiskers with both paws? Has he ever really laughed at rats?

(006-240) And that's another thing, Aunt Deborah--does God ever laugh at all? Does he

(006-241) know how to take a joke? If he don't, we might as well quit right now!'"

(006-242) Roger laughed with relish, and his daughter smiled at him:

(006-243) "Then the talk turned from rats and God to a big dam out in the Rockies.

(006-244) George has been reading about it, he's thinking of being an engineer. And

(006-245) there was so much he wanted to know that he was soon upon the verge of

(006-246) discovering my ignorance--when all of a sudden a dreamy look, oh, a very

(006-247) dreamy look, came into his eyes--and he asked me this." And over her bright

(006-248) expressive face came a scowl of boyish intensity: "Suppose I _was_ an

(006-249) engineer--and I was working on a dam, or may be a bridge, in the Rockies.

(006-250) And say it was pretty far down south--say around the Grand Canyon. I should

(006-251) think they'd need a dam down there, or anyhow a bridge,' said George. And

(006-252) he eyed me in a cautious way which said as plain as the nose on your face,

(006-253) 'Good Lord, she's only a woman, and she won't understand.' But I showed him

(006-254) I was serious, and he asked me huskily, 'Suppose it was winter, Aunt

(006-255) Deborah, and the Giants were in Texas. Do you think I could get a few days

(006-256) off?' And then before he could tell me the Giants were a baseball nine, I

(006-257) said I was sure he could manage it. You should have seen his face light up.

(006-258) And he added very fervently, 'Gee, it must be wonderful to be an engineer

(006-259) out there!'"

(006-260) Roger chuckled delightedly and Deborah went on with her work. "How good she

(006-261) is with young uns," he thought. "What a knack she has of drawing 'em out.

(006-262) What a pity she hasn't some of her own."

(006-263) He slept until late the next morning, and awoke to find Deborah by his bed.

(006-264) "It's another boy," she told him. Roger sat up excitedly. "Bruce has just

(006-265) telephoned the news. The children and I have breakfasted, and they're going

(006-266) out with their nurse. Suppose you and I go up and see Bruce and settle this

(006-267) trip to the mountains."

(006-268) About an hour later, arriving at Edith's apartment, they found Bruce

(006-269) downstairs with Allan Baird who was just taking his departure. Bruce's dark

(006-270) eyes shone with relief, but his hand was hot and nervous. Allan, on the

(006-271) contrary, held out to Edith's father a hand as steady and relaxed as was

(006-272) the bantering tone of his voice.

(006-273) "Bruce," he said, "has for once in his life decided to do something

(006-274) sensible. He's going to drop his wretched job and take a week off with his

(006-275) children."

(006-276) "And worry every minute he's gone," Deborah retorted, "and come back and

(006-277) work day and night to catch up. But he isn't going to do it. I've decided

(006-278) to take the children myself."

(006-279) "You have?" cried Bruce delightedly.

(006-280) "You'll do no such thing," said Allan, indignant.

(006-281) "Oh, you go to thunder," Bruce put in. "Haven't you any delicacy? Can't you

(006-282) see this is no business of yours?"

(006-283) "It isn't, eh," Allan sternly rejoined. And of Deborah he demanded, "Didn't

(006-284) you say you'd go with me to 'Pinafore' this Saturday night?"

(006-285) "Ah," sneered Bruce. "So that's your game. And for one little night of your

(006-286) pleasure you'd do me out of a week of my life!"

(006-287) "Like that," said Baird, with a snap of his fingers.

(006-288) "I'm going, though," said Deborah.

(006-289) "Quite right, little woman," Bruce admonished her earnestly. "Don't let him

(006-290) rob you of your happiness."

(006-291) "Come here," growled Baird to Deborah. She followed him into the living

(006-292) room, and Roger went upstairs with Bruce.

(006-293) "If he ever hopes to marry that girl," said Bruce, with an anxious backward

(006-294) glance, "he's got to learn to treat her with a little consideration."

(006-295) "Quit your quarreling," Roger said. "What's a week in the mountains to you?

(006-296) Hasn't your wife just risked her life?"

(006-297) "Sure she has," said Bruce feelingly. "And I propose to stick by her, too."

(006-298) "Can I see her?"

(006-299) "No, you can't--another of Baird's fool notions."

(006-300) "Then where's the baby?"

(006-301) "Right in here."

(006-302) Silently in front of the cradle Bruce and Roger stood looking down with the

(006-303) content which comes to men on such occasions when there is no woman by

(006-304) their side expecting them to say things.

(006-305) "I made it a rule in my family," Roger spoke up presently, "to have my

(006-306) first look at each child alone."

(006-307) "Same here," said Bruce. And they continued their silent communion. A few

(006-308) moments later, as they were leaving, Deborah came into the room and went

(006-309) softly to the cradle. Downstairs they found that Allan had gone, and when

(006-310) Deborah rejoined them she said she was going to stick to her plan. It was

(006-311) soon arranged that she and the youngsters should start on their journey the

(006-312) following day.

(006-313) Back at home she threw herself into the packing and was busy till late that

(006-314) night. At daybreak she was up again, for they were to make an early start.

(006-315) Bruce came with his new automobile, the children were all bundled in,

(006-316) together with Deborah and their nurse, and a half hour later at the train

(006-317) Bruce and Roger left them--Deborah flushed and happy, surrounded by

(006-318) luggage, wraps, small boys, an ice box, toys and picture books. The small

(006-319) red hat upon her head had already been jerked in a scrimmage, far down over

(006-320) one of her ears.

(006-321) "Don't worry about us, Bruce," she said. "We're going to have the time of

(006-322) our lives!" Bruce fairly beamed his gratitude.

(006-323) "If she don't marry," he declared, as he watched the train move slowly out,

(006-324) "there'll be a great mother wasted."
