---
description: "In the weeks which followed, Roger found the peace of his home so"
id: ch07
label: "Chapter VII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(007-001) In the weeks which followed, [[roger-gale|Roger]] found the peace of his [[family|home]] so

(007-002) interrupted and disturbed by [[marriage|wedding]] preparations that often retreating

(007-003) into his den he earnestly told himself he was through, that a man with

(007-004) three grown daughters was a fool to show any sympathy with the utter folly

(007-005) of their lives. Yield an inch and they took a mile! It began one night when

(007-006) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] said,

(007-007) "Now, dearie, I think you had better make up your mind to give [[laura-sloane|Laura]] just

(007-008) the kind of wedding she likes."

(007-009) And Roger weakly agreed to this, but as time wore on he discovered that the

(007-010) kind of wedding Laura liked was a thing that made his blood run cold. There

(007-011) seemed to be no end whatever to [[youth|the young]] bride's blithe demands. The

(007-012) trousseau part of it he didn't mind. To the gowns and hats and gloves and

(007-013) shoes and trunks and jaunty travelling bags which came pouring into the

(007-014) [[home|house]], he made no objection. All that, he considered, was fair play. But

(007-015) what got on Roger's nerves was this frantic fuss and change! The faded hall

(007-016) carpet had to come up, his favorite lounge was whisked away, the piano was

(007-017) re-tuned while he was trying to take a nap, rugs were beaten, crates and

(007-018) barrels filled the halls, and one whole bedroom stripped and bare was

(007-019) transformed into a shop where the wedding presents were displayed. In the

(007-020) shuffle his box of cigars disappeared. In short, there was the devil to

(007-021) pay!

(007-022) And Deborah, was as bad as the bride. At times it appeared to Roger as

(007-023) though her fingers fairly itched to jab and tug at his poor old house,

(007-024) which wore an air of mute reproach. She revealed a part of her nature that

(007-025) he viewed with dark amazement. Every hour she could spare from school, she

(007-026) was changing something or other at home--with an eager glitter in her eyes.

(007-027) Doing it all for Laura, she said. Fiddlesticks and rubbish! She did it

(007-028) because she liked it!

(007-029) In gloomy wrath one afternoon he went up to see [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and quiet down. She

(007-030) was well on the way to recovery, but instead of receiving solace here he

(007-031) only found fresh troubles. For sitting up in her old-fashioned bed, with an

(007-032) old-fashioned cap of lace upon her shapely little head, Edith made her

(007-033) father feel she had washed her hands of the whole affair.

(007-034) "I'm sorry," she said in an injured tone, "that Laura doesn't care enough

(007-035) about her oldest sister to put off the wedding two or three weeks so I

(007-036) could be there. It seems rather undignified, I think, for a girl to hurry

(007-037) her wedding so. I should have loved to make it the dear simple kind of

(007-038) wedding which mother would have wanted. But so long as she doesn't care for

(007-039) that--and in fact has only found ten minutes--once--to run in and see the

(007-040) baby--"

(007-041) In dismay her father found himself defending the very daughter of whom he

(007-042) had come to complain. It was not such a short engagement, he said, he had

(007-043) learned they had been engaged some time before they told him.

(007-044) "Do you approve of that?" she rejoined. "When I was engaged, I made [[bruce|Bruce]]

(007-045) go to you before I even let him--" here Edith broke off primly. "Of course

(007-046) that was some time ago. An engagement, Laura tells me, is 'a mere

(007-047) experiment' nowadays. They 'experiment' till they feel quite sure--then

(007-048) notify their parents and get married in a week."

(007-049) "She is rushing it, I admit," Roger soothingly replied. "But she has her

(007-050) mind set on [[paris|Paris]] in June."

(007-051) "Paris in June," said Edith, "sums up in three words Laura's whole

(007-052) conception of marriage. You really ought to talk to her, father. It's your

(007-053) duty, it seems to me."

(007-054) "What do you mean?"

(007-055) "I'd rather not tell you." Edith's glance went sternly to the cradle by her

(007-056) bed. "Laura pities me," she said, "for having had five [[childhood|children]]."

(007-057) "Oh, now, my dear girl!"

(007-058) "She does, though--she said as much. When she dropped in the other day and

(007-059) I tried to be sympathetic and give her a little sound advice, she said I

(007-060) had had the wedding I liked and the kind of married life I liked, and she

(007-061) was going to have hers. And she made it quite plain that her kind is to

(007-062) include no children. It's to be simply an effort to find by 'experiment'

(007-063) whether or not she loves Hal [[harold-sloane|Sloane]]. If she doesn't--" Edith gave a slight

(007-064) but emphatic wave of dismissal.

(007-065) "Do you mean to say Laura told you that?" her father asked with an angry

(007-066) frown.

(007-067) "I mean she made me feel it--as plainly as I'm telling it! What I can't

(007-068) understand," his daughter went on, "is Deborah's attitude in the affair."

(007-069) "What's the matter with Deborah?" inquired Roger dismally.

(007-070) "Oh, nothing's the matter with Deborah. She's quite self-sufficient. She at

(007-071) least can play with modern ideas and keep her head while she's doing it.

(007-072) But when poor Laura--a mere child with the mind of a chicken--catches

(007-073) vaguely at such ideas, applies them to her own little self and risks her

(007-074) whole future happiness, it seems to me perfectly criminal for Deborah not

(007-075) to interfere! Not even a word of warning!"

(007-076) "Deborah believes," said her father, "in everyone's leading his own life."

(007-077) "That's rot," was Edith's curt reply. "Do I lead my own life? Does Bruce?

(007-078) Do you?"

(007-079) "No," growled Roger feelingly.

(007-080) "Do my children?" Edith demanded. "I know Deborah would like them to.

(007-081) That's her latest and most modern fad, to run a school where every child

(007-082) shall sit with a rat in its lap or a goat, and do just what he

(007-083) pleases--follow his natural bent, she says. I [[dream|hope]] she won't come up to the

(007-084) mountains and practice on my children. I should hate to break with

(007-085) Deborah," Edith ended thoughtfully.

(007-086) Roger rose and walked the room. The comforting idea entered his mind that

(007-087) when the wedding was over he would take out his collection of rings and

(007-088) carefully polish every one. But even this hope did not stay with him long.

(007-089) "With Laura at home," he heard Edith continue, "you at least had a daughter

(007-090) to run your house. If Deborah tries to move you out--"

(007-091) "She won't!" cried Roger in alarm.

(007-092) "If she does," persisted Edith, "or if she begins any talk of the kind--you

(007-093) come to me and _I'll_ talk to her!"

(007-094) Her father walked in silence, his head down, frowning at the floor.

(007-095) "It seems funny," Edith continued, "that [[womens-roles|women]] like me who give children

(007-096) their lives, and men like Bruce who are building [[new-york-city|New York]]--actually doing

(007-097) it all the time--have so little to say in these modern ideas. I suppose

(007-098) it's because we're a little too real."

(007-099) "To come back to the wedding," Roger suggested.

(007-100) "To come back to the wedding, father dear," his daughter said

(007-101) compassionately. "I'm afraid it's going to be a 'mere form' which will make

(007-102) you rather wretched. When you get so you can't endure it, come in and see

(007-103) me and the baby."

(007-104) As he started for home, her words of warning recurred to his mind. Yes,

(007-105) here was the thing that disturbed him most, the ghost lurking under all

(007-106) this confusion, the part which had to do with himself. It was bad enough to

(007-107) know that his daughter, his own flesh and blood, was about to settle her

(007-108) fate at one throw. But to be moved out of his house bag and baggage! Roger

(007-109) strode wrathfully up the street.

(007-110) "It's your duty to talk to her," Edith had said. And he meditated darkly on

(007-111) this: "Maybe I will and maybe I won't. I know my duties without being told.

(007-112) How does Edith know what her mother liked? We had our own likings, her

(007-113) mother and I, and our own ideas, long after she was tucked into bed. And

(007-114) yet she's always harping on 'what mother would have wanted.' What I should

(007-115) like to know--right now--is what [[judith-gale|Judith]] would [[poverty|want]] if she were here!"

(007-116) With a pang of utter loneliness amid these vexing problems, Roger felt it

(007-117) crowding in, this city of his children's lives. As he strode on down

(007-118) Broadway, an old hag selling papers thrust one in his face and he caught a

(007-119) glimpse of a headline. Some bigwig woman re-divorced. How about Laura's

(007-120) "experiment"? A mob of street urchins nearly upset him. How about Deborah?

(007-121) How about children? How about [[education|schools]], education, the country? How about

(007-122) God? Was anyone thinking? Had anyone time? What a racket it made,

(007-123) slam-banging along. The taxis and motor trucks thundered and brayed, dark

(007-124) masses of people swept endlessly by, as though their very souls depended on

(007-125) their dinners or their jobs, their movies, roaring farces, thrills, their

(007-126) harum scarum dances, clothes. A plump little fool of a woman, her skirt so

(007-127) tight she could barely walk, tripped by on high-heeled slippers. That was

(007-128) it, he told himself, the whole city was high-heeled! No solid footing

(007-129) anywhere! And, good Lord, how they chattered!

(007-130) He turned into a less noisy street. What would Judith want if she were

(007-131) here? It became disturbingly clear to him that she would undoubtedly wish

(007-132) him to have a talk with Laura now, find out if she'd really made up her

(007-133) mind not to have any children, and if so to tell her plainly that she was

(007-134) not only going against her God but risking her own happiness. For though

(007-135) Judith had been liberal about any number of smaller things, she had been

(007-136) decidedly clear on this. Yes, he must talk to Laura.

(007-137) "And she'll tell me," he reflected, "that Edith put me up to it!"

(007-138) If only his oldest daughter would leave the other girls alone! Here she was

(007-139) planning a row with Deborah over whether poor young [[george-sidney|George]] should be

(007-140) allowed to play with rats! It was all so silly!... Yes, his three children

(007-141) were drifting apart, each one of them going her separate way. And he rather

(007-142) took comfort in the thought, for at least it would stop their wrangling.

(007-143) But again he pulled himself up with a jerk. No, certainly Judith would not

(007-144) have liked this. If she'd ever stood for anything, it was for keeping the

(007-145) family together. It had been the heart and center of their last talks

(007-146) before she died.

(007-147) His face relaxed as he walked on, but in his eyes was a deeper pain. If

(007-148) only Judith could be here. Before he reached home he had made up his mind

(007-149) to talk with Laura that very night. He drew out his latchkey, opened his

(007-150) door, shut it firmly and strode into his house. In the hall they were

(007-151) putting down the new carpet. Cautiously picking his way upstairs, he

(007-152) inquired for Laura and was told she was dressing for dinner. He knocked at

(007-153) her door.

(007-154) "Yes?" came her voice.

(007-155) "It's I," he said, "your father."

(007-156) "Oh, hello, dad," came the answer gaily, in that high sweet voice of hers.

(007-157) "I'm frightfully rushed. It's a dinner dance to-night for the bridesmaids

(007-158) and the ushers." Roger felt a glow of relief. "Come in a moment, won't

(007-159) you?"

(007-160) What a resplendent young creature she was, seated at her dresser. Behind

(007-161) her the maid with needle and thread was swiftly mending a little tear in

(007-162) the fluffy blue tulle she was wearing. The shaded light just over her head

(007-163) brought a shimmer of red in her sleek brown hair. What lips she had, what a

(007-164) bosom. She drew a deep breath and smiled at him.

(007-165) "What are you doing to-morrow night?" her father asked her.

(007-166) "Oh, dad, my [[love-and-courtship|love]], we have every evening filled and crammed right up to the

(007-167) wedding," she replied. "No--the last evening I'll be here. Hal's giving his

(007-168) ushers a dinner that night."

(007-169) "Good. I want to talk to you, my dear." He felt his voice solemn, a great

(007-170) mistake. He saw the quick glance from her luminous eyes.

(007-171) "All right, father--whenever you like."

(007-172) Much embarrassed Roger left the room.

(007-173) The few days which remained were a crowding confusion of dressmakers, gowns

(007-174) and chattering friends and gifts arriving at all hours. As a part of his

(007-175) resolve to do what he could for his daughter, Roger stayed home from his

(007-176) office that week. But all he could do was to unpack boxes, take out

(007-177) presents and keep the cards, and say, "Yes, my dear, it's very nice. Where

(007-178) shall I put this one?" As the array of presents grew, from time to time

(007-179) unconsciously he glanced at the engagement ring upon Laura's finger. And

(007-180) all the presents seemed like that. They would suit her apartment

(007-181) beautifully. He'd be glad when they were out of [[the-gale-home|the house]].

(007-182) The only gift that appealed to his fancy was a brooch, neither rich nor

(007-183) new, a genuine bit of old jewelry. But rather to his annoyance he learned

(007-184) that it had been sent to Laura by the old Galician Jew in the shop around

(007-185) the corner. It recalled to his mind the curious friendship which had

(007-186) existed for so long between the old man and his daughter. And as she turned

(007-187) the brooch to the light Roger thought he saw in her eyes anticipations

(007-188) which made him uneasy. Yes, she was a child of his. "June in Paris--"

(007-189) other Junes--"experiments"--no children. Again he felt he must have that

(007-190) talk. But, good Lord, how he dreaded it.

(007-191) The house was almost ready now, dismantled and made new and strange. It was

(007-192) the night before the wedding. Laura was taking her supper in bed. What was

(007-193) he going to say to her? He ate his dinner silently. At last he rose with

(007-194) grim resolution.

(007-195) "I think I'll go up and see her," he said. Deborah quickly glanced at him.

(007-196) "What for?" she asked.

(007-197) "Oh, I just want to talk to her--"

(007-198) "Don't stay long," she admonished him. "I've a masseuse coming at nine

(007-199) o'clock to get the child in condition to rest. Her nerves are rather tense,

(007-200) you know."

(007-201) "How about mine?" he said to himself as he started upstairs. "Never mind,

(007-202) I've got to tackle it."

(007-203) Laura saw what he meant to say the moment that he entered the room, and the

(007-204) tightening of her features made it all the harder for Roger to think

(007-205) clearly, to remember the grave, kind, fatherly things which he had intended

(007-206) to tell her.

(007-207) "I don't want to talk of the wedding, child, but of what's coming after

(007-208) that--between you and this man--all your life." He stopped short, with his

(007-209) heart in his mouth, for although he did not look at her he had a quick

(007-210) sensation as though he had struck her in the face.

(007-211) "Isn't this rather late to speak about that? Just now? When I'm nervous

(007-212) enough as it is?"

(007-213) "I know, I know." He spoke hurriedly, humbly. "I should have talked to you

(007-214) long ago, I should have known you better, child. I've been slack and

(007-215) selfish. But it's better late than never."

(007-216) "But you needn't!" the girl exclaimed. "You needn't tell me anything! I

(007-217) know more than you think--I know enough!" Roger looked at her, then at the

(007-218) wall. She went on in a voice rather breathless: "I know what I'm

(007-219) doing--exactly--just what I'm getting into. It's not as it was when you

(007-220) were young--it's different--we talk of these things. Harold and I have

(007-221) talked it all out." In the brief and dangerous pause which followed Roger

(007-222) kept looking at the wall.

(007-223) "Have you talked--about having children?"

(007-224) "Yes," came the answer sharply, and then he felt the hot clutch of her

(007-225) hand. "Hadn't you better go now, dad?" He hesitated.

(007-226) "No," he said. His voice was low. "Do you mean to have children, Laura?"

(007-227) "I don't know."

(007-228) "I think you do know. Do you mean to have children?" Her big black eyes,

(007-229) dilating, were fixed defiantly on his own.

(007-230) "Well then, no, I don't!" she replied. He made a desperate effort to think

(007-231) what he could say to her. Good God, how he was bungling! Where were all his

(007-232) arguments?

(007-233) "How about your religion?" he blurted out.

(007-234) "I haven't any--which makes me do that--I've a right to be happy!"

(007-235) "You haven't!" His voice had suddenly changed. In accent and in quality it

(007-236) was like a voice from the heart of [[new-england|New England]] where he had been born and

(007-237) bred. "I mean you won't be happy--not unless you have a child! It's what

(007-238) you need--it'll fill your life! It'll settle you--deepen you--tone you

(007-239) down!"

(007-240) "Suppose I don't want to be toned down!" The girl was almost hysterical.

(007-241) "I'm no Puritan--I want to live! I tell you we are different now! We're not

(007-242) all like Edith--and we're not like our mothers! We want to live! And we

(007-243) have a right to! Why don't you go? Can't you see I'm nearly crazy? It's my

(007-244) last night, my very last! I don't want to talk to you--I don't even know

(007-245) what I'm saying! And you come and try to frighten me!" Her voice caught

(007-246) and broke into sobs. "You know nothing about me! You never did! Leave me

(007-247) alone, can't you--leave me alone!"

(007-248) "Father?" He heard Deborah's voice, abrupt and stern, outside the door.

(007-249) "I'm sorry," he said hoarsely. He went in blind fashion out of the room and

(007-250) down to his study. He lit a cigar and smoked wretchedly there. When

(007-251) presently Deborah appeared he saw that her face was set and hard; but as

(007-252) she caught the baffled look, the angry tortured light in his eyes, her own

(007-253) expression softened.

(007-254) "Poor father," she said, in a pitying way. "If Edith had only let you

(007-255) alone."

(007-256) "I certainly didn't do much good."

(007-257) "Of course you didn't--you did harm--oh, so much more harm than you know."

(007-258) Into the quiet voice of his daughter crept a note of keen regret. "I wanted

(007-259) to make her last days in this house a time she could look back on, so that

(007-260) she'd want to come home for help if ever she's in trouble. She has so

(007-261) little--don't you see?--of what a woman needs these days. She has grown up

(007-262) so badly. Oh, if you'd only let her alone. It was such a bad, bad time to

(007-263) choose." She went to her father and kissed him. "Well, it's over now," she

(007-264) said, "and we'll make the best we can of it. I'll tell her you're sorry and

(007-265) quiet her down. And to-morrow we'll try to forget it has happened."

(007-266) * * * * *

(007-267) For Roger the morrow went by in a whirl. The wedding, a large [[the-church|church]]

(007-268) affair, was to take place at twelve o'clock. He arose early, put on his

(007-269) Prince Albert, went down and ate his breakfast alone. The waitress was

(007-270) flustered, the coffee was burnt. He finished and anxiously wandered about.

(007-271) The [[servants|maids]] were bustling in and out, with Deborah giving orders pellmell.

(007-272) The caterers came trooping in. The bridesmaids were arriving and hurrying

(007-273) up to Roger's room. That place was soon a chaos of voices, giggles, peals

(007-274) of laughter. Laura's trunks were brought downstairs, and Roger tagged them

(007-275) for the ship, one for the cabin and three for the hold, and saw them into

(007-276) the wagon. Then he strode distractedly everywhere, till at last he was

(007-277) hustled by Deborah into a taxi waiting outside.

(007-278) "It's all going so smoothly," Deborah said, and a faint sardonic glimmer

(007-279) came into her father's hunted eyes. Deborah was funny!

(007-280) Soon he found himself in the [[religion|church]]. He heard whispers, eager voices, heard

(007-281) one usher say to another, "God, what a terrible head I've got!" And Roger

(007-282) glared at him for that. Plainly these youngsters, all mere boys, had been

(007-283) up with the groom a good part of the night.... But here was Laura, pale and

(007-284) tense. She smiled at him and squeezed his hand. There was silence, then the

(007-285) organ, and now he was taking her up the aisle. Strange faces stared. His

(007-286) jaw set hard. At last they reached the altar. An usher quickly touched his

(007-287) arm and he stepped back where he belonged. He listened but understood

(007-288) nothing. Just words, words and motions.

(007-289) "If any man can show just cause why they may not be lawfully joined

(007-290) together, let him now speak or else hereafter forever hold his peace."

(007-291) "No," thought Roger, "I won't speak."

(007-292) Just then he caught sight of Deborah's face, and at the look in her steady

(007-293) gray eyes all at once he could feel the hot tears in his own.

(007-294) At the wedding breakfast he was gay to a boisterous degree. He talked to

(007-295) strange women and brought them food, took punch with men he had never laid

(007-296) eyes on, went off on a feverish hunt for cigars, came back distractedly,

(007-297) joked with young girls and even started some of them dancing. The whole

(007-298) affair was over in no time. The bride and the groom came rushing

(007-299) downstairs; and as they escaped from the shower of rice, Roger ran after

(007-300) them down the steps. He gripped Sloane's hand.

(007-301) "Remember, boy, it's her whole life!" entreated Roger hoarsely.

(007-302) "Yes, sir! I'll look out! No fear!"

(007-303) "Good-bye, daddy!"

(007-304) "God bless you, dear!"

(007-305) They were speeding away. And with the best man, who looked weary and spent,

(007-306) Roger went slowly back up the steps. It was an effort now to talk. Thank

(007-307) Heaven these people soon were gone. Last of all went the ponderous aunt of

(007-308) the groom. How the taxi groaned as he helped her inside and started her off

(007-309) to [[bridgeport|Bridgeport]]. Back in his study he found his cigars and smoked one

(007-310) dismally with Bruce. Bruce was a decent sort of chap. He knew when to be

(007-311) silent.

(007-312) "Well," he spoke finally, rising, "I guess I'll have to get back to the

(007-313) office." He smiled a little and put his hand on Roger's weary shoulder.

(007-314) "We're glad it's over--eh?" he asked.

(007-315) "Bruce," said Roger heavily, "you've got a girl of your own growing up.

(007-316) Don't let her grow to feel you're old. Live on with her. She'll need you."

(007-317) His massive blunt face darkened. "The world's so damnably new," he

(007-318) muttered, "so choked up with fool ideas." Bruce still smiled

(007-319) affectionately.

(007-320) "Go up and see Edith," he said, "and forget 'em. She never lets one into

(007-321) the flat. She said you were to be sure to come and tell her about the

(007-322) wedding."

(007-323) "All right, I'll go," said Roger. He hunted about for his hat and coat.

(007-324) What a devilish mess they had made of the house. A half hour later he was

(007-325) with Edith; but there, despite his efforts to answer all her questions, he

(007-326) grew heavier and heavier, till at last he barely spoke. He sat watching

(007-327) Edith's baby.

(007-328) "Did you talk to Laura?" he heard her ask.

(007-329) "Yes," he replied. "It did no good." He knew that Edith was waiting for

(007-330) more, but he kept doggedly silent.

(007-331) "Well, dear," she said presently, "at least you did what you could for

(007-332) her."

(007-333) "I've never done what I could," he rejoined. "Not with any one of you." He

(007-334) glanced at her with a twinge of pain. "I don't know as it would have helped

(007-335) much if I had. This town is running away with itself. I want a rest now,

(007-336) Edith, I want things quiet for a while." He felt her anxious, pitying look.

(007-337) "Where's Deborah?" she asked him. "Gone back to school already?"

(007-338) "I don't know where she is," he replied. And then he rose forlornly. "I

(007-339) guess I'll be going back home," he said.

(007-340) On his way, as his thoughts slowly cleared, the old uneasiness rose in his

(007-341) mind. Would Deborah want to keep the house? Suppose she suggested moving to

(007-342) some titty-tatty little flat. No, he would not stand in her way. But, Lord,

(007-343) what an end to make of his life.

(007-344) His home was almost dark inside, but he noticed rather to his surprise that

(007-345) the rooms had already been put in order. He sank down on the living room

(007-346) sofa and lay motionless for a while. How tired he was. From time to time he

(007-347) drearily sighed. Yes, Deborah would find him old and life here dull and

(007-348) lonely. Where was she to-night, he wondered. Couldn't she quit her zoo

(007-349) school for one single afternoon? At last, when the room had grown pitch

(007-350) dark, he heard the maid lighting the gas in the hall. Roger loudly cleared

(007-351) his throat, and at the sound the startled girl ejaculated, "Oh, my Gawd!"

(007-352) "It's I," said Roger sternly. "Did Miss Deborah say when she'd be back?"

(007-353) "She didn't go out, sir. She's up in her room."

(007-354) Roger went up and found her there. All afternoon with both the maids she

(007-355) had been setting the house to rights, and now she ached in every limb. She

(007-356) was lying on her bed, and she looked as though she had been crying.

(007-357) "Where have you been?" she inquired.

(007-358) "At Edith's," her father answered. She reached up and took his hand, and

(007-359) held it slowly tighter.

(007-360) "You aren't going to find it too lonely here, with Laura gone?" she asked

(007-361) him. And the wistfulness in her deep sweet voice made something thrill in

(007-362) Roger.

(007-363) "Why should I?" he retorted. Deborah gave a queer little laugh.

(007-364) "Oh, I'm just silly, that's all," she said. "I've been having a fit of

(007-365) blues. I've been feeling so old this afternoon--a regular old woman. I

(007-366) wanted you, dearie, and I was afraid that you--" she broke off.

(007-367) "Look here," said Roger sharply. "Do you really want to keep this house?"

(007-368) "Keep this house? Why, father!"

(007-369) "You think you can stand it here alone, just the two of us?" he demanded.

(007-370) "I can," cried Deborah happily. Her father walked to the window. There as

(007-371) he looked blindly out, his eyes were assaulted by the lights of all those

(007-372) titty-tatty flats. And a look of vicious triumph appeared for a moment on

(007-373) his face.

(007-374) "Very well," he said quietly, turning back. "Then we're both suited." He

(007-375) went to the door. "I'll go and wash up for supper," he said.
