---
description: "It was a relief to him to find how smoothly he and Deborah dropped back"
id: ch08
label: "Chapter VIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(008-001) It was a relief to him to find how smoothly he and [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] dropped back

(008-002) into their old relations. It was good to get [[family|home]] those evenings; for in

(008-003) this new stage of its existence, with its family of two, [[the-gale-home|the house]] appeared

(008-004) to have filled itself with a deep reposeful feeling. [[laura-sloane|Laura]] had gone out of

(008-005) its life. He glanced into her room one night, and it looked like a guest

(008-006) room now. The sight of it brought him a [[regret|pang of regret]]. But the big ship

(008-007) which was bearing her swiftly away to "[[paris|Paris]] in June" seemed bearing off

(008-008) [[roger-gale|Roger]]'s uneasiness too. He could smile at his former fears, for Laura was

(008-009) safely married and wildly in [[love-and-courtship|love]] with her husband. Time, he thought, would

(008-010) take care of the rest. Occasionally he missed her here--her voice,

(008-011) high-pitched but musical, chatting and laughing at the 'phone, her bustle

(008-012) of dressing to go out, glimpses of her extravagances, of her smart suits

(008-013) and evening gowns, of all the joyous color and dash that she had given to

(008-014) his home. But these regrets soon died away. The old [[home|house]] shed them easily,

(008-015) as though glad to enter this long rest.

(008-016) For the story of his family, from Roger's point of view at least, was a

(008-017) long uneven narrative, with prolonged periods of peace and again with

(008-018) events piling one on the other. And now there came one of those peaceful

(008-019) times, and Roger liked the quiet. The old routine was re-established--his

(008-020) dinner, his paper, his cigar and then his book for the evening, some good

(008-021) old-fashioned novel or some pleasant book of travel which he and [[judith-gale|Judith]] had

(008-022) read aloud when they were planning out their lives. They had meant to go

(008-023) [[europe|abroad]] so often when the [[childhood|children]] had grown up. And he liked to read about

(008-024) it still. Life was so quiet over the sea, things were so old and mellow

(008-025) there. He resumed, too, his horseback rides, and on the way home he would

(008-026) stop in for a visit with [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and her baby. The wee boy grew funnier every

(008-027) day, with his sudden kicks and sneezes, his waving fists and mighty yawns.

(008-028) And Roger felt drawn to his daughter here, for in these grateful seasons of

(008-029) rest that followed the birth of each of her children, Edith loved to lie

(008-030) very still and make new plans for her small brood.

(008-031) Only once she spoke of Laura, and then it was to suggest to him that he

(008-032) gather together all the bills his daughter had doubtless left behind.

(008-033) "If you don't settle them," Edith said, "they'll go to her husband. And you

(008-034) wouldn't like that, would you?"

(008-035) Roger said he would see to it, and one evening after dinner he started in

(008-036) on Laura's bills. It was rather an appalling time. He looked into his bank

(008-037) account and found that Laura's [[marriage|wedding]] would take about all his surplus.

(008-038) But this did not dismay him much, for money matters never did. It simply

(008-039) meant more [[work-and-vocation|work]] in [[rogers-office|the office]].

(008-040) The next day he rose early and was in his office by nine o'clock. He had

(008-041) not been so prompt in months, and many of his employees came in late that

(008-042) morning. But nobody seemed very much perturbed, for Roger was an easy

(008-043) employer. Still, he sternly told himself, he had been letting things get

(008-044) altogether too slack. He had been neglecting his business again. The work

(008-045) had become so cut and dried, there was nothing creative left to do. It had

(008-046) not been so in years gone by. Those years had fairly bristled with ideas

(008-047) and hopes and schemes. But even those old memories were no longer here to

(008-048) hearten him. They had all been swept away when [[bruce|Bruce]] had made him move out

(008-049) of his office in a dark creaky edifice down close under Brooklyn Bridge,

(008-050) and come up to this new building, this steel-ribbed caravansary for all

(008-051) kinds of business ventures, this place of varnished woodwork, floods of

(008-052) daylight, concrete floors, this building fireproof throughout. That

(008-053) expressed it exactly, Roger thought. Nothing could take fire here, not even

(008-054) a man's [[dream|imagination]], even though he did not feel old. Now and then in the

(008-055) elevator, as some youngster with eager eyes pushed nervously against him,

(008-056) Roger would frown and wonder, "What are you so excited about?"

(008-057) But again the business was running down, and this time he must jerk it back

(008-058) before it got beyond him. He set himself doggedly to the task, calling in

(008-059) his assistants one by one, going through the work in those outer rooms,

(008-060) where at tables long rows of busy young girls, with colored pencils,

(008-061) scissors and paste, were demolishing enormous piles of newspapers and

(008-062) magazines. And vaguely, little by little, he came to a realization of how

(008-063) while he had slumbered the life of the country had swept on. For as he

(008-064) studied the lists and the letters of his patrons, Roger felt confusedly

(008-065) that a new [[america|America]] was here.

(008-066) Clippings, clippings, clippings. [[business|Business]] men and business firms, gigantic

(008-067) corporations, kept sending here for clippings, news of themselves or their

(008-068) rivals, keeping keen watch on each other's affairs for signs of strength or

(008-069) weakness. How savage was the fight these days. Here was news of mines and

(008-070) mills and factories all over the land, clippings sent each morning by

(008-071) special messengers [[downtown-new-york|downtown]] to reach the brokers' offices before the market

(008-072) opened. One broker wrote, "Please quote your terms for the following. From

(008-073) nine to two o'clock each day our messenger will call at your office every

(008-074) hour for clippings giving information of the companies named below."

(008-075) The long list appended carried Roger's fancy out all over the continent.

(008-076) And then came this injunction: "Remember that our messenger must leave your

(008-077) office every hour. In information of this kind every minute counts."

(008-078) Clippings, clippings, clippings. As Roger turned over his morning mail, in

(008-079) spite of himself he grew absorbed. What a change in the world of

(008-080) literature. What a host of names of scribblers, not authors but just

(008-081) writers, not only men but [[womens-roles|women]] too, novelists and dramatists, poets and

(008-082) muckrakers all jumbled in together, each one of them straining for a place.

(008-083) And the actors and the actresses, the musicians and the lecturers, each

(008-084) with his press agent and avid for publicity, "fame!" And here were society

(008-085) women, from [[new-york-city|New York]] and other cities, all eager for press notices of

(008-086) social affairs they had given or managed, charity work they had conducted,

(008-087) suffrage speeches they had made. Half the women in the land were fairly

(008-088) talking their heads off, it seemed. Some had been on his lists for years.

(008-089) They married and wanted to hear what was said in the papers about their

(008-090) weddings, they quarreled and got divorces and still sent here for

(008-091) clippings, they died and still their relatives wrote in for [[judith-gales-funeral|the funeral]]

(008-092) notices. And even death was commercialized. A maker of monuments wanted

(008-093) news "of all people of large means, dead or dangerously ill, in the State

(008-094) of Pennsylvania." Here were demands from charity bodies, hospitals and

(008-095) colleges, from clergymen with an anxious eye on the Monday morning papers.

(008-096) And here was an anarchist millionaire! And here was an insane asylum

(008-097) wanting to see itself in print!

(008-098) With a grim smile on his heavy visage, Roger stared out of his window.

(008-099) Slowly the smile faded, a wistful look came on his face.

(008-100) "Who'll take my business when I'm gone?"

(008-101) If his small son had only lived, with what new zest and vigor it might have

(008-102) been made to grow and expand. If only his son had been here by his side....
