---
description: "DEBORAH needed rest, he thought, for the bright attractive face of his"
id: ch09
label: "Chapter IX: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(009-001) DEBORAH needed rest, he thought, for the bright attractive face of his

(009-002) daughter was looking rather pale of late, and the birthmark on her forehead

(009-003) showed a faint thin line of red. One night at dinner, watching her, he

(009-004) wondered what was on her mind. She had come in late, and though several

(009-005) times she had made an effort to keep up the conversation, her cheeks were

(009-006) almost colorless and more than once in her deepset eyes came a flash of

(009-007) pain that startled him.

(009-008) "Look here. What's the matter with you?" he asked. [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] looked up

(009-009) quickly.

(009-010) "I'd rather not talk about it, dad--"

(009-011) "Very well," he answered. And with a slight hesitation, "But I think I know

(009-012) the trouble," he said. "And perhaps some other time--when you do feel like

(009-013) talking--" He stopped, for on her wide sensitive lips he saw a twitch of

(009-014) amusement.

(009-015) "What do you think is the trouble?" she asked. And [[roger-gale|Roger]] looked at her

(009-016) squarely.

(009-017) "[[loneliness|Loneliness]]," he answered.

(009-018) "Why?" she asked him.

(009-019) "Well, there's [[edith-sidney|Edith]]'s baby--and [[laura-sloane|Laura]] getting married--"

(009-020) "I see--and so I'm lonely for a [[deborahs-family-of-her-own|family of my own]]. But you're forgetting my

(009-021) school," she said.

(009-022) "Yes, yes, I know," he retorted. "But that's not at all the same.

(009-023) Interesting [[work-and-vocation|work]], no doubt, but--well, it isn't personal."

(009-024) "Oh, isn't it?" she answered, and she drew a quivering breath. Rising from

(009-025) the table she went into the living room, and there a few moments later he

(009-026) found her walking up and down. "I think I will tell you now," she said.

(009-027) "I'm afraid of being alone to-night, of keeping this matter to myself." He

(009-028) looked at her apprehensively.

(009-029) "Very well, my dear," he said.

(009-030) "This is the trouble," she began. "Down in my school we've a family of

(009-031) about three thousand [[childhood|children]]. A few I get to know so well I try to follow

(009-032) them when they leave. And one of these, an [[italy|Italian]] boy--his name is [[joe-italian|Joe]]

(009-033) Bolini--was one of the best I ever had, and one of the most appealing. But

(009-034) Joe took to drinking and got in with a gang of boys who blackmailed small

(009-035) shopkeepers. He used to come to me at times in occasional moods of

(009-036) repentance. He was a splendid physical type and he'd been a leader in our

(009-037) athletics, so I took him back into [[deborahs-school|the school]] to manage our teams in

(009-038) basket-ball. He left the gang and stopped drinking, and we had long talks

(009-039) together about his great ambition. He wanted to enter the Fire Department

(009-040) as soon as he was twenty-one. And I promised to use my influence." She

(009-041) stopped, still frowning slightly.

(009-042) "What happened?" Roger asked her.

(009-043) "His girl took up with another man, and Joe has hot Italian blood. He got

(009-044) drunk one night and--shot them both." There was another silence. "I did

(009-045) what I could," she said harshly, "but he had a bad record behind him, and

(009-046) [[youth|the young]] assistant district attorney had his own record to think of, too.

(009-047) So Joe got a death sentence. We appealed the case but it did no good. He

(009-048) was sent up the river and is in the death [[home|house]] now--and he sent for me to

(009-049) come to-day. His letter hinted he was scared, he wrote that his priest was

(009-050) no good to him. So I went up this afternoon. Joe goes to the chair

(009-051) to-morrow at six."

(009-052) Deborah went to the sofa and sat down inertly. Roger remained motionless,

(009-053) and a dull chill crept over him.

(009-054) "So you see my work is personal," he heard her mutter presently. All at

(009-055) once she seemed so far away, such a stranger to him in this life of hers.

(009-056) "By [[george-sidney|George]], it's horrible!" he said. "I'm sorry you went to see the boy!"

(009-057) "I'm glad," was his daughter's quick retort. "I've been getting much too

(009-058) sure of myself--of my school, I mean, and what it can do. I needed this to

(009-059) bring me back to the kind of world we live in!"

(009-060) "What do you mean?" he roughly asked.

(009-061) "I mean there are [[education|schools]] and prisons! And gallows and electric chairs! And

(009-062) I'm for schools! They've tried their jails and gallows for whole black

(009-063) hideous centuries! What good have they done? If they'd given Joe back to

(009-064) the school and me, I'd have had him a fireman in a year! I know, because I

(009-065) studied him hard! He'd have _grown_ fighting fires, he would have _saved_

(009-066) lives!"

(009-067) Again she stopped, with a catch of her breath. In suspense he watched her

(009-068) angry struggle to regain control of herself. She sat bolt upright, rigid;

(009-069) her birthmark showed a fiery red. In a few moments he saw her relax.

(009-070) "But of course," she added wearily, "it's much more complex than that. A

(009-071) school is nothing nowadays--just by itself alone, I mean--it's only a part

(009-072) of a city's life--which for most tenement children is either very dull and

(009-073) hard, or cheap and false and overexciting. And behind all that lie the

(009-074) reasons for that. And there are so many reasons." She stared straight past

(009-075) her father as though at something far away. Then she seemed to recall

(009-076) herself: "But I'm talking too much of my family."

(009-077) Roger carefully lit a cigar:

(009-078) "I don't think you are, my dear. I'd like to hear more about it." She

(009-079) smiled:

(009-080) "To keep my mind off Joe, you mean."

(009-081) "And mine, too," he answered.

(009-082) They had a long talk that evening about her [[dream|hope]] of making her school what

(009-083) Roger visaged confusedly as a kind of mammoth [[family|home]], the center of a

(009-084) neighborhood, of one prodigious family. At times when the clock on the

(009-085) mantle struck the hour loud and clear, there would fall a sudden silence,

(009-086) as both thought of what was to happen at dawn. But quickly Roger would

(009-087) question again and Deborah would talk steadily on. It was after midnight

(009-088) when she stopped.

(009-089) "You've been good to me to-night, dearie," she said. "Let's go to bed now,

(009-090) shall we?"

(009-091) "Very well," he answered. He looked at his daughter anxiously. She no

(009-092) longer seemed to him mature. He could feel what heavy discouragements, what

(009-093) problems she was facing in the dark mysterious tenement world which she had

(009-094) chosen to make her own. And compared to these she seemed a mere girl, a

(009-095) child groping its way, just making a start. And so he added wistfully, "I

(009-096) wish I could be of more help to you." She looked up at him for a moment.

(009-097) "Do you know why you are such a help?" she said. "It's because you have

(009-098) never grown old--because you've never allowed yourself to grow absolutely

(009-099) certain about anything in life." A smile half sad and half perplexed came

(009-100) on her father's heavy face.

(009-101) "You consider that a strong point?" he asked.

(009-102) "I do," she replied, "compared to being a bundle of creeds and prejudices."

(009-103) "Oh, I've got prejudices enough."

(009-104) "Yes," she said. "And so have I. But we're not even sure of _them_, these

(009-105) days."

(009-106) "The world has a habit of crowding in," her father muttered vaguely.

(009-107) * * * * *

(009-108) Roger did not sleep that night. He could not keep his thoughts away from

(009-109) what was going to happen at dawn. Yes, [[new-york-city|the city]] was crowding in upon this

(009-110) quiet house of his. Dimly he could recollect, in the genial years of long

(009-111) ago, just glancing casually now and then at some small and unobtrusive

(009-112) notice in his evening paper: "Execution at Sing Sing." It had been so

(009-113) remote to him. But here it was smashing into his house, through the life

(009-114) his own daughter was leading day and night among the poor! Each time he

(009-115) thought of that lad in a cell, again a chill crept over him! But savagely

(009-116) he shook it off, and by a strong effort of his will he turned his thoughts

(009-117) to the things she had told him about her school. Yes, in her main idea she

(009-118) was right. He had no use for wild reforms, but here was something solid, a

(009-119) good education for every child. More than once, while she had talked,

(009-120) something very deep in Roger had leaped up in swift response.

(009-121) For Deborah, too, was a part of himself. He, too, had had his feeling for

(009-122) humanity in the large. For years he had run a boys' club at a little

(009-123) mission school in which his wife had been interested, and on Christmas Eve

(009-124) he had formed the habit of gathering up a dozen small urchins right off the

(009-125) street and taking them 'round and fitting them out with good warm winter

(009-126) clothing, after which he had gone home to help [[judith-gale|Judith]] trim the Christmas

(009-127) tree and fill their children's stockings. And later, when she had gone to

(009-128) bed, invariably he had taken "The Christmas Carol" from its shelf and had

(009-129) settled down with a glow of almost luxurious brotherhood. There was

(009-130) sentiment in Roger Gale, and as he read of "Tiny Tim" his deepset eyes

(009-131) would glisten with tears.

(009-132) And now here was Deborah fulfilling a part of him in herself. "You will

(009-133) live on in our children's lives." But this was going much too far! She was

(009-134) letting herself be swallowed up completely by this work of hers! It was all

(009-135) very well for [[memory|the past]] ten years, but she was getting on in age! High time

(009-136) to marry and settle down!

(009-137) Again angrily he shook off the thought of that boy Joe alone in a cell,

(009-138) eyes fixed in animal terror upon the steel door which would open so soon.

(009-139) The day was slowly breaking. It was the early part of June. How fresh and

(009-140) lovely it must be up there in the big mountains with Edith's happy little

(009-141) lads. Here it was raw and garish, weird. Some sparrows began quarreling

(009-142) just outside his window. Roger rose and walked the room. Restlessly he went

(009-143) into the hall. The old house appeared so strange in this light--as though

(009-144) stripped bare--there was something gone. Softly he came to Deborah's door.

(009-145) It was open wide, for the night had been warm, and she lay awake upon her

(009-146) bed with her gaze fixed on the ceiling. She turned her head and saw him

(009-147) there. He came in and sat down by her window. For a long time neither made

(009-148) a sound. Then the great clock on the distant tower, which had been silent

(009-149) through the night, resumed its deep and measured boom. It struck six times.

(009-150) There was silence again. More and more taut grew his muscles, and suddenly

(009-151) it felt to him as though Deborah's fierce agony were pounding into his very

(009-152) soul. The slow, slow minutes throbbed away. At last he rose and left her.

(009-153) There was a cold sweat on his brow.

(009-154) "I'll go down and make her some coffee," he thought.

(009-155) Down in the kitchen it was a relief to bang about hunting for the utensils.

(009-156) On picnics up in [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]] his coffee had been famous. He made some now

(009-157) and boiled some eggs, and they breakfasted in Deborah's room. She seemed

(009-158) almost herself again. Later, while he was dressing, he saw her in the

(009-159) doorway. She was looking at her father with bright and grateful,

(009-160) affectionate eyes.

(009-161) "Will you come to school with me to-day? I'd like you to see it," Deborah

(009-162) said.

(009-163) "Very well," he answered gruffly.
