---
description: "Out of the subway they emerged into a noisy tenement street. Roger had"
id: ch10
label: "Chapter X: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(010-001) Out of the subway they emerged into a noisy tenement street. [[roger-gale|Roger]] had

(010-002) known such streets as this, but only in the night-time, as picturesque and

(010-003) adventurous ways in an underground world he had explored in search of

(010-004) strange old glittering rings. It was different now. Gone were the Rembrandt

(010-005) shadows, the leaping flare of torches, the dark surging masses of weird

(010-006) uncouth humanity. Here in garish daylight were poverty and ugliness, here

(010-007) were heaps of refuse and heavy smells and clamor. It disgusted and repelled

(010-008) him, and he was tempted to turn back. But glancing at [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] by his side

(010-009) he thought of the night she had been through. No, he decided, he would go

(010-010) on and see what she was up to here.

(010-011) They turned into a narrower street between tall dirty tenements, and in a

(010-012) twinkling all was changed. For the street, as far as he could see, was gay

(010-013) with flaunting colors, torrents of bobbing hats and ribbons, frocks and

(010-014) blouses, shirts and breeches, vivid reds and yellows and blues. It was

(010-015) deafening with joyous cries, a shrill incessant chatter, chatter, piercing

(010-016) yells and shrieks of laughter. Children, swarms of [[childhood|children]], children of

(010-017) all sizes passed him, clean and dirty, smiling, scowling, hurrying,

(010-018) running, pummeling, grabbing, whirling each other 'round and 'round--till

(010-019) the very air seemed quivering with wild spirits and new life!

(010-020) He heard Deborah laughing. Five hilarious small boys had hold of her hands

(010-021) and were marching in triumph waving their caps. "Heigh there--heigh there!

(010-022) Heigh--heigh--heigh!"

(010-023) The school was close in front of them. An enormous building of brick and

(010-024) tile wedged into a disordered mass of tenements, shops and factories, it

(010-025) had been built around a court shut out from the street by a high steel

(010-026) fence. They squeezed into the gateway, through which a shouting punching

(010-027) mob of urchins were now pushing in; and soon from a balcony above Roger

(010-028) looked down into the court, where out of a wild chaos order was appearing.

(010-029) Boys to the right and girls to the left were forming in long sinuous lines,

(010-030) and three thousand faces were turned toward the building. In front appeared

(010-031) the Stars and Stripes. Then suddenly he heard a crash from underneath the

(010-032) balcony, and looking down he saw a band made up of some thirty or forty

(010-033) boys. Their leader, a dark [[italy|Italian]] lad, made a flourish, a pass with his

(010-034) baton, and the band broke into a blaring storm, an uproarious, booming

(010-035) march. The mob below fell into step, and line after line in single file the

(010-036) children marched into their school.

(010-037) "Look up! Look all around you!" He heard Deborah's eager voice in his ear.

(010-038) And as he looked up from the court below he gave a low cry of amazement. In

(010-039) hundreds of windows all around, of sweatshops, tenements, factories, on

(010-040) tier upon tier of fire escapes and even upon the roofs above, silent

(010-041) watchers had appeared. For this one moment in the day the whole congested

(010-042) neighborhood had stopped its feverish [[work-and-vocation|labor]] and become an amphitheater with

(010-043) all eyes upon [[deborahs-school|the school]]. And the thought flashed into Roger's mind:

(010-044) "Deborah's big family!"

(010-045) He had a strange confusing time. In her office, in a daze, he sat and heard

(010-046) his daughter with her two assistant principals, her clerk and her

(010-047) stenographer, plunge into the routine work of the day. What kind of school

(010-048) teacher was this? She seemed more like the manager of some buzzing factory.

(010-049) Messages kept coming constantly from [[social-class|class]]-rooms, children came for

(010-050) punishment, and on each small human problem she was passing judgment

(010-051) quickly. Meanwhile a score of mothers, most of them Italians with colored

(010-052) shawls upon their heads, had straggled in and taken seats, and one by one

(010-053) they came to her desk. For these [[womens-roles|women]] who had been children in peasant

(010-054) huts in Italy now had children of their own in the great city of [[new-york-city|New York]],

(010-055) and they found it very baffling. How to keep them in at night? How to make

(010-056) them go to the priest? How to feed and clothe them? How to live in these

(010-057) tenement homes, in this wild din and chaos? They wanted help and they

(010-058) wanted advice. Deborah spoke in Italian, but turning to her father she

(010-059) would translate from time to time.

(010-060) A tired scowling woman said, "My boy won't obey me. His father is dead.

(010-061) When I slap him he only jumps away. I lock him in and he steals the key, he

(010-062) keeps it in his pocket. He steals the money that I earn. He says I'm from

(010-063) the country." And a flabby anxious woman said, "My girl runs out to dance

(010-064) halls. Sometimes she comes back at two in the morning. She is fifteen and

(010-065) she ought to get married. But what can I do? A nice steady man who never

(010-066) dances comes sometimes to see her--but she makes faces and calls him a

(010-067) fatty, she dances before him and pushes him out and slams the door. What

(010-068) can I do?"

(010-069) "Please come and see our janitor and make him fix our kitchen sink!" an

(010-070) angry little woman cried. "When I try to wash the dishes the water spouts

(010-071) all over me!" And then a plump rosy mother said in a soft coaxing voice, "I

(010-072) have eight little children, all nice and clean. When you tell them to do

(010-073) anything they always do it quickly. They smile at you, they are like

(010-074) saints. So could the kind beautiful teacher fix it up with a newspaper to

(010-075) send them to the country--this summer when it is so hot? The newspaper

(010-076) could send a man and he could take our pictures."

(010-077) "Most of us girls used to be in this school," said a bright looking Jewess

(010-078) of eighteen. "And you taught us how we should live nice. But how can we

(010-079) live nice when our shop is so rotten? Our boss is trying to kiss the

(010-080) girls, he is trying to hug them on the stairs. And what he pays us is a

(010-081) joke, and we must work till nine o'clock. So will you help us, teacher, and

(010-082) give us a room for our meetings here? We [[poverty|want]] to have a [[marriage|union]]."

(010-083) A truant officer brought in two ragged, frightened little chaps. Found on

(010-084) the street during school hours, they had to give an account of themselves.

(010-085) Sullenly one of them gave an address far up in the Bronx, ten miles away.

(010-086) They had not been [[family|home]] for a week, he said. Was he lying? What was to be

(010-087) done? Somewhere in the city their homes must be discovered. And the talk of

(010-088) the truant officer made Roger feel ramifications here which wound out

(010-089) through the police and the [[law|courts]] to reformatories, distant cells. He

(010-090) thought of that electric chair, and suddenly he felt oppressed by the heavy

(010-091) complexity of it all.

(010-092) And this was part and parcel of his daughter's daily work in school! Still

(010-093) dazed, disturbed but curious, he sat and watched and listened, while the

(010-094) bewildering demands of Deborah's big family kept crowding in upon her. He

(010-095) went to a few of the class-rooms and found that reading and writing,

(010-096) arithmetic and spelling were being taught in ways which he had never

(010-097) dreamed of. He found a kindergarten class, a carpenter shop and a printing

(010-098) shop, a sewing class and a cooking class in a large model kitchen. He

(010-099) watched the nurse in her [[the-hospital|hospital]] room, he went into the dental clinic

(010-100) where a squad of fifty urchins were having their teeth examined, and out

(010-101) upon a small side roof he found a score of small invalids in steamer

(010-102) chairs, all fast asleep. It was a strange astounding school! He heard

(010-103) Deborah speak of a mothers' club and a neighborhood association; and he

(010-104) learned of other ventures here, the school [[medicine|doctor]], the nurse and the

(010-105) visitor endlessly making experiments, delving into the neighborhood for

(010-106) ways to meet its problems. And by the way Deborah talked to them he felt

(010-107) she had gone before, that years ago by day and night she had been over the

(010-108) ground alone. And she'd done all this while she lived in his [[home|house]]!

(010-109) Scattered memories out of [[memory|the past]], mere fragments she had told him, here

(010-110) flashed back into his mind: humorous little incidents of daily battles she

(010-111) had waged in rotten old tenement buildings with rags and filth and garbage,

(010-112) with vermin, darkness and disease. Mingled with these had been accounts of

(010-113) dances, weddings and christenings and of curious funeral rites. And

(010-114) struggling with such dim memories of Deborah in her twenties, called forth

(010-115) in his mind by the picture of the woman of thirty here, Roger grew still

(010-116) more confused. What was to be the end of it? She was still but a pioneer in

(010-117) a jungle, endlessly groping and trying new things.

(010-118) "How many children are there in the public [[education|schools]]?" he asked.

(010-119) "[[About]] eight hundred thousand," Deborah said.

(010-120) "Good Lord!" he groaned, and he felt within him a glow of indignation rise

(010-121) against these immigrant women for breeding so inconsiderately. With the mad

(010-122) city growing so fast, and the people of [[tenement-district|the tenements]] breeding, breeding,

(010-123) breeding, and packing the schools to bursting, what could any teacher be

(010-124) but a mere cog in a machine, ponderous, impersonal, blind, grinding out

(010-125) future New Yorkers?

(010-126) He reached home limp and battered from the storm of new impressions coming

(010-127) on top of his sleepless night. He had thought of a school as a simple

(010-128) place, filled with little children, mischievous at times perhaps and some

(010-129) with dirty faces, but still with minds and spirits clean, unsoiled as yet

(010-130) by contact with the grim spirit of the town. He had thought of childhood as

(010-131) something intimate and pure, inside his home, his family. Instead of that,

(010-132) in Deborah's school he had been disturbed and thrilled by the presence all

(010-133) around him of something wild, barbaric, dark, compounded of the city

(010-134) streets, of surging crowds, of rushing feet, of turmoil, filth, disease and

(010-135) death, of poverty and vice and crime. But Roger could still hear that band.

(010-136) And behind its blaring crash and din he had felt the vital throbbing of a

(010-137) tremendous joyousness, of gaiety, fresh hopes and [[dream|dreams]], of leaping young

(010-138) emotions like deep buried bubbling springs bursting up resistlessly to

(010-139) renew the fevered life of the town! Deborah's big family! Everybody's

(010-140) children!

(010-141) "You will live on in our children's lives." The vision hidden in those

(010-142) words now opened wide before his eyes.
