---
description: "She told him the next morning her night school closed for the summer that"
id: ch11
label: "Chapter XI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(011-001) She told him the next morning her night school closed for the summer that

(011-002) week.

(011-003) "I think I should like to see it," her father said determinedly. She gave

(011-004) him an affectionate smile:

(011-005) "Oh, dearie. Haven't you had enough?"

(011-006) "I guess I can stand it if you can," was his gruff rejoinder, "though if I

(011-007) ran a school like yours I think by night I'd have schooled enough. Do most

(011-008) principals run night [[education|schools]] too?"

(011-009) "A good many of them do."

(011-010) "Isn't it taxing your strength?" he asked.

(011-011) "Don't you have to tax your strength," his daughter replied good humoredly,

(011-012) "to really accomplish anything? Don't you have to risk yourself in order to

(011-013) really live these days? Suppose you come down to-morrow night. We won't go

(011-014) to [[deborahs-school|the school]], for I doubt if the clubs and classes would interest you very

(011-015) much. I'll take you through the neighborhood."

(011-016) * * * * *

(011-017) They went down the following evening. The night was warm and humid, and

(011-018) through the narrow tenement streets there poured a teeming mass of life.

(011-019) People by the thousands passed, bareheaded, men in shirt sleeves, their

(011-020) faces glistening with sweat. Animal odors filled the air. The torches on

(011-021) the pushcarts threw flaring lights and shadows, the peddlers shouted

(011-022) hoarsely, the tradesmen in the booths and stalls joined in with cries,

(011-023) shrill peals of mirth. The mass swept onward, talking, talking, and its

(011-024) voice was a guttural roar. Small boys and girls with piercing yells kept

(011-025) darting under elbows, old [[womens-roles|women]] dozed on doorsteps, babies screamed on

(011-026) every side. Mothers leaned out of windows, and by their faces you could see

(011-027) that they were screaming angrily for [[childhood|children]] to come up to bed. But you

(011-028) could not hear their cries. Here around a hurdy gurdy gravely danced some

(011-029) little girls. A tense young Jew, dark faced and thin, was shouting from a

(011-030) wagon that all men and women must be free and own the factories and mills.

(011-031) A mob of small boys, clustered 'round a "camp fire" they had made on the

(011-032) street, were leaping wildly through the flames. It was a mammoth cauldron

(011-033) here, seething, bubbling over with a million foreign lives. [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s big

(011-034) family.

(011-035) She turned into a doorway, went down a long dark passage and came into a

(011-036) court-yard enclosed by greasy tenement walls that reared to a spot of dark

(011-037) blue sky where a few quiet stars were twinkling down. With a feeling of

(011-038) repugnance [[roger-gale|Roger]] followed his daughter into a tall rear building and up a

(011-039) rickety flight of stairs. On the fourth landing she knocked at a door, and

(011-040) presently it was opened by a stout young Irish woman with flushed haggard

(011-041) features and disheveled hair.

(011-042) "Oh. Good evening, [[mrs-berry|Mrs. Berry]]."

(011-043) "Good evening. Come in," was the curt reply. They entered a small stifling

(011-044) room where were a stove, two kitchen chairs and three frowzled beds in

(011-045) corners. On one of the beds lay a baby asleep, on another two small

(011-046) restless boys sat up and watched the visitors. A sick man lay upon the

(011-047) third. And a cripple boy, a boarder here, stood on his crutches watching

(011-048) them. Roger was struck at once by his face. Over the broad cheek bones the

(011-049) sallow skin was tightly drawn, but there was a determined set to the jaws

(011-050) that matched the boy's shrewd grayish eyes, and his face lit up in a

(011-051) wonderful smile.

(011-052) "Hello, Miss Deborah," he said. His voice had a cheery quality.

(011-053) "Hello, [[johnny-geer|Johnny]]. How are you?"

(011-054) "Fine, thank you."

(011-055) "That's good. I've brought my father with me."

(011-056) "Howdado, sir, glad to meet you."

(011-057) "It's some time since you've been to see me, John," Deborah continued.

(011-058) "I know it is," he answered. And then with a quick jerk of his head, "He's

(011-059) been pretty bad," he said. Roger looked at the man on the bed. With his

(011-060) thin waxen features drawn, the man was gasping for each breath.

(011-061) "What's the matter?" Roger whispered.

(011-062) "Lungs," said [[youth|the young]] woman harshly. "You needn't bother to speak so low.

(011-063) He can't hear you anyhow. He's [[death|dying]]. He's been dying weeks."

(011-064) "Why didn't you let me know of this?" Deborah asked gently.

(011-065) "Because I knew what you'd [[poverty|want]] to do--take him off to a [[the-hospital|hospital]]! And I

(011-066) ain't going to have it! I promised him he could die at [[family|home]]!"

(011-067) "I'm sorry," Deborah answered. There was a moment's silence, and the baby

(011-068) whimpered in its sleep. One child had gone to his father's bed and was

(011-069) frowning at his agony as though it were a tiresome sight.

(011-070) "Are any of them coughing?" Deborah inquired.

(011-071) "No," said the woman sharply.

(011-072) "Yes, they are, two of 'em," John cheerfully corrected her.

(011-073) "You shut up!" she said to him, and she turned back to Deborah. "It's my

(011-074) home, I guess, and my family, too. So what do you think that _you_ can do?"

(011-075) Deborah looked at her steadily.

(011-076) "Yes, it's your family," she agreed. "And it's none of my business, I

(011-077) know--except that John is one of my boys--and if things are to go on like

(011-078) this I can't let him board here any more. If he had let me know before I'd

(011-079) have taken him from you sooner. You'll miss the four dollars a week he

(011-080) pays."

(011-081) The woman swallowed fiercely. The flush on her face had deepened. She

(011-082) scowled to keep back the tears.

(011-083) "We can all die for all I care! I've about got to the end of my rope!"

(011-084) "I see you have." Deborah's voice was low. "You've made a hard plucky

(011-085) fight, Mrs. Berry. Are there any empty rooms left in this building?"

(011-086) "Yes, two upstairs. What do you want to know for?"

(011-087) "I'm going to rent them for you. I'll arrange it to-night with the janitor,

(011-088) on condition that you promise to move your children to-morrow upstairs and

(011-089) keep them there until this is over. Will you?"

(011-090) "Yes."

(011-091) "That's sensible. And I'll have one of the visiting nurses here within an

(011-092) hour."

(011-093) "Thanks."

(011-094) "And later on we'll have a talk."

(011-095) "All right--"

(011-096) "Good-night, Mrs. Berry."

(011-097) "Good-night, Miss Gale, I'm much obliged.... Say, wait a minute! Will you?"

(011-098) The wife had followed them out on the landing and she was clutching

(011-099) Deborah's arm. "Why can't the nurse give him something," she whispered, "to

(011-100) put him to sleep for good and all? It ain't right to let a man suffer like

(011-101) that! I can't stand it! I'm--I'm--" she broke off with a sob. Deborah put

(011-102) one arm around her and held her steadily for a moment.

(011-103) "The nurse will see that he sleeps," she said. "Now, John," she added,

(011-104) presently, when the woman had gone into the room, "I want you to get your

(011-105) things together. I'll have the janitor move them upstairs. You sleep there

(011-106) to-night, and to-morrow morning come to see me at the school."

(011-107) "All right, Miss Deborah, much obliged. I'll be all right. Good-night,

(011-108) sir--"

(011-109) "Good-night, my boy," said Roger, and suddenly he cleared his throat. He

(011-110) followed his daughter down the stairs. A few minutes she talked with the

(011-111) janitor, then joined her father in the court.

(011-112) "I'm sorry I took you up there," she said. "I didn't know the man was

(011-113) sick."

(011-114) "Who are they?" he asked.

(011-115) "Poor people," she said. And Roger flinched.

(011-116) "Who is this boy?"

(011-117) "A neighbor of theirs. His mother, who was a widow, died about two years

(011-118) ago. He was left alone and scared to death lest he should be 'put away' in

(011-119) some big institution. He got Mrs. Berry to take him in, and to earn his

(011-120) board he began selling papers instead of coming to our school. So our

(011-121) school visitor looked him up. Since then I have been paying his board from

(011-122) a fund I have from friends uptown, and so he has finished his schooling.

(011-123) He's to graduate next week. He means to be a stenographer."

(011-124) "How old is he?"

(011-125) "Seventeen," she replied.

(011-126) "How was he crippled? Born that way?"

(011-127) "No. When he was a baby his mother dropped him one Saturday night when she

(011-128) was drunk. He has never been able to sit down. He can lie down or he can

(011-129) stand. He's always in pain, it never stops. I learned that from the [[medicine|doctor]]

(011-130) I took him to see. But whenever you ask him how he feels you get the same

(011-131) answer always: 'Fine, thank you.' He's a fighter, is John."

(011-132) "He looks it. I'd like to help that boy--"

(011-133) "All right--you can help him," Deborah said. "You'll find him quite a

(011-134) tonic."

(011-135) "A what?"

(011-136) "A tonic," she repeated. And with a sudden tightening of her wide and

(011-137) sensitive mouth, Deborah added slowly, "Because, though I've known many

(011-138) hungry boys, Johnny Geer is the hungriest of them all--hungry to get on in

(011-139) life, to grow and learn and get good things, get friends, [[love-and-courtship|love]], happiness,

(011-140) everything!" As she spoke of this child in her family, over her strong

(011-141) quiet face there swept a fierce, intent expression which struck Roger

(011-142) rather cold. What a fight she was making, this daughter of his, against

(011-143) what overwhelming odds. But all he said to her was this:

(011-144) "Now let's look at something more cheerful, my dear."

(011-145) "Very well," she answered with a smile. "We'll go and see [[isadore-freedom|Isadore Freedom]]."

(011-146) "Who's he?"

(011-147) "Isadore [[freedom|Freedom]]," said Deborah, "is the beginning of something tremendous.

(011-148) He came from Russian Poland--and the first [[america|American]] word he learned over

(011-149) there was 'freedom.' So in [[new-york-city|New York]] he changed his name to that--very

(011-150) solemnly, by due process of law. It cost him seven dollars. He had nine

(011-151) dollars at the time. Isadore is a flame, a kind of a torch in the

(011-152) wilderness."

(011-153) "How does the flame earn his living?"

(011-154) "At first in a sweatshop," she replied. "But he came to my school five

(011-155) nights a week, and at ten o'clock when school was out he went to a little

(011-156) basement café, where he sat at a corner table, drank one glass of Russian

(011-157) tea and studied till they closed at one. Then he went to his room, he told

(011-158) me, and used to read himself to sleep. He slept as a rule four hours. He

(011-159) said he felt he needed it. Now he's a librarian earning fifteen dollars a

(011-160) week, and having all the money he needs he has put the thought of it out of

(011-161) his life and is living for education--education in freedom. For Isadore has

(011-162) studied his name until he thinks he knows what it means."

(011-163) They found him in a small public library on an ill-smelling ghetto street.

(011-164) The place had been packed with people, but the clock had just struck ten

(011-165) and the readers were leaving reluctantly, many with books under their arms.

(011-166) At sight of Deborah and her father, Isadore leaped up from his desk and

(011-167) came quickly to meet them with outstretched hands.

(011-168) "Oh, this is splendid! Good evening!" he cried. Hardly more than a boy,

(011-169) perhaps twenty-one, he was short of frame but large of limb. He had wide

(011-170) stooping shoulders and reddish hollows in his dark cheeks. Yet there was a

(011-171) springiness in his step, vigor and warmth in the grip of his hand, in the

(011-172) very curl of his thick black hair, in his voice, in his enormous smile.

(011-173) "Come," he said to Roger, when the greetings were over. "You shall see my

(011-174) library, sir. But I want that you shall not see it alone. While you look

(011-175) you must close for me your eyes and see other libraries, many, many, all

(011-176) over the world. You must see them in big cities and in very little towns

(011-177) to-night. You must see people, millions there, hungry, hungry people. Now I

(011-178) shall show you their food and their drink." As he spoke he was leading them

(011-179) proudly around. In the stacks along the walls he pointed out fiction,

(011-180) poetry, history, books of all the sciences.

(011-181) "They read all, all!" cried Isadore. "Look at this Darwin on my desk. In a

(011-182) year so many have read this book it is a case for the board of health. And

(011-183) look at this shelf of economics. I place it next to astronomy. And I say to

(011-184) these people, 'Yes, read about jobs and your hours and wages. Yes, you must

(011-185) strike, you must have better lives. But you must read also about the

(011-186) stars--and about the big spaces--silent--not one single little sound for

(011-187) many, many million years. To be free you must grow as big as that--inside

(011-188) of your head, inside of your soul. It is not enough to be free of a czar, a

(011-189) kaiser or a sweatshop boss. What will you do when they are gone? My fine

(011-190) people, how will you run the world? You are deaf and blind, you must be

(011-191) free to open your own ears and eyes, to look into the books and see what is

(011-192) there--great thoughts and feelings, great ideas! And when you have seen,

(011-193) then you must think--you must think it all out every time! That is

(011-194) freedom!'" He stopped abruptly. Again on his dark features came a huge and

(011-195) winning smile, and with an apologetic shrug, "But I talk too much of my

(011-196) books," he said. "Come. Shall we go to my café?"

(011-197) On a neighboring street, a few minutes later, down a flight of steep wooden

(011-198) stairs they descended into a little café, shaped like a tunnel, the ceiling

(011-199) low, the bare walls soiled by rubbing elbows, dirty hands, the air blue and

(011-200) hot with smoke. Young men and girls packed in at small tables bent over

(011-201) tall glasses of Russian tea, and gesturing with their cigarettes declaimed

(011-202) and argued excitedly. Quick joyous cries of greeting met Isadore from every

(011-203) side.

(011-204) "You see?" he said gaily. "This is my club. Here we are like a family." He

(011-205) ordered tea of a waiter who seemed more like a bosom friend. And leaning

(011-206) eagerly forward, he began to speak in glowing terms of the men and girls

(011-207) from sweatshops who spent their nights in these feasts of the soul,

(011-208) talking, listening, grappling, "for the power to think with minds as clear

(011-209) as the sun when it rises," he ardently cried. "There is not a night in this

(011-210) city, not one, when hundreds do not talk like this until the breaking of

(011-211) the day! And then they sleep! A little joke! For at six o'clock they must

(011-212) rise to their [[work-and-vocation|work]]! And that is a force," he added, "not only for those

(011-213) people but a force for you and me. Do you see? When you feel tired, when

(011-214) all your hopes are sinking low, you think of those people and you say, 'I

(011-215) will go to their places.' And you go. You listen and you watch their faces,

(011-216) and such fire makes you burn! You go home, you are happy, you have a new

(011-217) life!

(011-218) "And perhaps at last you will have a religion," he continued, in fervent

(011-219) tones. "You see, with us Jews--and with Christians, too--the old religion,

(011-220) it is gone. And in its place there is nothing strong. And so the young

(011-221) people go all to pieces. They dance and they drink. If you go to those

(011-222) dance halls you say, 'They are crazy!' For dancing alone is not enough. And

(011-223) you say, 'These people must have a religion.' You ask, 'Where can I find a

(011-224) new God?' And you reply, 'There is no God.' And then you must be very sad.

(011-225) You know how it is? You feel too free. And you feel scared and lonely. You

(011-226) look up at the stars. There are millions. You are only a speck of dust--on

(011-227) one.

(011-228) "But then you come to my library. And you see those hungry people--more

(011-229) hungry than men have ever been. And you see those books upon the shelves.

(011-230) And you know when they come together at last, when that power to think as

(011-231) clear as the sun comes into the souls of those people so hungry, then we

(011-232) shall have a new god for the world. For there is no end to what they shall

(011-233) do," Isadore ended huskily.

(011-234) Roger felt a lump in his throat. He glanced into his daughter's eyes and

(011-235) saw a suspicious brightness there. Isadore looked at her happily.

(011-236) "You see?" he said to Roger. "When she came here to-night she was tired,

(011-237) half sick. But now she is all filled with life!"

(011-238) * * * * *

(011-239) Later, on the street outside when Isadore had left them, Deborah turned to

(011-240) her father:

(011-241) "Before we go home, there's one place more."

(011-242) And they went to a building not far away, a new structure twelve floors

(011-243) high which rose out of the neighboring tenements. It had been built, she

(011-244) told him, by a socialist daily paper. A dull night watchman half asleep

(011-245) took them in the elevator up to the top floor of the building, where in a

(011-246) bustling, clanking loft the paper was just going to press. Deborah seemed

(011-247) to know one of the foremen. He smiled and nodded and led the way through

(011-248) the noise and bustle to a large glass door at one end. This she opened and

(011-249) stepped out upon a fire escape so broad it was more like a balcony. And

(011-250) with the noise of the presses subdued, from their high perch they looked

(011-251) silently down.

(011-252) All around them for miles, it seemed, stretched dark uneven fields of

(011-253) roofs, with the narrow East River winding its way through the midst of them

(011-254) to the harbor below, silvery, dim and cool and serene, opening to the

(011-255) distant sea. From the bridges rearing high over the river, lights by

(011-256) thousands sparkled down. But directly below the spot where they stood was

(011-257) only a dull hazy glow, rising out of dark tenement streets where dimly they

(011-258) could just make out numberless moving shadowy forms, restless crowds too

(011-259) hot to sleep. The roofs were covered everywhere with men and women and

(011-260) children--families, families, families, all merged together in the dark.

(011-261) And from them rose into the night a ceaseless murmur of voices, laughing

(011-262) and joking, quarreling, loving and hating, demanding, complaining, and

(011-263) fighting and [[sacrifice|slaving]] and scheming for bread and the means of stark

(011-264) existence. But among these struggling multitudes confusedly did Roger feel

(011-265) the brighter presence here and there of more aspiring figures, small groups

(011-266) in glaring, stilling rooms down there beneath the murky dark, young people

(011-267) fiercely arguing, groping blindly for new gods. And all these voices, to

(011-268) his ears, merged into one deep thrilling hum, these lights into one

(011-269) quivering glow, that went up toward the silent stars.

(011-270) And there came to him a feeling which he had often had before in many

(011-271) different places--that he himself was a part of all this, the great, blind,

(011-272) wistful soul of mankind, which had been here before he was born and would

(011-273) be here when he was dead--still groping, yearning, struggling upward, on

(011-274) and on--to something distant as the sun. And still would he be a part of it

(011-275) all, through the eager lives of his children. He turned and looked at

(011-276) Deborah and caught the light that was in her eyes.
