---
description: "Roger awoke the next morning feeling sore and weary, and later in his"
id: ch12
label: "Chapter XII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(012-001) [[roger-gale|Roger]] awoke the next morning feeling sore and weary, and later in his

(012-002) office it was hard to keep his mind on his [[work-and-vocation|work]]. He thought of young

(012-003) [[isadore-freedom|Isadore Freedom]]. He was glad he had met that boy, and so he felt toward

(012-004) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s whole terrific family. Confused and deafening as it was, there

(012-005) was something inspiring in it all. But God save him from many such

(012-006) evenings! For half his life Roger had been a collector, not only of rings

(012-007) but of people, too, of curious personalities. These human bits, these

(012-008) memories, he had picked up as he lived along and had taken them with him

(012-009) and made them his own, had trimmed and polished every one until its rough

(012-010) unpleasant edges were all nicely smoothed away and it glittered and shone

(012-011) like the gem that it was. For Roger was an idealist. And so he would have

(012-012) liked to do here. What a gem could be made of Isadore with a little careful

(012-013) polishing.

(012-014) But Deborah's way was different. She stayed in life, lived in it close,

(012-015) with its sharp edges bristling. In this there was something splendid, but

(012-016) there was something tragic, too. It was all very well for that young Jew to

(012-017) burn himself up with his talk about freedom, his feverish searching for new

(012-018) gods. "In five years," Roger told himself, "Mr. Isadore [[freedom|Freedom]] will either

(012-019) tone down or go stark mad."

(012-020) But quite probably he would tone down, for he was only a youngster, these

(012-021) were Isadore's wild oats. But this was no longer Deborah's [[childhood|youth]], she had

(012-022) been at this job ten years. And she hadn't gone mad, she had kept herself

(012-023) sane, she had many sides her father knew. He knew her in [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]], or

(012-024) bustling about at [[family|home]] getting ready for [[laura-sloane|Laura]]'s [[marriage|wedding]], or packing

(012-025) [[ediths-children|Edith's children]] off for their summer up at the farm. But did that make it

(012-026) any easier? No. To let yourself go was easy, but to keep hold of yourself

(012-027) was hard. It meant wear and tear on a woman, this constant straining effort

(012-028) to keep her balance and see life whole.

(012-029) "Well, it will break her down, that's all, and I don't propose to allow

(012-030) it," he thought. "She's got to rest this summer and go easier next fall."

(012-031) But how could he accomplish it? As he thought about her school, with its

(012-032) long and generous arms reaching upon every side out into [[tenement-district|the tenements]], the

(012-033) prospect was bewildering. He searched for something definite. What could he

(012-034) do to prove to his daughter his real interest in her work? Presently he

(012-035) remembered [[johnny-geer|Johnny Geer]], the cripple boy whom he had liked, and at once he

(012-036) began to feel himself back again upon known ground. Instead of millions

(012-037) here was one, one plucky lad who needed help. All right, by [[george-sidney|George]], he

(012-038) should have it! And Roger told his daughter he would be glad to pay the

(012-039) expense of sending John away for the summer, and that in the autumn perhaps

(012-040) he would take the lad into [[rogers-office|his office]].

(012-041) "That's good of you, dearie," Deborah said. It was her only comment, but

(012-042) from the look she gave him Roger felt he was getting on.

(012-043) * * * * *

(012-044) One evening not long afterwards, as they sat together at dinner, she rose

(012-045) unsteadily to her feet and said in a breathless voice,

(012-046) "It's rather close in here, isn't it? I think I'll go outside for a while."

(012-047) Roger jumped up.

(012-048) "Look here, my child, you're faint!" he cried.

(012-049) "No, no, it's nothing! Just the heat!" She swayed and reeled, pitched

(012-050) suddenly forward. "Father! Quick!" And Roger caught her in his arms. He

(012-051) called to the maid, and with her help he carried Deborah up to her bed.

(012-052) There she shuddered violently and beads of sweat broke out on her brow.

(012-053) Her breath came hard through chattering teeth.

(012-054) "It's so silly!" she said fiercely.

(012-055) But as moments passed the chill grew worse. Her whole body seemed to be

(012-056) shaking, and as Roger was rubbing one of her arms she said something to him

(012-057) sharply, in a voice so thick he could not understand.

(012-058) "What is it?" he asked.

(012-059) "I can't feel anything."

(012-060) "What do you mean?"

(012-061) "In my arm where you're rubbing--I can't feel your hand."

(012-062) "You'd better have a [[medicine|doctor]]!"

(012-063) "Telephone [[allan-baird|Allan]]--Allan Baird. He knows about this," she muttered. And

(012-064) Roger ran down to the telephone. He was thoroughly frightened.

(012-065) "All right, Mr. Gale," came Baird's gruff bass, steady and slow, "I think I

(012-066) know what the trouble is--and I wouldn't worry if I were you. I'll be there

(012-067) in about ten minutes." And it was hardly more than that when he came into

(012-068) Deborah's room. A moment he looked down at her.

(012-069) "Again?" he said. She glanced up at him and nodded, and smiled quickly

(012-070) through set teeth. Baird carefully examined her and then turned to Roger:

(012-071) "Now I guess you'd better go out. You stay," he added to [[sarah-maid|Sarah]], the maid.

(012-072) "I may need you here awhile."

(012-073) [[About]] an hour later he came down to Roger's study.

(012-074) "She's safe enough now, I guess," he said. "I've telephoned for a nurse for

(012-075) her, and she'll have to stay in bed a few days."

(012-076) "What's the trouble?"

(012-077) "Acute indigestion."

(012-078) "You don't say!" exclaimed Roger brightly, with a rush of deep relief.

(012-079) Baird gave him a dry quizzical smile.

(012-080) "People have died of that," he remarked, "in less than an hour. We caught

(012-081) your daughter just in time. May I stay a few moments?"

(012-082) "Glad to have you! Smoke a cigar!"

(012-083) "Thanks--I will." As Baird reached out for the proffered cigar, Roger

(012-084) suddenly noticed his hand. Long and muscular, finely shaped, it seemed to

(012-085) speak of strength and skill and an immense vitality. Baird settled himself

(012-086) in his chair. "I [[poverty|want]] to talk about her," he said. "This little attack is

(012-087) only a symptom--it comes from nerves. She's just about ready for a smash.

(012-088) She's had slighter attacks of this kind before."

(012-089) "I never knew it," Roger said.

(012-090) "No--I don't suppose you did. Your daughter has a habit of keeping things

(012-091) like this to herself. She came to me and I warned her, but she wanted to

(012-092) finish out her year. Do you know anything about her school work?"

(012-093) "Yes, I was with her there this week."

(012-094) "What did she show you?" Baird inquired. Roger tried to tell him. "No,

(012-095) that's not what I'm after," he said. "That's just one of her usual

(012-096) evenings." For a moment he smoked in silence. "I'm hunting now for

(012-097) something else, for some unusual nervous shock which she appears to me to

(012-098) have had."

(012-099) "She has!" And Roger told him of her visit up to Sing Sing. Baird's lean

(012-100) muscular right hand slowly tightened on his chair.

(012-101) "That's a tough family of hers," he remarked.

(012-102) "Yes," said Roger determinedly, "and she's got to give it up."

(012-103) "You mean she ought to. But she won't."

(012-104) "She's got to be made to," Roger growled. "This summer at least." Baird

(012-105) shook his head.

(012-106) "You forget her fresh air work," he replied. "She has three thousand

(012-107) children on her mind. The city will be like a furnace, of course, and the

(012-108) children must be sent to camps. If you don't see the necessity, go and talk

(012-109) to her, and then you will."

(012-110) "But you can forbid it, can't you?"

(012-111) "No. Can you?"

(012-112) "I can try," snapped Roger.

(012-113) "Let's try what's possible," said Baird. "Let's try to keep her in bed

(012-114) three days."

(012-115) "Sounds modest," Roger grunted. And a glimmer of amusement came into

(012-116) Baird's impassive eyes.

(012-117) "Try it," he drawled. "By to-morrow night she'll ask for her stenographer.

(012-118) She'll make you think she is out of the woods. But she won't be, please

(012-119) remember that. A few years more," he added, "and she'll have used up her

(012-120) vitality. She'll be an old woman at thirty-five."

(012-121) "It's got to be stopped!" cried Roger.

(012-122) "But how?" came the low sharp retort. "You've got to know her trouble

(012-123) first. And her trouble is deep, it's motherhood--on a scale which has never

(012-124) been tried before--for thousands of children, all of whom are living in a

(012-125) kind of hell. I know your daughter pretty well. Don't make the mistake of

(012-126) mixing her up with the old-fashioned teacher. It isn't what those children

(012-127) learn, it's how they live that interests her, and how they are all growing

(012-128) up. I say she's a mother--in spirit--but her body has never borne a child.

(012-129) And that makes it worse--because it makes her more intense. It isn't

(012-130) natural, you see."

(012-131) A little later he rose to go.

(012-132) "By the way," he said, at the door, "there's something I meant to tell her

(012-133) upstairs--about a poor devil she has on her mind. A chap named

(012-134) [[mrs-berry|Berry]]--[[death|dying]]--lungs. She asked me to go and see him."

(012-135) "Yes?"

(012-136) "I found it was only a matter of days." The tragic pity in Baird's quiet

(012-137) voice was so deep as barely to be heard.

(012-138) "So I shot him full of morphine. He won't wake up. Please tell her that."

(012-139) Tall, ungainly, motionless, he loomed there in the doorway. With a little

(012-140) shrug and a smile he turned and went slowly out of [[the-gale-home|the house]].
