---
description: "Deborah's recovery was rapid and determined. The next night she was sitting"
id: ch13
label: "Chapter XIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(013-001) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s recovery was rapid and determined. The next night she was sitting

(013-002) up and making light of her [[disease|illness]]. On the third day she dismissed her

(013-003) nurse, and when her father came [[family|home]] from [[rogers-office|his office]] he found gathered

(013-004) about her bed not only her stenographer but both her assistant principals.

(013-005) He frowned severely and went to his room, and a few minutes later he heard

(013-006) them leave. Presently she called to him, and he came to her bedside. She

(013-007) was lying back on the pillow with rather a guilty expression.

(013-008) "Up to your old antics, eh?" he remarked.

(013-009) "Exactly. It couldn't be helped, you see. It's the last week of our school

(013-010) year, and there are so many little things that have to be attended to. It's

(013-011) simply now or never."

(013-012) "Humph!" was [[roger-gale|Roger]]'s comment. "It's now or never with you," he thought. He

(013-013) went down to his dinner, and when he came back he found her exhausted. In

(013-014) the dim soft light of her room her face looked flushed and feverish, and

(013-015) vaguely he felt she was in a mood where she might listen to reason. He felt

(013-016) her hot dry hand on his. Her eyes were closed, she was smiling.

(013-017) "Tell me the news from [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]]," she said. And he gave her the gossip

(013-018) of the farm in a letter he had had from [[george-sidney|George]]. It told of a picnic supper,

(013-019) the first one of the season. They had had it in the usual place, down by

(013-020) the dam on the river, "with a bonfire--a perfect peach--down by the big

(013-021) yellow rock--the one you call the Elephant." As Roger read the letter he

(013-022) could feel his daughter listening, vividly picturing to herself the great

(013-023) dark boulders by the creek, the shadowy firs, the stars above and the cool

(013-024) fresh tang of the mountain night.

(013-025) "After this little sickness of yours--and that harum scarum [[marriage|wedding]]," he

(013-026) said, "I feel we're both entitled to a good long rest in mountain air."

(013-027) "We'll have it, too," she murmured.

(013-028) "With [[edith-sidney|Edith]]'s little youngsters. They're all the medicine you need." He

(013-029) paused for a moment, hesitating. But it was now or never. "The only trouble

(013-030) with you," he said, "is that you've let yourself be caught by the same

(013-031) disease which has its grip upon this whole infernal town. You're like

(013-032) everyone else, you're tackling about forty times what you can do. You're

(013-033) actually trying not only to teach but to bring 'em all up as your own,

(013-034) three thousand tenement [[childhood|children]]. And this is where it gets you."

(013-035) Again he halted, frowning. What next?

(013-036) "Go on, dear, please," said Deborah, in demure and even tones. "This is

(013-037) very interesting."

(013-038) "Now then," he continued, "in this matter of your school. I wouldn't ask

(013-039) you to give it up, I've already seen too much of it. But so long as you've

(013-040) got it nicely started, why not give somebody else a chance? One of those

(013-041) assistants of yours, for example--capable young [[womens-roles|women]], both. You could

(013-042) stand right behind 'em with help and advice--"

(013-043) "Not yet," was Deborah's soft reply. She had turned her head on her pillow

(013-044) and was looking at him affectionately. "Why not?" he demanded.

(013-045) "Because it's not nicely started at all. There's nothing brilliant about

(013-046) me, dear--I'm a plodder, feeling my way along. And what I have done in the

(013-047) last ten years is just coming to a stage at last where I can really see a

(013-048) chance to make it count for something. When I feel I've done that, say in

(013-049) five years more--"

(013-050) "Those five years," said her father, "may cost you a very heavy price." As

(013-051) Deborah faced his troubled regard, her own grew quickly serious.

(013-052) "I'd be willing to pay the price," she replied.

(013-053) "But why?" he asked with impatience. "Why pay when you don't have to? Why

(013-054) not by taking one year off get strength for twenty years' [[work-and-vocation|work]] later on?

(013-055) You'd be a different woman!"

(013-056) "Yes, I think I should be. I'd never be the same again. You don't quite

(013-057) understand, you see. This work of mine with children--well, it's like

(013-058) Edith's having a baby. You have to do it while you're young."

(013-059) "That works both ways," her father growled.

(013-060) "What do you mean?" He hesitated:

(013-061) "Don't you [[poverty|want]] any children of your own?"

(013-062) Again she turned her eyes toward his, then closed them and lay perfectly

(013-063) still. "Now I've done it," he thought anxiously. She reached over and took

(013-064) his hand.

(013-065) "Let's talk of our summer's vacation," she said.

(013-066) A little while later she fell asleep.

(013-067) Downstairs he soon grew restless and after a time he went out for a walk.

(013-068) But he felt tired and oppressed, and as he had often done of late he

(013-069) entered a little "movie" nearby, where gradually the pictures, continually

(013-070) flashing out of the dark, drove the worries from his mind. For a half an

(013-071) hour they held his gaze. Then he fell into a doze. He was roused by a roar

(013-072) of laughter, and straightening up in his seat with a jerk he looked angrily

(013-073) around. Something broadly comic had been flashed upon the screen; and men

(013-074) and women and children, Italians, Jews and Irish, jammed in close about

(013-075) him, a dirty and perspiring mass, had burst into a terrific guffaw. Now

(013-076) they were suddenly tense again and watching the screen in absorbed

(013-077) suspense, while the crude passions within themselves were played upon in

(013-078) the glamorous dark. And Roger scanned their faces--one moment smiling, all

(013-079) together, as though some god had pulled a string; then mawkish,

(013-080) sentimental, soft; then suddenly scowling, twitching, with long rows of

(013-081) animal eyes. But eager--eager all the time! Hungry people--yes, indeed!

(013-082) Hungry for all the good things in the town, and for as many bad things,

(013-083) too! On one who tried to feed this mob there was no end to their demands!

(013-084) What was one woman's life to them? Deborah's big family!

(013-085) * * * * *

(013-086) Edith came to [[the-gale-home|the house]] one afternoon, and she was in Deborah's room when

(013-087) her father returned from his office. Her convalescence over at last, she

(013-088) was leaving for the mountains.

(013-089) "Do learn your lesson, Deborah dear," she urged upon her sister. "Let [[sarah-maid|Sarah]]

(013-090) pack your trunk at once and come up with me on Saturday night."

(013-091) "I can't get off for two weeks yet."

(013-092) "Why can't you?" Edith demanded. And when Deborah spoke of fresh air camps

(013-093) and baby farms and other work, Edith's impatience only grew. "You'll have

(013-094) to leave it to somebody else! You're simply in no condition!" she cried.

(013-095) "Impossible," said Deborah. Edith gave a quick sigh of exasperation.

(013-096) "Isn't it enough," she asked, "to have worked your nerves to a frazzle

(013-097) already? Why can't you be sensible? You've got to think of yourself a

(013-098) little!"

(013-099) "You'd like me to marry, wouldn't you, dear?" her sister put in wearily.

(013-100) "Yes, I should, while there is still time! Just now you look far from it!

(013-101) It's exactly as [[allan-baird|Allan]] was saying! If you keep on as you're going you'll be

(013-102) an old woman at thirty-five!"

(013-103) "Thank you!" said Deborah sharply. Two spots of color leaped in her checks.

(013-104) "You'd better leave me, Edith! I'll come up to the mountains as soon as I

(013-105) can! And I'll try not to look any more like a hag than I have to!

(013-106) Good-night!"

(013-107) Roger followed Edith out of the room.

(013-108) "That last shot of mine struck home," she declared to him in triumph.

(013-109) "I wouldn't have done it," her father said. "I gave you that remark of

(013-110) Baird's in strict confidence, Edith--"

(013-111) "Now father," was her good-humored retort, "suppose you leave this matter

(013-112) to me. I know just what I'm doing."

(013-113) "Well," he reflected uneasily, after she had left him, "here's more trouble

(013-114) in the family. If Edith isn't careful she'll make a fine mess of this whole

(013-115) affair."

(013-116) After dinner he went up to Deborah's room, but through the open doorway he

(013-117) caught a glimpse of his daughter which made him instinctively draw back.

(013-118) Sitting bolt upright in her bed, sternly she was eyeing herself in a small

(013-119) mirror in her hand. Her father chuckled noiselessly. A moment later, when

(013-120) he went in, the glass had disappeared from view. Soon afterwards Baird

(013-121) himself arrived, and as they heard him coming upstairs Roger saw his

(013-122) daughter frown, but she continued talking.

(013-123) "Hello, Allan," she said with indifference. "I'm feeling much better this

(013-124) evening."

(013-125) "Are you? Good," he answered, and he started to pull up an easy chair. "I

(013-126) was hoping I could stay awhile--I've been having one of those long mean

(013-127) days--"

(013-128) "I'd a little rather you wouldn't," Deborah put in softly. Allan turned to

(013-129) her in surprise. "I didn't sleep last night," she murmured, "and I feel so

(013-130) drowsy." There was a little silence. "And I really don't think there's any

(013-131) need of your dropping in to-morrow," she added. "I'm so much

(013-132) better--honestly."

(013-133) Baird looked at her a moment.

(013-134) "Right--O," he answered slowly. "I'll call up to-morrow night."

(013-135) Roger followed him downstairs.

(013-136) "Come into my den and smoke a cigar!" he proposed in hearty ringing tones.

(013-137) Allan thanked him and came in, but the puzzled expression was still on his

(013-138) face, and through the first moments of their talk he was very

(013-139) absent-minded. Roger's feeling of guilt increased, and he cursed himself

(013-140) for a meddlesome fool.

(013-141) "Look here, Baird," he blurted out, "there's something I think you ought to

(013-142) know." Allan slightly turned his head, and Roger reddened a little. "The

(013-143) worst thing about living in a [[home|house]] chock full of meddling women is that

(013-144) you get to be one yourself," he growled. "And the fact is--" he cleared his

(013-145) throat--"I've put my foot in it, Baird," he said. "I was fool enough the

(013-146) other day to quote you to Edith."

(013-147) "To what effect?"

(013-148) "That if Deborah keeps on like this she'll be an old woman at thirty-five."

(013-149) Allan sat up in his chair:

(013-150) "Was Edith here this afternoon?"

(013-151) "She was," said Roger.

(013-152) "Say no more."

(013-153) Baird had a wide, likable, generous mouth which wrinkled easily into a

(013-154) smile. He leaned back now and enjoyed himself. He puffed a little cloud of

(013-155) smoke, looked over at Roger and chuckled aloud. And Roger chuckled with

(013-156) relief. "What a decent chap he is," he thought.

(013-157) "I'm sorry, of course," he said to Baird. "I thought of trying to

(013-158) explain--"

(013-159) "Don't," said Allan. "Leave it alone. It won't do Deborah any harm--may

(013-160) even do her a little good. After all, I'm her [[doctor|physician]]--"

(013-161) "Are you?" Roger asked with a twinkle. "I thought upstairs you were

(013-162) dismissed."

(013-163) "Oh no, I'm not," was the calm reply. And the two men went on smoking.

(013-164) Roger's liking for Baird was growing fast. They had had several little

(013-165) talks during Deborah's illness, and Roger was [[education|learning]] more of the man.

(013-166) Raised on a big cattle ranch that his father had owned in New Mexico,

(013-167) riding broncos on the plains had given him his abounding [[medicine|health]] of body,

(013-168) [[courage|nerve]] and spirit, his steadiness and sanity in all this feverish city life.

(013-169) "Are you riding these days?" he inquired.

(013-170) "No," said Roger, "the park is too hot--and they don't sprinkle the path as

(013-171) they should. I've had my cob sent up to the mountains. By the way," he

(013-172) added cordially, "you must come up there and ride with me."

(013-173) "Thanks, I'd like to," Allan said, and with a little inner smile he added

(013-174) dryly to himself, "He's getting ready to meddle again." But whatever

(013-175) amusement Baird had in this thought was concealed behind his sober gray

(013-176) eyes. Soon after that he took his leave.

(013-177) "Now then," Roger reflected, with a little glow of expectancy, "if Edith

(013-178) will only leave me alone, she may find I'm smarter then she thinks!"

(013-179) * * * * *

(013-180) One evening in the following week, after Edith had left town, Roger had

(013-181) [[bruce|Bruce]] to dine at his club, a pleasant old building on Madison Square, where

(013-182) comfortably all by themselves they could discuss Baird's chances.

(013-183) "A. Baird and I have been chums," said Bruce, "ever since we were in

(013-184) college. Take it from me I know his brand. And he isn't the kind to be

(013-185) pushed."

(013-186) "Who wants to push him?" Roger demanded, with a sudden guilty twinge.

(013-187) "Edith does," Bruce answered. "And I tell you that won't do with A. Baird.

(013-188) He has his mind set on Deborah sure. He's been setting it harder and harder

(013-189) for months--and he knows it--and so does she. But they're both the kind of

(013-190) people who don't like interference, they've got to get to it by themselves.

(013-191) Edith must keep out of the way. She mustn't take it on herself to ask him

(013-192) up to the mountains." Roger gave a little start. "If she does, there'll be

(013-193) trouble with Deborah."

(013-194) Roger smoked for a moment in silence and then sagely nodded his head.

(013-195) "That's so," he murmured thoughtfully. "Yes, my boy, I guess you're right."

(013-196) Bruce lifted his mint julep:

(013-197) "God, but it's hot in here to-night. How about taking a spin up the river?"

(013-198) "Delighted," replied his father-in-law.

(013-199) And a half hour later in Bruce's new car, which was the pride and joy of

(013-200) his life, they were far up the river. On a long level stretch of road Bruce

(013-201) "let her out to show what she could do." And Roger with his heart in his

(013-202) mouth and his eye upon the speedometer, saw it creep to sixty-three.

(013-203) "Almost as good as a horse," remarked Bruce, when the car had slowed a

(013-204) little.

(013-205) "Almost," said Roger, "but not quite. It's--well, it's dissipation."

(013-206) "And a horse?"

(013-207) "Is life," was the grave reply. "You'll have a crash some day, my boy, if

(013-208) you go on at your present speed. It gets me worried sometimes. You see

(013-209) you're a family man."

(013-210) "I am and I'm glad of it. Edith and the kiddies suit me right down to the

(013-211) ground. I'm crazy about 'em--you know that. But a chap with a job like

(013-212) mine," Bruce continued pleadingly, as he drove his car rushing around a

(013-213) curve, "needs a little dissipation, too. I can't tell you what it means to

(013-214) me, when I'm kept late at the office, to have this car for the run up home.

(013-215) Lower Broadway's empty then, and I know the cops. I swing around through

(013-216) [[washington-square|Washington Square]], and the Avenue looks clear for miles, nothing but two

(013-217) long rows of lights to the big hump at Murray Hill. It's the time between

(013-218) crowds--say about ten. And I know the cops."

(013-219) "That's all right," said Roger. "No one was more delighted than I when you

(013-220) got this car. You deserve it. It's the _work_ that I was speaking of.

(013-221) You've got it going at such a speed--"

(013-222) "Only way on earth to get on--to get what I want for my family--"

(013-223) "Yes, yes, I know," muttered Roger vaguely. Bruce began talking of his work

(013-224) for the steel construction concern [[downtown-new-york|downtown]].

(013-225) "Take it from me," he declared at the end, "this town has only just begun!"

(013-226) "Has, eh," Roger grunted. "Aren't the buildings high enough?"

(013-227) "My God, I wish they were twenty times higher," Bruce rejoined

(013-228) good-humoredly. "But they won't be--we've stopped going up. We've done

(013-229) pretty well in the air, and now we're going underground. And when we get

(013-230) through, this old rock of Manhattan will be such a network of tunnels

(013-231) there'll be a hole waiting at every corner to take you wherever you want to

(013-232) go. Speed? We don't even know what it means!"

(013-233) And again Bruce "let her out" a bit. It was _quite_ a bit. Roger grabbed

(013-234) his hat with one hand and the side of the car with the other.

(013-235) "They'll look back on a mile a minute," said Bruce, "as we look back on

(013-236) stage coach days! And in the rush hour there'll be a rush that'll make you

(013-237) think of pneumatic tubes! Not a sound nor a quiver--_just pure speed!_

(013-238) Shooting people home at night at a couple of hundred miles an hour! The

(013-239) city will be as big as that! And there won't be any accidents and there

(013-240) won't be any smoke. Instead of coal they'll use the sun! And, my God, man,

(013-241) the boulevards--and parks and places for the kids! The way they'll use the

(013-242) River--and the ocean and the Sound! The Catskills will be Central Park!

(013-243) Sounds funny, don't it--but it's true. I've studied it out from A to Z.

(013-244) This town is choking itself to death simply because we're so damn slow! We

(013-245) don't know how to spread ourselves! All this city needs is speed!"

(013-246) "Bruce," said Roger anxiously, "just go a bit easy on that gas. The fact

(013-247) is, it was a great mistake for me to eat those crabs to-night."

(013-248) Bruce slowed down compassionately, and soon they turned and started home.

(013-249) And as they drew near the glow of the town, other streets and boulevards

(013-250) poured more motors into the line, until at last they were rushing along

(013-251) amid a perfect bedlam made up of honks and shrieks of horns. The air grew

(013-252) hot and acrid, and looking back through the bluish haze of smoke and dust

(013-253) behind him Roger could see hundreds of huge angry motor eyes. Crowding and

(013-254) jamming closer, pell mell, at a pace which barely slackened, they sped on,

(013-255) a wild uproarious crew, and swept into [[new-york-city|the city]].

(013-256) Roger barely slept that night. He felt the city clamoring down into his

(013-257) very soul. "Speed!" he muttered viciously. "Speed--speed! We need more

(013-258) speed!" The words beat in like a savage refrain. At last with a sigh of

(013-259) impatience he got up in his nightshirt and walked about. It was good to

(013-260) feel his way in the dark in this cool silent house which he knew so well.

(013-261) Soon his nerves felt quieter. He went back to his bed and lay there inert.

(013-262) How good it would be to get up to the farm.

(013-263) * * * * *

(013-264) The next Saturday evening, with Deborah, he started for the mountains. And

(013-265) Bruce came down to see them off.

(013-266) "Remember, son," said Roger, as the two walked on the platform. "Come up

(013-267) this year for a month, my boy. You need it." The train was about to start.

(013-268) "Oh, I'll be all right," was the answer. "My friend the Judge, who has hay

(013-269) fever, tells me he has found a cure."

(013-270) "Damn his cure! You come to us!"

(013-271) "Hold on a minute, live and learn. The Judge is quite excited about it.

(013-272) You drink little bugs, he says, a billion after every meal. They come in

(013-273) tall blue bottles. We're going to dine together next week and drink 'em

(013-274) till we're all lit up. Oh, we're going to have a hell of a time. _His_ wife

(013-275) left town on Tuesday."

(013-276) "Bruce," said Roger sternly, as the train began to move, "leave bugs alone

(013-277) and come up and breathe! And quit smoking so many cigarettes!" He stepped

(013-278) on the car.

(013-279) "Remember, son, a solid month!" Bruce nodded as the train moved out.

(013-280) "Good luck--good-bye--fine summer--my [[love-and-courtship|love]] to the wife and the kiddies--"

(013-281) and Bruce's dark, tense, smiling face was left behind. Roger went back into

(013-282) the smoker.

(013-283) "Now for the mountains," he thought. "Thank God!"
