---
description: "A few hours later Roger awakened. His lower berth was still pitch dark. The"
id: ch14
label: "Chapter XIV: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(014-001) A few hours later [[roger-gale|Roger]] awakened. His lower berth was still pitch dark. The

(014-002) train had stopped, and he had been roused by a voice outside his window.

(014-003) Rough and slow and nasal, the leisurely drawl of a mountaineer, it came

(014-004) like balm to Roger's ears. He raised the curtain and looked out. A train

(014-005) hand with a lantern was listening to a dairy man, a tall young giant in top

(014-006) boots. High overhead loomed a shadowy mountain and over its rim came the

(014-007) glow of the dawn. With a violent lurch the train moved on. And Roger, lying

(014-008) back on his pillow, looked up at the misty mountain sides all mottled in

(014-009) the strange blue light with patches of firs and birches and pines. In the

(014-010) narrow valley up which the train was thundering, were small herds of

(014-011) grazing cattle, a lonely farmhouse here and there. From one a light was

(014-012) twinkling. And [[new-york-city|the city]] with its heat and noise, its nervous throb, its

(014-013) bedlam nights, all dropped like a fever from his soul.

(014-014) Now, close by the railroad track, through a shallow rocky gorge a small

(014-015) river roared and foamed. Its cool breath came up to his nostrils and

(014-016) gratefully he breathed it in. For this was the Gale River, named after one

(014-017) of his forefathers, and in his mind's eye he followed the stream back up

(014-018) its course to the little station where he and [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] were to get off.

(014-019) There the narrowing river bed turned and wound up through a cleft in the

(014-020) hills to the homestead several miles away. On the dark forest road beside

(014-021) it he pictured [[george-sidney|George]], his grandson, at this moment driving down to meet

(014-022) them in a mountain wagon with one of the two hired men, a lantern swinging

(014-023) under the wheels. What an adventure for young George.

(014-024) Presently he heard Deborah stirring in the berth next to his own.

(014-025) At the station George was there, and from a thermos bottle which [[edith-sidney|Edith]] had

(014-026) filled the night before he poured coffee piping hot, which steamed in the

(014-027) keen, frosty air.

(014-028) "Oh, how good!" cried Deborah. "How thoughtful of your mother, George. How

(014-029) is she, dear?"

(014-030) "Oh, she's all right, Aunt Deborah." His blunt freckled features flushed

(014-031) from his drive, George stood beaming on them both. He appeared, if

(014-032) anything, tougher and scrawnier than before. "Everything's all right," he

(014-033) said. "There ain't a sick animal on the whole farm."

(014-034) As Roger sipped his coffee he was having a look at the horses. One of them

(014-035) was William, his cob.

(014-036) "Do you see it?" inquired his grandson.

(014-037) "What?"

(014-038) "The boil," George answered proudly, "on William's rump. There it is--on

(014-039) the nigh side. Gee, but you ought to have seen it last week. It was a whale

(014-040) of a boil," said George, "but we poulticed him, me and [[dave-royce|Dave]] did--and now

(014-041) the swelling's nearly gone. You can ride him to-morrow if you like."

(014-042) Luxuriously Roger lit a cigar and climbed to the front seat with George. Up

(014-043) the steep and crooked road the stout horses tugged their way, and the wagon

(014-044) creaked, and the Gale River, here only a brook, came gurgling, dashing to

(014-045) meet them--down from [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]], from the farm, from Roger's [[childhood|youth]] to

(014-046) welcome him [[family|home]]. And the sun was flashing through the pines. As they drew

(014-047) near the farmhouse through a grove of sugar maples, he heard shrill cries

(014-048) of, "There they come!" And he glimpsed the flying figures of George's

(014-049) brothers, Bob and Tad. George whipped up the horses, the wagon gained upon

(014-050) the boys and reached [[the-gale-home|the house]] but a few rods behind the little runners.

(014-051) Edith was waiting by the door, fresh and smiling, blooming with [[medicine|health]].

(014-052) How well this suited her, Roger thought. Amid a gay chorus of greetings he

(014-053) climbed down heavily out of the wagon, looked about him and drew a deep

(014-054) breath. The long lazy days on the farm had begun.

(014-055) From the mountain side the farm looked down on a wide sweeping valley of

(014-056) woods and fields. The old [[home|house]] straggled along the road, with addition

(014-057) after addition built on through [[generational-change|generations]] by many men and [[womens-roles|women]]. Here lay

(014-058) the history, unread, of the family of Roger Gale. Inside there were steps

(014-059) up and down from one part to another, queer crooks in narrow passageways.

(014-060) The lower end was attached to the woodshed, and the woodshed to the barn.

(014-061) Above the house a pasture dotted with gray boulders extended up to a wood

(014-062) of firs, and out of this wood the small river which bore the name of the

(014-063) family came rushing down the field in a gully, went under the road, swept

(014-064) around to the right and along the edge of a birch copse just below the

(014-065) house. The little stream grew quieter there and widened into a mill pond.

(014-066) At the lower end was a broken dam and beside it a dismantled mill. Here was

(014-067) peace for Roger's soul. The next day at dawn he awakened, and through the

(014-068) window close by his bed he saw no tall confining walls; his eye was carried

(014-069) as on wings out over a billowy blanket of mist, soft and white and cool and

(014-070) still, reaching over the valley. From underneath to his sensitive ears came

(014-071) the numberless voices of the awakening sleepers there, cheeps and tremulous

(014-072) warbles from the birch copse just below, cocks crowing in the valley, and

(014-073) ducks and geese, dogs, sheep and cattle faintly heard from distant farms.

(014-074) Just so it had been when he was a boy. How unchanged and yet how new were

(014-075) these fresh hungry cries of life. From the other end of the house he heard

(014-076) Edith's tiny son lustily demanding his breakfast, as other wee boys before

(014-077) him had done for over a hundred years, as other babies still unborn would

(014-078) do in the many years to come. Soon the cry of the child was hushed. Quiet

(014-079) fell upon the house. And Roger sank again into deep happy slumber.

(014-080) Here was nothing new and disturbing. [[ediths-children|Edith's children]]? Yes, they were new,

(014-081) but they were not disturbing. Their growth each summer was a joy, a renewal

(014-082) of life in the battered old house. Here was no huge tenement family

(014-083) crowding in with dirty faces, clamorous demands for aid, but only five

(014-084) delightful youngsters, clean and fresh, of his own blood. He loved the

(014-085) small excitements, the plans and plots and discoveries, the many adventures

(014-086) that filled their days. He spent hours with their mother, listening while

(014-087) she talked of them. Edith did so [[love-and-courtship|love]] this place and she ran the house so

(014-088) beautifully. It was so cool and fragrant, so clean and so old-fashioned.

(014-089) Deborah, too, came under the spell. She grew as lazy as a cat and day by

(014-090) day renewed her strength from the hills and from Edith's little brood.

(014-091) Roger had feared trouble there, for he knew how Edith disapproved of her

(014-092) sister's new ideas. But although much with the children, Deborah apparently

(014-093) had no new ideas at all. She seemed to be only listening. One balmy day at

(014-094) sunset, Roger saw her lying on the grass with George sprawled by her side.

(014-095) Her head upon one arm, she appeared to be watching the cattle in the

(014-096) sloping pasture above. Slowly, as though each one of them was drawn by

(014-097) mysterious unseen chains, they were drifting down toward the barn where it

(014-098) was almost milking time. George was talking earnestly. She threw a glance

(014-099) at him from time to time, and Roger could see how intent were her eyes.

(014-100) Yes, Deborah knew how to study a boy.

(014-101) Only once during the summer did she talk about her [[work-and-vocation|work]]. On a walk with her

(014-102) father one day she took him into a small forlorn building, a mere cabin of

(014-103) one room. The white paint had long been worn away, the windows were all

(014-104) broken, half the old shingles had dropped from the roof and on the

(014-105) flagpole was no flag. It was the district schoolhouse where for nearly half

(014-106) his life Deborah's grandfather had taught a score of pupils. Inside were a

(014-107) blackboard, a rusty stove, a teacher's desk and a dozen forms, grown mouldy

(014-108) and worm-eaten now. A torn and faded picture of Lincoln was upon one wall,

(014-109) half hidden by a spider's web and by a few old dangling rags which once had

(014-110) been red, white and blue. Below, still clinging to the wall, was an old

(014-111) scrap of paper, on which in a large rugged hand there had been written long

(014-112) ago a speech, but it had been worn away until but three words were

(014-113) legible--"conceived and dedicated--"

(014-114) "Tell me about your school," she said. "All you can remember." Seated at

(014-115) her grandfather's desk she asked Roger many questions. And his

(014-116) recollections, at first dim and hazy, began to clear a little.

(014-117) "By George!" he exclaimed. "Here are my initials!"

(014-118) He stooped over one of the benches.

(014-119) "Oh, dearie! Where?" He pointed them out, and then while he sat on the rude

(014-120) old bench for some time more she questioned him.

(014-121) "But your school was not all here," she said musingly at last, "it was up

(014-122) on the farm, besides, where you learned to plough and sow and reap and take

(014-123) care of the animals in the barn, and mend things that were broken, and--oh,

(014-124) turn your hand to anything. But millions of children nowadays are growing

(014-125) up in cities, you see."

(014-126) Half frowning and half smiling she began to talk of her work in town. "What

(014-127) is there about her," Roger asked, "that reminds me so of my mother?" His

(014-128) mind strayed back into [[memory|the past]] while the low quiet voice of his daughter

(014-129) went on, and a wistful expression crept over his face. What would she do

(014-130) with the family name? What life would she lead in those many years?...

(014-131) "What a mother she would make." The words rose from within him, but in a

(014-132) voice which was not his own. It was Deborah's grandmother speaking, so

(014-133) clearly and distinctly that he gave a start almost of alarm.

(014-134) "And if you don't believe they'll do it," Deborah was saying, "you don't

(014-135) know what's in children. Only we've got to help bring it out." What had she

(014-136) been talking about? He remembered the words "a new nation"--no more. "We've

(014-137) got to grope around in the dark and hunt for new ways and learn as we go.

(014-138) And when you've once got into the work and really felt the thrill of it

(014-139) all--well, then it seems rather foolish and small to bother about your own

(014-140) little life."

(014-141) * * * * *

(014-142) Roger spent much of his time alone. He took long rides on William along

(014-143) crooked, hilly roads. As the afternoon drew to its end, the shadows would

(014-144) creep up the mountain sides to their summits where glowed the last rays of

(014-145) the sun, painting the slate and granite crags in lovely pink and purple

(014-146) hues. And sometimes mighty banks of clouds would rear themselves high

(014-147) overhead, gigantic mountains of the air with billowy, misty caverns, cliffs

(014-148) and jagged peaks, all shifting there before his eyes. And he would think of

(014-149) [[judith-gale|Judith]] his wife. And the old haunting certainty, that her soul had died

(014-150) with her body, was gone. There came to him the feeling that he and his wife

(014-151) would meet again. Why did this [[dream|hope]] come back to him? Was it all from the

(014-152) glory of the sun? Or was it from the presence, silent and invisible, of

(014-153) those many other mortals, folk of his own flesh and blood, who at their

(014-154) deaths had gone to their graves to put on immortality? Or was this

(014-155) deepening [[religion|faith]] in Roger simply a sign of his growing old age?

(014-156) He frowned at the thought and shook it off, and again stared up at the

(014-157) light on the hills. "You will live on in our children's lives." Was there

(014-158) no other immortality?

(014-159) He often thought of his boyhood here. On a ride one day he stopped for a

(014-160) drink at a spring in a grove of maples surrounding a desolate farmhouse not

(014-161) more than a mile away from his own. And through the trees as he turned to

(014-162) go he saw the stark figure of a woman, poorly clad and gaunt and gray. She

(014-163) stood motionless watching him with a look of sullen bitterness. She was the

(014-164) last of "the Elkinses," a mountain family run to seed. As he rode away he

(014-165) saw in the field a boy with a pitchfork in his hands, a meager ragged

(014-166) little chap. He was staring into the valley at a wriggling, blue smoke

(014-167) serpent made by the night express to New York. And something leaped in

(014-168) Roger, for he had once felt just like that! But the woman's harsh voice cut

(014-169) in on his dream, as she shouted to her son below, "Hey! Why the hell you

(014-170) standin' thar?" And the boy with a jump of alarm turned back quickly to his

(014-171) work. At home a few days later, George with a mysterious air took his

(014-172) grandfather into the barn, and after a pledge of secrecy he said in swift

(014-173) and thrilling tones, "You know young Bill Elkins? Yes, you do--the boy up

(014-174) on the Elkins place who lives alone with his mother. Well, look here!"

(014-175) George swallowed hard. "Bill has cleared out--he's run away! I was up at

(014-176) five this morning and he came hiking down the road! He had a bundle on his

(014-177) back and he told me he was off for good! And was he scared? You bet he was

(014-178) scared! And I told him so and it made him mad! 'Aw, you're scared!' I said.

(014-179) 'I ain't neither!' he said. He could barely talk, but the kid had his

(014-180) [[courage|nerve]]! 'Where you going?' I asked. 'To New York,' he said. 'Aw, what do you

(014-181) know of New York?' I said. And then, by golly, he busted right down. 'Gee!'

(014-182) he said, 'Gee! Can't you lemme alone?' And then he beat it down the road!

(014-183) You could hear the kid breathe, he was hustling so! He's way off now, he's

(014-184) caught the train! He wants to be a cabin boy on a big ocean liner!" For a

(014-185) moment there was silence. "Well?" the boy demanded, "What do you think of

(014-186) his chances?"

(014-187) "I don't know," said Roger huskily. He felt a tightening at his throat.

(014-188) Abruptly he turned to his grandson.

(014-189) "George," he asked, "what do _you_ [[poverty|want]] to be?" The boy flushed under his

(014-190) freckles.

(014-191) "I don't know as I know. I'm thinking," he answered very slowly.

(014-192) "Talk it over with your mother, son."

(014-193) "Yes, sir," came the prompt reply. "But he won't," reflected Roger.

(014-194) "Or if you ever feel you want to, have a good long talk with me."

(014-195) "Yes, sir," was the answer. Roger stood there waiting, then turned and

(014-196) walked slowly out of the barn. How these children grew up inside of

(014-197) themselves. Had boys always grown like that? Well, perhaps, but how strange

(014-198) it was. Always new lives, lives of their own, the old families scattering

(014-199) over the land. So the great life of the nation swept on. He kept noticing

(014-200) here deserted farms, and one afternoon in the deepening dusk he rode by a

(014-201) graveyard high up on a bare hillside. A horse and buggy were outside, and

(014-202) within he spied a lean young woman neatly dressed in a plain dark suit.

(014-203) With a lawn mower brought from home she was cutting the grass on her family

(014-204) lot. And she seemed to fit into the landscape. [[new-england|New England]] had grown very

(014-205) old.

(014-206) * * * * *

(014-207) Late one night toward the end of July, there came a loud honk from down the

(014-208) hill, then another and another. And as George in his pajamas came rushing

(014-209) from his bedroom shouting radiantly, "Gee! It's dad!"--they heard the car

(014-210) thundering outside. [[bruce|Bruce]] had left New York at dawn and had made the run in

(014-211) a single day, three hundred and eleven miles. He was gray with dust all

(014-212) over and he was worn and hollow eyed, but his dark visage wore a look of

(014-213) solid satisfaction.

(014-214) "I needed the trip to shake me down," he pleaded, when Edith scolded him

(014-215) well for this terrific manner of starting his vacation. "I had to have it

(014-216) to cut me off from the job I left behind me. Now watch me settle down on

(014-217) this farm."

(014-218) But it appeared he could not settle down. For the first few days, in his

(014-219) motor, he was busy exploring the mountains. "We'll make 'em look foolish.

(014-220) Eh, son?" he said. And with George, who mutely adored him, he ran all about

(014-221) them in a day. Genially he gave everyone rides. When he'd finished with the

(014-222) family, he took Dave Royce the farmer and his wife and children, and even

(014-223) both the hired men, for Bruce was an hospitable soul. But more than anyone

(014-224) else he took George. They spent hours working on the car, and at times when

(014-225) they came into the house begreased and blackened from their work, Edith

(014-226) reproved them like bad boys--but Deborah smiled contentedly.

(014-227) But at the end of another week Bruce grew plainly restless, and despite his

(014-228) wife's remonstrances made ready to return to town. When she spoke of his

(014-229) hay fever he bragged to her complacently of his newly discovered cure.

(014-230) "Oh, bother your little blue bugs!" she cried.

(014-231) "The bugs aren't blue," he explained to her, in a mild and patient voice

(014-232) that drove Edith nearly wild. "They're so little they have no color at all.

(014-233) Poor friendly little devils--"

(014-234) "Bruce!" his wife exploded.

(014-235) "They've been almighty good to me. You ought to have heard my friend the

(014-236) Judge, the last night I was with him. He patted his bottle and said to me,

(014-237) 'Bruce, my boy, with all these simple animals right here as our companions

(014-238) why be a damn fool and run off to the cows?' And there's a good deal in

(014-239) what he says. You ought to be mighty thankful, too, that my summer

(014-240) pleasures are so mild. If you could see what some chaps do--"

(014-241) And Bruce started back for the city. George rode with him the first few

(014-242) miles, then left him and came trudging home. His spirits were exceedingly

(014-243) low.

(014-244) As August drew toward a close, Deborah, too, showed signs of unrest. With

(014-245) ever growing frequency Roger felt her eagerness to return to her work in

(014-246) New York.

(014-247) "You're as bad as Bruce," he growled at her. "You don't have to be back,"

(014-248) he argued. "School doesn't begin for nearly three weeks."

(014-249) "There's the suffrage campaign," she answered. He gave her a look of

(014-250) exasperation.

(014-251) "Now what the devil has suffrage to do with your [[education|schools]]?" he demanded.

(014-252) "When the women get the vote, we'll spend more money on the children."

(014-253) "Suppose the money isn't there," was Roger's grim rejoinder.

(014-254) "Then we'll act like old-fashioned wives, I suppose," his daughter answered

(014-255) cheerfully, "and keep nagging till it is there. We'll keep up such a

(014-256) nagging," she added, in sweet even tones, "that you'll get the money by

(014-257) hook or crook, to save yourselves from going insane."

(014-258) After this he caught her reading in the New York papers the list of

(014-259) campaign meetings each night, meetings in hot stifling halls or out upon

(014-260) deafening corners. And as she read there came over her face a look like

(014-261) that of a man who has given up tobacco and suddenly sniffs it among his

(014-262) friends. She went down the last night of August.

(014-263) * * * * *

(014-264) Roger stayed on for another two weeks, on into the best time of the year.

(014-265) For now came the nights of the first snapping frosts when the dome of the

(014-266) heavens was steely blue, and clear sparkling mornings, the woods aflame

(014-267) with scarlet and gold. And across the small field below the house, at

(014-268) sunset Roger would go down to the copse of birches there and find it filled

(014-269) with glints of light that took his glance far in among the slender, creamy

(014-270) stems of the trees, all slowly swaying to and fro, the leafage rich with

(014-271) autumn hues, warm orange, yellow and pale green. Lovely and silent and

(014-272) serene. So it had been when he was a boy and so it would be when he was

(014-273) dead. Countless trees had been cut down but others had risen in their

(014-274) stead. Now and then he could hear a bird warbling.

(014-275) Long ago this spot had been his mother's favorite refuge from her busy day

(014-276) in the house. She had almost always come alone, but sometimes Roger

(014-277) stealing down would watch her sitting motionless and staring in among the

(014-278) trees. Years later in his reading he had come upon the phrase, "sacred

(014-279) grove," and at once he had thought of the birches. And sitting here where

(014-280) she had been, he felt again that boundless faith in life resplendent,

(014-281) conquering death, and serenely sweeping him on--into what he did not fear.

(014-282) For this had been his mother's faith. Sometimes in the deepening dusk he

(014-283) could almost see her sitting here.

(014-284) "This faith in you has come from me. This is my memory living on in you, my

(014-285) son, though you do not know. How many times have I held you back, how many

(014-286) times have I urged you on, roused you up or soothed you, made you hope or

(014-287) fear or dream, through memories of long ago. For you were once a part of

(014-288) me. I moulded you, my little son. And as I have been to you, so you will be

(014-289) to your children. In their lives, too, we shall be there--silent and

(014-290) invisible, the dim strong figures of the past. For this is the power of

(014-291) families, this is the mystery of birth."

(014-292) Suddenly he started. What was it that had thrilled him so? Only a tall dark

(014-293) fir in the birches. But looming in there like a shadowy phantom it had

(014-294) recalled a memory of a dusk far back in his boyhood, when seeing a shadow

(014-295) just like this he had thought it a ghost in very truth and had run for the

(014-296) house like a rabbit! How terribly real that fright had been! The

(014-297) recollection suddenly became so vivid in his mind, that as though a veil

(014-298) had been lifted he felt the living presence here, close by his side, of a

(014-299) small barefoot mountain lad, clothed in sober homespun gray, but filled

(014-300) with warm desires, dreams and curiosities, exploring upon every hand, now

(014-301) marching boldly forward, now stealing up so cautiously, now galloping away

(014-302) like mad! "I was once a child." To most of us these are mere words. To few

(014-303) is it ever given to attain so much as even a glimpse into the warm and

(014-304) quivering soul of that little stranger of long ago. We do not know how we

(014-305) were made.

(014-306) "I moulded you, my little son. And as I have been to you, so you will be to

(014-307) your children. In their lives, too, we shall be there."

(014-308) Darker, darker grew the copse and the chill of the night descended. But to

(014-309) Roger's eyes there was no gloom. For he had seen a vision.
