---
description: "On his return to the city, Roger found that Deborah's school had apparently"
id: ch15
label: "Chapter XV: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(015-001) On his return to [[new-york-city|the city]], [[roger-gale|Roger]] found that [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s school had apparently

(015-002) swept all other interests out of her mind. Baird hardly ever came to the

(015-003) [[home|house]], and she herself was seldom there except for a hasty dinner at night.

(015-004) The house had to run itself more or less; and though Annie the cook was

(015-005) doing her best, things did not run so smoothly. Roger missed little

(015-006) comforts, attentions, and he missed Deborah most of all. When he came down

(015-007) to his breakfast she had already left [[the-gale-home|the house]], and often she did not

(015-008) return until long after he was in bed. She felt the difference herself, and

(015-009) though she did not put it in words her manner at times seemed to beg his

(015-010) forbearance. But there were many evenings when her father found it

(015-011) difficult to hold to the resolve he had made, to go slowly with his

(015-012) daughter until he could be more sure of his ground. She was growing so

(015-013) intense again. From [[deborahs-school|the school]] authorities she had secured a still wider

(015-014) range and freedom for her new experiment, and she was working day and night

(015-015) to put her ideas into effect.

(015-016) "It's only too easy," she remarked, "to launch an idea in this town. The

(015-017) town will put it in headlines at once, and with it a picture of yourself in

(015-018) your best bib and tucker, looking as though you loved the whole world. And

(015-019) you can make a wonderful splurge, until they go on to the next new thing.

(015-020) The real trouble comes in working it out."

(015-021) And this she had set out to do. Many nights in the autumn Roger went down

(015-022) to the school, to try to get some clear idea of this vision of hers for

(015-023) [[childhood|children]], which in a vague way he could feel was so much larger than his

(015-024) own, for he had seen its driving force in the grip it had upon her life. At

(015-025) first he could make nothing of it at all; everywhere chaos met his eyes.

(015-026) But he found something formless, huge, that made to him a strong appeal.

(015-027) The big building fairly hummed at night with numberless activities.

(015-028) Fathers, mothers and children came pouring in together and went skurrying

(015-029) off to their places. They learned to speak English, to read and write;

(015-030) grown men and [[womens-roles|women]] scowled and toiled over their arithmetic. They worked

(015-031) at trades in the various shops; they hammered and sawed and set up type;

(015-032) they cooked and sewed and gossiped. "The Young Galician Socialist Girls"

(015-033) debated on the question: "Resolved that [[suffrage|woman suffrage]] has worked in

(015-034) Colorado." "The Caruso Pleasure Club" gave a dance to "The Garibaldi

(015-035) Whirlwinds." An orchestra rehearsed like mad. They searched their memories

(015-036) for the songs and all the folk tales they had heard in peasant huts in

(015-037) [[italy|Italy]], in hamlets along rocky coasts, in the dark old ghettos of crowded

(015-038) towns in Poland and in Russia. And some of these songs were sung in school,

(015-039) and some of these tales were dramatized here. Children and parents all took

(015-040) part. And speakers emerged from the neighborhood. It was at times

(015-041) appalling, the number of young Italians and Jews who had ideas to give

(015-042) forth to their friends on socialism, poverty, marriage and religion, and

(015-043) all the other questions that rose among these immigrants jammed into this

(015-044) tenement hive. But when there were too many of these self-appointed guides,

(015-045) the neighborhood shut down on them.

(015-046) "We don't [[poverty|want]]," declared one indignant old woman, "that every young loafer

(015-047) should shout in our face!"

(015-048) Roger was slowly attracted into this enormous [[family|family life]], and yielding to

(015-049) an impulse he took charge of a boys' club which met on Thursday evenings

(015-050) there. He knew well this job of fathering a small jovial group of lads; he

(015-051) had done it before, many years ago, in the mission school, to please his

(015-052) wife; he felt himself back on familiar ground. And from this point of

(015-053) vantage, with something definite he could do, he watched with an interest

(015-054) more clear the school form steadily closer ties with [[tenement-district|the tenements]] that

(015-055) hedged it 'round, gathering its big family. And this family by slow degrees

(015-056) began to make itself a part of the daily life of Roger's house. Committees

(015-057) held their meetings here, teachers dropped in frequently, and Roger invited

(015-058) the boys in his club to come up and see him whenever they liked.

(015-059) His most frequent visitor was [[johnny-geer|Johnny Geer]], the cripple. He was working in

(015-060) [[rogers-office|Roger's office]] now and the two had soon become close friends. John kept

(015-061) himself so neat and clean, he displayed such a keen interest in all the

(015-062) details of office [[work-and-vocation|work]], and he showed such a beaming appreciation of

(015-063) anything that was done for him.

(015-064) "That boy is getting a hold on me lately almost like a boy of my own,"

(015-065) Roger said one evening when [[allan-baird|Allan Baird]] was at the house. "He's the

(015-066) pluckiest young un I ever met. I've put him to work in my private office,

(015-067) where he can use the sofa to rest, and I've made him my own

(015-068) stenographer--partly because he's so quick at dictation and partly to try

(015-069) to make him slow down. He has the mind of a race horse. He runs at night to

(015-070) libraries until I should think he'd go insane. And his body can't stand it,

(015-071) he's breaking down--though whenever I ask him how he feels, he always says,

(015-072) 'Fine, thank you.'" Here Roger turned to Allan. "I wish you'd take the

(015-073) boy," he said, "to the finest specialist in town, and see what can be done

(015-074) for his spine. I'll pay any price."

(015-075) "There won't be any price," said Allan, "but I'll see to it at once."

(015-076) He had John examined the same week.

(015-077) "Well?" asked Roger when next they met.

(015-078) "Well," said Baird, "it isn't good news."

(015-079) "You mean he's hopeless?" Allan nodded:

(015-080) "It's [[disease|Pott's disease]], and it's gone too far. John is eighteen. He may live

(015-081) to be thirty."

(015-082) "But I tell you, Baird, I'll do anything!"

(015-083) "There's almost nothing you can do. If he had been taken when he was a

(015-084) baby, he might have been cured and given a chance. But the same mother who

(015-085) dropped him then, when she was full of liquor, just went to the druggist on

(015-086) her block, and after listening to his advice she bought some patent

(015-087) medicine, a steel jacket and some crutches, and thought she'd done her

(015-088) duty."

(015-089) "But there must be something we can do!" retorted Roger angrily.

(015-090) "Yes," said Baird, "we can make him a little more comfortable. And

(015-091) meanwhile we can help Deborah here to get hold of other boys like John and

(015-092) give 'em a chance before it's too late--keep them from being crippled for

(015-093) life because their mothers were too blind and ignorant to act in time."

(015-094) Baird's voice had a ring of bitterness.

(015-095) "Most of 'em [[love-and-courtship|love]] their children," Roger said uneasily. Baird turned on him

(015-096) a steady look.

(015-097) "Love isn't enough," he retorted. "The time is coming very soon when we'll

(015-098) have the right to guard the child not only when it's a baby but even before

(015-099) it has been born."

(015-100) Roger drew closer to John after this. Often behind the beaming smile he

(015-101) would feel the pain and loneliness, and the angry grit which was fighting

(015-102) it down. And so he would ask John home to supper on nights when nobody else

(015-103) was there. One day late in the afternoon they were walking home together

(015-104) along the west side of Madison Square. The big open space was studded with

(015-105) lights sparkling up at the frosty stars, in a city, a world, a universe

(015-106) that seemed filled with the zest and the vigor of life. Out of these lights

(015-107) a mighty tower loomed high up into the sky. And stopping on his crutches, a

(015-108) grim small crooked figure in all this rushing turmoil, John set his jaws,

(015-109) and with his shrewd and twinkling eyes fixed on the top of the tower, he

(015-110) said,

(015-111) "I meant to tell you, Mr. Gale. You was asking me once what I wanted to be.

(015-112) And I want to be an architect."

(015-113) "Do, eh," grunted Roger. He, too, looked up at that thing in the stars, and

(015-114) there was a tightening at his throat. "All right," he added, presently,

(015-115) "why not start in and be one?"

(015-116) "How?" asked John alertly.

(015-117) "Well, my boy," said Roger, "I'd hate to lose you in the office--"

(015-118) "Yes, sir, and I'd hate to go." Just then the big clock in the tower began

(015-119) to boom the hour, and a chill struck into Roger.

(015-120) "You'd have to," he said gruffly. "You haven't any time to lose! I mean,"

(015-121) he hastily added, "that for a job as big as that you'd need a lot of

(015-122) training. But if it's what you want to be, go right ahead. I'll back you.

(015-123) My son-in-law is a builder at present. I'll talk to him and get his advice.

(015-124) We may be able to arrange to have you go right into his office, begin at

(015-125) the bottom and work straight up." In silence for a moment John hobbled on

(015-126) by Roger's side.

(015-127) "I'd hate to leave your place," he said.

(015-128) "I know," was Roger's brusque reply, "and I'd hate to lose you. We'll have

(015-129) to think it over."

(015-130) A few days later he talked with [[bruce|Bruce]], who said he'd be glad to take the

(015-131) boy. And at dinner that night with Deborah, Roger asked abruptly,

(015-132) "Why not let Johnny come here for a while and use one of our empty

(015-133) bedrooms?"

(015-134) With a quick flush of pleased surprise, Deborah gave her father a look that

(015-135) embarrassed him tremendously.

(015-136) "Well, why not?" he snapped at her. "Sensible, isn't it?"

(015-137) "Perfectly."

(015-138) And sensible it turned out to be. When John first heard about it, he was

(015-139) apparently quite overcome, and there followed a brief awkward pause while

(015-140) he rapidly blinked the joy from his eyes. But then he said, "Fine, thank

(015-141) you. That's mighty good of you, Mr. Gale," in as matter of fact a tone as

(015-142) you please. And he entered the household in much the same way, for John had

(015-143) a sense of the fitness of things. He had always kept himself neat and

(015-144) clean, but he became immaculate now. He dined with Roger the first night,

(015-145) but early the next morning he went down to the kitchen and breakfasted

(015-146) there; and from this time on, unless he were especially urged to come up to

(015-147) the [[the-dining-room|dining room]], John took all his meals downstairs. The [[servants|maids]] were

(015-148) Irish--so was John. They were good Catholics--so was John. They loved the

(015-149) movies--so did John. In short, it worked out wonderfully. In less than a

(015-150) month John had made himself an unobtrusive and natural part of the life of

(015-151) Roger's sober old house. It had had to stretch just a little, no more.
