---
description: "But that winter there was more in the house than Deborah's big family."
id: ch16
label: "Chapter XVI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(016-001) But that winter there was more in [[the-gale-home|the house]] than [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s big family.

(016-002) Though at times [[roger-gale|Roger]] felt it surging in with its crude, immense vitality,

(016-003) there were other times when it was not so, and the lives of his other two

(016-004) daughters attracted his attention, for both were back again in town.

(016-005) [[laura-sloane|Laura]] and her husband had returned from [[europe|abroad]] in October, and in a small

(016-006) but expensive apartment in a huge new building facing on Park Avenue they

(016-007) had gaily started the [[work-and-vocation|career]] of their own little family, or "ménage," as

(016-008) Laura called it. This word had stuck in Roger's mind, for he had a

(016-009) suspicion that a "ménage" was no place for babies. Grimly, when he went

(016-010) there first to be shown the new [[family|home]] by its mistress, he looked about him

(016-011) for a room which might be made a nursery. But no such room was in evidence.

(016-012) "We decided to have no guest room," he heard Laura say to Deborah. And

(016-013) glancing at his daughter then, sleek and smiling and demure, in her

(016-014) tea-gown fresh from [[paris|Paris]], Roger darkly told himself that a child would be

(016-015) an unwelcome guest. The whole place was as compact and sparkling as a jewel

(016-016) box. The bed chamber was luxurious, with a gorgeous bath adjoining and a

(016-017) dressing-room for [[harold-sloane|Harold]].

(016-018) "And look at this [[love-and-courtship|love]] of a closet!" said Laura to Deborah eagerly. "Isn't

(016-019) it simply enormous?" As Deborah looked, her father did, too, and his eye

(016-020) was met by an array of shimmering apparel which made him draw back almost

(016-021) with a start.

(016-022) They found Harold in the pantry. Their Jap, it appeared, was a marvellous

(016-023) cook and did the catering as well, so that Laura rarely troubled herself

(016-024) to order so much as a single meal. But her husband had for many years been

(016-025) famous for his cocktails, and although the Jap did everything else Hal had

(016-026) kept this in his own hands.

(016-027) "I thought this much of the [[home|house]]-keeping ought to remain in the family,"

(016-028) he said.

(016-029) Roger did not like this joke. But later, when he had imbibed the delicious

(016-030) concoction Harold had made, and had eaten the dinner created by that

(016-031) Japanese artist of theirs, his irritation subsided.

(016-032) "They barely know we're here," he thought. "They're both in love up to

(016-033) their ears."

(016-034) Despite their genial attempts to be hospitable and friendly, time and again

(016-035) he saw their glances meet in an intimate gleaming manner which made him

(016-036) rather uncomfortable. But where was the harm, he asked himself. They were

(016-037) married all right, weren't they? Still somehow--somehow--no, by [[george-sidney|George]], he

(016-038) didn't like it, he didn't approve! The whole affair was decidedly mixing.

(016-039) Roger went away vaguely uneasy, and he felt that Deborah was even more

(016-040) disturbed than himself.

(016-041) "Those two," she remarked to her father, "are so fearfully wrapt up in each

(016-042) other it makes me afraid. Oh, it's all right, I suppose, and I wouldn't for

(016-043) worlds try to interfere. But I can't help feeling somehow that no two

(016-044) people with such an abundance of [[childhood|youth]] and money and happiness have the

(016-045) right to be so amazingly--selfish!"

(016-046) "They ought to have children," Roger said.

(016-047) "But look at [[edith-sidney|Edith]]," his daughter rejoined. "She hasn't a single interest

(016-048) that I can find outside her home. It seems to have swallowed her, body and

(016-049) soul." A frowning look of perplexity swept over Deborah's mobile face, and

(016-050) with a whimsical sigh she exclaimed, "Oh, this queer business of families!"

(016-051) In December there came a little crash. Late one evening Laura came bursting

(016-052) in upon them in a perfect tantrum, every [[courage|nerve]] in her lithe body tense,

(016-053) her full lips visibly quivering, her voice unsteady, and her big black eyes

(016-054) aflame with rage. She was jealous of her husband and "that nasty little

(016-055) cat!" Roger learned no more about it, for Deborah motioned him out of the

(016-056) room. He heard their two voices talk on and on, until Laura's slowly

(016-057) quieted down. Soon afterwards she left the house, and Deborah came in to

(016-058) him.

(016-059) "She's gone home, eh?" asked Roger.

(016-060) "Yes, she has, poor silly child--she said at first she had come here to

(016-061) stay."

(016-062) "By George," he said. "As bad as that?"

(016-063) "Of course it isn't as bad as that!" Deborah cried impatiently. "She just

(016-064) built and built on silly suspicions and let herself get all worked up! I

(016-065) don't see what they're coming to!" For a few moments nothing was said.

(016-066) "It's so unnatural!" she exclaimed. "Men and [[womens-roles|women]] weren't _made_ to live

(016-067) like that!" Roger scowled into his paper.

(016-068) "Better leave 'em alone," he admonished her. "You can't help--they're not

(016-069) your kind. Don't you mix into this affair."

(016-070) But Deborah did. She remembered that her sister had once shown quite a

(016-071) talent for amateur theatricals; and to give Laura something to do, Deborah

(016-072) persuaded her to take a dramatic club in her school. And Laura, rather to

(016-073) Roger's surprise, became an enthusiast down there. She worked like a slave

(016-074) at rehearsals, and upon the costumes she spent money with a lavish hand.

(016-075) Moreover, instead of being annoyed, as Edith was, at Deborah's prominence

(016-076) in the press, Laura gloried in it, as though this "radical" sister of hers

(016-077) were a distinct social asset among her giddy friends uptown. For even

(016-078) Laura's friends, her father learned with astonishment, had acquired quite

(016-079) an appetite for men and women with ideas--the more "radical," the better.

(016-080) But the way Laura used this word at times made Roger's blood run cold. She

(016-081) was vivid in her approval of her sister's whole idea, as a scheme of

(016-082) wholesale motherhood which would give "a perfectly glorious jolt" to the

(016-083) old-fashioned home with its overworked mothers who let their children

(016-084) absorb their days.

(016-085) "As though having children and bringing them up," she disdainfully

(016-086) declared, "were something every woman must do, whether she happens to like

(016-087) it or not, at the cost of any real growth of her own!"

(016-088) And smilingly she hinted at impending radical changes in the whole relation

(016-089) of marriage, of which she was hearing in detail at a series of lectures to

(016-090) young wives, delivered on Thursday mornings in a hotel ball-room.

(016-091) What the devil was getting into the town? Roger frowned his deep dislike.

(016-092) Here was Laura with her chicken's mind blithely taking her sister's

(016-093) thoughts and turning them topsy-turvy, to make for herself a view of life

(016-094) which fitted like a white kid glove her small and elegant "ménage." And

(016-095) although her father had only inklings of it all, he had quite enough to

(016-096) make him irate at this uncanny interplay of influences in his family. Why

(016-097) couldn't the girls leave each other alone?

(016-098) * * * * *

(016-099) Early in the winter, Edith, too, had entered in. It had taken Edith just

(016-100) one glance into the bride's apartment to grasp Laura's whole scheme of

(016-101) existence.

(016-102) "Selfish, indulgent and abnormal," was the way she described it. She and

(016-103) [[bruce|Bruce]] were dining with Roger that night. "I wash my hands of the whole

(016-104) affair," continued Edith curtly. "So long as she doesn't [[poverty|want]] my help, as

(016-105) she has plainly made me feel, I certainly shan't stand in her way."

(016-106) "You're absolutely right," said her father.

(016-107) "Stick to it," said Bruce approvingly.

(016-108) But Edith did not stick to it. In her case too, as the weeks wore on, those

(016-109) subtle family ties took hold and made her feel the least she could do was

(016-110) "to keep up appearances." So she and Bruce dined with the bride and groom,

(016-111) and in turn had them to dinner. And these dinners, as Bruce confided to

(016-112) Roger, were occasions no man could forget.

(016-113) "They come only about once a month," he said in a tone of pathos, "but it

(016-114) seems as though barely a week had gone by when Edith says to me again,

(016-115) 'We're dining with Laura and Hal to-night.' Well, and we dine. Young Sloane

(016-116) is not a bad sort of a chap--works hard [[downtown-new-york|downtown]] and worships his wife. The

(016-117) way he lives--well, it isn't mine--and mine isn't his--and we both let it

(016-118) go at that. But the women can't, they haven't it in 'em. Each sits with her

(016-119) way of life in her lap. You can't see it over the tablecloth, but, my God,

(016-120) how you feel it! The worst of it is," he ended, "that after one of these

(016-121) terrible meals each woman is more set than before in her own way of living.

(016-122) Not that I don't like Edith's way," her husband added hastily.

(016-123) Edith also disapproved of the fast increasing publicity which Deborah was

(016-124) getting.

(016-125) "I may be very old-fashioned," she remarked to her father, "but I can't get

(016-126) used to this idea that a woman's place is in headlines. And I think it's

(016-127) rather hard on you--the use she's making of your house."

(016-128) One Friday night when she came to play chess, she found her father in the

(016-129) midst of a boisterous special meeting of his club of [[italy|Italian]] boys. It had

(016-130) been postponed from the evening before. And though Roger, overcome with

(016-131) dismay at having forgotten Edith's night, apologized profusely, the

(016-132) time-honored weekly game took place no more from that day on.

(016-133) "Edith's pretty sore," said Bruce, who dropped in soon afterwards. "She

(016-134) says Deborah has made your house into an annex to her school."

(016-135) Roger smoked in silence. His whole family was about his ears.

(016-136) "My boy," he muttered earnestly, "you and I must stick together."

(016-137) "We sure must," agreed his son-in-law. "And what's more, if we're to keep

(016-138) the peace, we've got to try to put some punch into Deborah's so-called love

(016-139) affair. She ought to get married and settle down."

(016-140) "Yes," said Roger, dubiously. "Only let's keep it to ourselves."

(016-141) "No chance of that," was the cheerful reply. "You can't keep Edith out of

(016-142) it. It would only make trouble in _my_ family." Roger gave him a pitying

(016-143) look and said,

(016-144) "Then, for the Lord's sake, let her in!"

(016-145) So they took Edith into their councils, and she gave them an indulgent

(016-146) smile.

(016-147) "Suppose you leave this to me," she commanded. "Don't you think I've been

(016-148) using my eyes? There's no earthly use in stepping in now, for Deborah has

(016-149) lost her head. She sees herself a great new woman with a career. But wait

(016-150) till the present flare-up subsides, till the newspapers all drop her and

(016-151) she is thoroughly tired out. Until then, remember, we keep our hands off."

(016-152) "Do you think you can?" asked Roger, with a little glimmer of [[dream|hope]].

(016-153) "I?" she retorted. "Most certainly! I mean to leave her alone

(016-154) absolutely--until she comes to me herself. When she does, we'll know it's

(016-155) time to begin."

(016-156) * * * * *

(016-157) "I'm afraid Edith is hurt about something," said Deborah to her father,

(016-158) about a month after this little talk. "She hasn't been near us for over

(016-159) three weeks."

(016-160) "Let her be!" said Roger, in alarm. "I mean," he hastily added, "why can't

(016-161) you let Edith come when she likes? There's nothing the matter. It's simply

(016-162) her children--they take up her time."

(016-163) "No," said Deborah calmly, "it's I. She as good as told me so last month.

(016-164) She thinks I've become a perfect fanatic--without a spare moment or

(016-165) thought for my family."

(016-166) "Oh, my family!" Roger groaned. "I tell you, Deborah, you're wrong! Edith's

(016-167) children are probably sick in bed!"

(016-168) "Then I'll go and see," she answered.

(016-169) * * * * *

(016-170) "Something has happened to Deborah," Edith informed him blithely, over the

(016-171) telephone the next night.

(016-172) "Has, eh," grunted Roger.

(016-173) "Yes, she was here to see me to-day. And something has happened--she's

(016-174) changing fast. I felt it in all kinds of ways. She was just as dear as she

(016-175) could be--and lonely, as though she were feeling her age. I really think we

(016-176) can do something now."

(016-177) "All right, let's do something," Roger growled.

(016-178) And Edith began to do something. Her hostility to her sister had completely

(016-179) disappeared. In its place was a friendly affection, an evident desire to

(016-180) please. She even drew Laura into the secret, and there was a gathering of

(016-181) the clan. There were consultations in Roger's den. "Deborah is to get

(016-182) married." The feeling of it crept through the house. Nothing was said to

(016-183) her, of course, but Deborah was made to feel that her two sisters had drawn

(016-184) close. And their influence upon her choice was more deep and subtle than

(016-185) she knew. For although Roger's family had split so wide apart, between his

(016-186) three daughters there were still mysterious bonds reaching far back into

(016-187) nursery days. And Deborah in deciding whether to marry [[allan-baird|Allan Baird]] was

(016-188) affected more than she was aware by the married lives of her sisters. All

(016-189) she had seen in Laura's ménage, all that she had ever observed in Edith's

(016-190) growing family, kept rising from time to time in her thoughts, as she

(016-191) vaguely tried to picture herself a wife and the mother of children.

(016-192) So the family, with those subtle bonds from [[memory|the past]], began to press

(016-193) steadily closer and closer around this one unmarried daughter, and help her

(016-194) to make up her mind.
