---
description: "But she did not appear to care to be helped. Nor did Allan--he rarely came"
id: ch17
label: "Chapter XVII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(017-001) But she did not appear to care to be helped. Nor did [[allan-baird|Allan]]--he rarely came

(017-002) to [[the-gale-home|the house]], and he went to [[edith-sidney|Edith]]'s not at all. He was even absent from

(017-003) her Christmas tree for the [[childhood|children]], a jolly little festivity which neither

(017-004) he nor [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] had missed in years.

(017-005) "What has got into him?" [[roger-gale|Roger]] asked. And shortly after Christmas he called

(017-006) the fellow up on the 'phone. "Drop in for dinner to-night," he urged. And

(017-007) he added distinctly, "I'm alone."

(017-008) "Are you? I'll be glad to."

(017-009) "Thank you, Baird, I [[poverty|want]] your advice." And as he hung up the receiver he

(017-010) said, "Now then!" to himself, in a tone of firm decision. But later, as the

(017-011) day wore on, he cursed himself for what he had done. "Don't it beat the

(017-012) devil," he thought, "how I'm always putting my foot in it?" And when Baird

(017-013) came into the room that night he loomed, to Roger's anxious eye, if

(017-014) anything taller than before. But his manner was so easy, his gruff voice so

(017-015) natural, and he seemed to take this little party of two so quietly as a

(017-016) matter of course, that Roger was soon reassured, and at table he and Allan

(017-017) got on even better than before. Baird talked of his life as a student, in

(017-018) Vienna, Bonn and Edinburgh, and of his first struggles in [[new-york-city|New York]]. His

(017-019) talk was full of human bits, some tragic, more amusing. And Roger's liking

(017-020) for the man increased with every story told.

(017-021) "I asked you here," he bluntly began, when they had gone to the study to

(017-022) smoke, "to talk to you about Deborah." Baird gave him a friendly look.

(017-023) "All right. Let's talk about her."

(017-024) "It strikes me you were right last year," said Roger, speaking slowly.

(017-025) "She's already showing the strain of her [[work-and-vocation|work]]. She don't look to me as

(017-026) strong as she was."

(017-027) "She looks to me stronger," Allan replied. "You know, people fool doctors

(017-028) now and then--and she seems to have taken a fresh start. I feel she may go

(017-029) on for years." Roger was silent a moment, chagrined and disappointed.

(017-030) "Have you had a good chance to watch her?" he asked.

(017-031) "Yes, and I'm watching her still," said Baird. "I see her down there at the

(017-032) school. She tells me you've been there yourself."

(017-033) "Yes," said Roger, determinedly, "and I mean to keep on going. I'm trying

(017-034) not to lose hold of her," he added with harsh emphasis. Baird turned and

(017-035) frankly smiled at him.

(017-036) "Then you have probably seen," he replied, "that to keep any hold at all on

(017-037) her, you must make up your mind as I have done that, strength or no

(017-038) strength, this job of hers is going to be a life career. When a woman who

(017-039) has held a job without a break for eleven years can feel such a flame of

(017-040) enthusiasm, you can be pretty sure, I think, it is the deepest part of her.

(017-041) At least I feel that way," he said. "And I believe the only way to keep

(017-042) near her--for the present, anyhow--is to help her in her work."

(017-043) When Baird had gone, Roger found himself angry.

(017-044) "I'm not in the habit, young man," he thought, "of throwing my daughter at

(017-045) gentlemen's heads. If you feel as calm and contented as that you can go to

(017-046) the devil! Far be it from me to lift a hand! In fact, as I come to think of

(017-047) it, you would probably make her a mighty poor husband!" He worked himself

(017-048) into quite a rage. But an hour later, when he had subsided, "Hold on," he

(017-049) thought. "Am I right about this? Is the man as contented as he talks? No,

(017-050) sir, not for a minute he isn't! But what can he do? If he tried making [[love-and-courtship|love]]

(017-051) to Deborah he'd simply be killing his chances. Not the slightest doubt in

(017-052) the world. She can't think of anything but her career. Yes, sir, when all's

(017-053) said and done, to marry a modern woman is no child's play, it means thought

(017-054) and care. And A. Baird has made up his mind to it. He has made up his mind

(017-055) to marry her by playing a long waiting game. He's just slowly and quietly

(017-056) nosing his way into her school, because it's her life. And a mighty shrewd

(017-057) way of going about it. You don't need any help from me, my friend; all you

(017-058) need is to be let alone."

(017-059) In talks at [[family|home]] with Deborah, and in what he himself observed at school,

(017-060) Roger began to get inklings of "A. Baird's long waiting game." He found

(017-061) that several months before Allan had offered to start a free clinic for

(017-062) mothers and children in connection with [[deborahs-school|the school]], and that he alone had

(017-063) put it through, with only the most reluctant aid and gratitude from

(017-064) Deborah--as though she dreaded something. Baird took countless hours from

(017-065) his busy uptown practice; he hurt himself more than once, in fact, by

(017-066) neglecting rich patients to do this work. Where a sick or pregnant mother

(017-067) was too poor to carry out his advice, he followed her into her tenement

(017-068) home, sent one of his nurses to visit her, and even gave money when it was

(017-069) needed to ease the strain of her poverty until she should be well and

(017-070) strong. Soon scores of the mothers of Deborah's children were singing the

(017-071) praises of [[doctor|Doctor]] Baird.

(017-072) Then he began coming to the [[home|house]].

(017-073) "I was right," thought Roger complacently.

(017-074) He laid in a stock of fine cigars and some good port and claret, too; and

(017-075) on evenings when Baird came to dine, Roger by a genial glow and occasional

(017-076) jocular ironies would endeavor to drag the talk away from clinics,

(017-077) adenoids, children's teeth, epidemics and the new education. But no joke

(017-078) was so good that Deborah could not promptly match it with some amusing

(017-079) little thing which one of her children had said or done. For she had a

(017-080) mother's instinct for bragging fondly of her brood. It was deep, it was

(017-081) uncanny, this queer community motherhood.

(017-082) "This poor devil," Roger thought, with a pitying glance at Baird, "might

(017-083) just as well be marrying a widow with three thousand brats."

(017-084) But Baird did not seem in the least dismayed. On the contrary, his

(017-085) assurance appeared to be deepening every week, and with it Deborah's air of

(017-086) alarm. For his clinic, as it swiftly grew, he secured financial backing

(017-087) from his rich [[womens-roles|women]] patients uptown, many of them childless and only too

(017-088) ready to respond to the appeals he made to them. And one Saturday evening

(017-089) at the house, while dining with Roger and Deborah, he told of an offer he

(017-090) had had from a wealthy banker's widow to build a [[motherhood|maternity]] [[the-hospital|hospital]]. He

(017-091) talked hungrily of all it could do in co-operation with the school. He said

(017-092) nothing of the obvious fact that it would require his whole time, but Roger

(017-093) thought of that at once, and by the expression on Deborah's face he saw she

(017-094) was thinking, too.

(017-095) He felt they wanted to be alone, so presently he left them. From his study

(017-096) he could hear their voices growing steadily more intense. Was it all about

(017-097) work? He could not tell. "They've got working and living so mixed up, a man

(017-098) can't possibly tell 'em apart."

(017-099) Then his daughter was called to the telephone, and Allan came in to bid

(017-100) Roger good-night. And his eyes showed an impatience he did not seem to care

(017-101) to hide.

(017-102) "Well?" inquired Roger. "Did you get Deborah's consent?"

(017-103) "To what?" asked Allan sharply.

(017-104) "To your [[peace|acceptance]]," Roger answered, "of the widow's mite." Baird grinned.

(017-105) "She couldn't help herself," he said.

(017-106) "But she didn't seem to like it, eh--"

(017-107) "No," said Baird, "she didn't." Roger had a dark suspicion.

(017-108) "By the way," he asked in a casual tone, "what's this philanthropic widow

(017-109) like?"

(017-110) "She's sixty-nine," Baird answered.

(017-111) "Oh," said Roger. He smoked for a time, and sagely added, "My daughter's a

(017-112) queer woman, Baird--she's modern, very modern. But she's still a woman, you

(017-113) understand--and so she's jealous--of her job." But A. Baird was in no

(017-114) joking mood.

(017-115) "She's narrow," he said sternly. "That's what's the matter with Deborah.

(017-116) She's so centered on her job she can't see anyone else's. She thinks I'm

(017-117) doing all this work solely in order to help her school--when if she'd use

(017-118) some [[dream|imagination]] and try to put herself in my shoes, she'd see the chance

(017-119) it's giving _me_!"

(017-120) "How do you mean?" asked Roger, looking a bit bewildered.

(017-121) "Why," said Baird with an impatient fling of his hand, "there are men in my

(017-122) line all over the country who'd leave home, wives and children for the

(017-123) chance I've blundered onto here! A hospital fully equipped for research, a

(017-124) free hand, an opportunity which comes to one man in a million! But can she

(017-125) see it? Not at all! It's only an annex to her school!"

(017-126) "Yes," said Roger gravely, "she's in a pretty unnatural state. I think she

(017-127) ought to get married, Baird--" To his friendly and disarming twinkle Baird

(017-128) replied with a rueful smile.

(017-129) "You do, eh," he growled. "Then tell her to plan her [[marriage|wedding]] to come before

(017-130) her funeral." As he rose to go, Roger took his hand.

(017-131) "I'll tell her," he said. "It's sound advice. Good-night, my boy, I wish

(017-132) you luck."

(017-133) A few moments later he heard in the hall their brief good-nights to each

(017-134) other, and presently Deborah came in. She was not looking quite herself.

(017-135) "Why are you eyeing me like that?" his daughter asked abruptly.

(017-136) "Aren't you letting him do a good deal for you?"

(017-137) Deborah flushed a little:

(017-138) "Yes, I am. I can't make him stop."

(017-139) Her father hesitated.

(017-140) "You could," he said, "if you wanted to. If you were sure," he added

(017-141) slowly, "that you didn't love him--and told him so." He felt a little

(017-142) panic, for he thought he had gone too far. But his daughter only turned

(017-143) away and restlessly moved about the room. At last she came to her father's

(017-144) chair:

(017-145) "Hadn't you better leave this to me?"

(017-146) "I had, my dear, I most certainly had. I was all wrong to mention it," he

(017-147) answered very humbly.

(017-148) * * * * *

(017-149) From this night on, Baird changed his tack. Although soon busy with the

(017-150) plans for the hospital, to be built at once, he said little about it to

(017-151) Deborah. Instead, he insisted on taking her off on little evening sprees

(017-152) uptown.

(017-153) "Do you know what's the matter with both of us?" he said to her one

(017-154) evening. "We've been getting too durned devoted to our jobs and our ideals.

(017-155) You're becoming a regular school marm and I'm getting to be a regular slave

(017-156) to every wretched little babe who takes it into his head to be born. We

(017-157) haven't one redeeming vice."

(017-158) And again he took up dancing. The first effort which he made, down at

(017-159) Deborah's school one evening, was a failure quite as dismal as his attempts

(017-160) of the previous year. But he did not appear in the least discouraged. He

(017-161) came to the house one Friday night.

(017-162) "I knew I could learn to dance," he said, "in spite of all your taunts and

(017-163) jibes. That little fiasco last Saturday night--"

(017-164) "Was perfectly awful," Deborah said.

(017-165) "Did not discourage me in the least," he continued severely. "I decided the

(017-166) only trouble with me was that I'm tall and I've got to bend--to learn to

(017-167) bend."

(017-168) "Tremendously!"

(017-169) "So I went to a lady professor, and she saw the point at once. Since then

(017-170) I've had five lessons, and I can fox-trot in my sleep. To-morrow is

(017-171) Saturday. Where shall we go?"

(017-172) "To the theater."

(017-173) "Good. We'll start with that. But the minute the play is over we'll gallop

(017-174) off to the Plaza Grill--just as the music is in full swing--"

(017-175) "And we'll dance," she groaned, "for hours. And when I get home, I'll creep

(017-176) into bed so tired and sore in every limb--"

(017-177) "That you'll sleep late Sunday morning. And a mighty good thing for you,

(017-178) too--if you ask my advice--"

(017-179) "I don't ask your advice!"

(017-180) "You're getting it, though," he said doggedly. "If you're still to be a

(017-181) friend of mine we'll dance at the Plaza to-morrow night--and well into the

(017-182) Sabbath."

(017-183) "The principal of a public school--dancing on the Sabbath. Suppose one of

(017-184) my friends should see us there."

(017-185) "Your friends," he replied with a fine contempt, "do not dance in the Plaza

(017-186) Grill. I'm the only roisterer you know."

(017-187) "All right," she conceded grudgingly, "I'll roister. Come and get me. But

(017-188) I'd much prefer when the play is done to come home and have milk and

(017-189) crackers here."

(017-190) "Deborah," he said cheerfully, "for a radical school reformer you're the

(017-191) most conservative woman I know."
