---
description: "But there was a rugged practical side to the character of Roger Gale, and"
id: ch22
label: "Chapter XXII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(022-001) But there was a rugged practical side to the [[nature|character]] of [[roger-gale|Roger Gale]], and

(022-002) the next morning he was ashamed of the brooding thoughts which had come in

(022-003) the night. He shook them off as morbid, and resolutely set himself to what

(022-004) lay close before him. There was [[work-and-vocation|work]] to be done on [[bruce|Bruce]]'s affairs, and the

(022-005) work was a decided relief. [[madge-deering|Madge Deering]], in the meantime, had offered to

(022-006) go with [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and the [[childhood|children]] to [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]] and see them all well

(022-007) settled there. And a little talk he had with Madge relieved his mind still

(022-008) further. What a recovery _she_ had made from the tragedy of years ago. How

(022-009) alert and wide-awake she seemed. If Edith could only grow like that.

(022-010) Soon after their departure, one night when he was dining alone, he had a

(022-011) curious consciousness of the mingled presence of Edith and of [[judith-gale|Judith]] his

(022-012) wife. And this feeling grew so strong that several times he looked about in

(022-013) a startled, questioning manner. All at once his eye was caught by an old

(022-014) mahogany sideboard. It was Edith's. It had been her mother's. Edith, when

(022-015) she married, had wanted something from her old [[family|home]]. Well, now it was back

(022-016) in the family.

(022-017) The rest of Edith's furniture, he learned from [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] that night, had been

(022-018) stored in the top of [[the-gale-home|the house]].

(022-019) "Most of it," she told him, "Edith will probably [[poverty|want]] to use in fitting up

(022-020) the children's rooms." With a twinge of foreboding, Roger felt the

(022-021) approaching change in his home.

(022-022) "When do you plan to be married?" he asked.

(022-023) "[[About]] the end of August. We couldn't very well till then, without hurting

(022-024) poor Edith a little, you see. You know how she feels about such things--"

(022-025) "Yes, I guess you're right," he agreed.

(022-026) How everything centered 'round Edith, he thought. To pay the debts which

(022-027) Bruce had left would take all Roger had on hand; and from this time on his

(022-028) expenses, with five growing children here, would be a fast increasing

(022-029) drain. He would have to be careful and husband his strength, a thing he had

(022-030) always hated to do.

(022-031) In the next few weeks, he worked hard in [[rogers-office|his office]]. He cut down his

(022-032) smoking, stayed home every evening and went to bed at ten o'clock. He tried

(022-033) to shut Deborah out of his mind. As for [[laura-sloane|Laura]], he barely gave her a

(022-034) thought. She dropped in one evening to bid him good-bye, for this summer

(022-035) again she was going [[europe|abroad]]. She and her husband, she told him, were to

(022-036) motor through the Balkans and down into [[italy|Italy]]. Her father gruffly answered

(022-037) that he hoped she would enjoy herself. It seemed infernally unfair that it

(022-038) should not be Deborah who was sailing the next morning. But when he felt

(022-039) himself growing annoyed, abruptly he put a check on himself. It was Edith

(022-040) he must think of now.

(022-041) But curiously it happened, in this narrowing of his attention, that while

(022-042) he shut out two of his daughters, a mere outsider edged closer in.

(022-043) [[johnny-geer|Johnny Geer]] was a great help. He was back in Roger's office, and with the

(022-044) sharp wits he had gained in his eighteen years of fighting for a chance to

(022-045) stay alive, now at Roger's elbow John was watching like a hawk for all the

(022-046) little ways and means of pushing up the business. What a will the lad had

(022-047) to down bodily ills, what vim in the way he tackled each job. His shrewd

(022-048) and cheery companionship was a distraction and relief. John was so funny

(022-049) sometimes.

(022-050) "Good-morning, Mr. Gale," he said, as Roger came into the office one day.

(022-051) "Hello, Johnny. How are you?" Roger replied.

(022-052) "Fine, thank you." And John went on with his work of opening the morning's

(022-053) mail. But a few minutes later he gave a cackling little laugh.

(022-054) "What's so funny?" Roger asked.

(022-055) "Fellers," was the answer. "Fellers. Human nature. Here's a letter from

(022-056) Shifty Sam."

(022-057) "Who the devil is he? A friend of yours?"

(022-058) "No," said John, "he's a 'con man.' He works about as mean a graft as any

(022-059) you ever heard of. He reads the 'ads' in the papers--see?--of servant girls

(022-060) who're looking for work. He makes a specialty of cooks. Then he goes to

(022-061) where they live and talks of some nice family that wants a servant right

(022-062) away. He claims to be the butler, and he's dressed to look the part. 'There

(022-063) ain't a minute to lose,' he says. 'If you want a chawnce, my girl, come

(022-064) quick.' He says 'chawnce' like a butler--see? 'Pack your things,' he tells

(022-065) her, 'and come right along with me.' So she packs and hustles off with

(022-066) him--Sam carrying her suit case. He puts her on a trolley and says, 'I

(022-067) guess I'll stay on the platform. I've got a bit of a headache and the air

(022-068) will do me good.' So he stays out there with her suit case--and as soon as

(022-069) the car gets into a crowd, Sam jumps and beats it with her clothes."

(022-070) "I see," said Roger dryly. "But what's he writing _you_ about?"

(022-071) "Oh, it ain't me he's writing to--it's you," was John's serene reply. Roger

(022-072) started.

(022-073) "What?" he asked.

(022-074) "Well," said the boy in a cautious tone, vigilantly eyeing his chief, "you

(022-075) see, a lot of these fellers like Sam have been in the papers lately.

(022-076) They're being called a crime wave."

(022-077) "Well?"

(022-078) "Sam is up for trial this week--and half the Irish cooks in town are

(022-079) waiting 'round to testify. And Shifty seems to enjoy himself. His

(022-080) picture's in the papers--see? And he wants all the clippings. So he

(022-081) encloses a five dollar bill."

(022-082) "He does, eh--well, you write to Sam and send his money back to him!" There

(022-083) was a little silence.

(022-084) "But look here," said John with keen regret. "We've had quite a lot of

(022-085) these letters this week."

(022-086) Roger wheeled and looked at him.

(022-087) "John," he demanded severely, "what game have you been up to here?"

(022-088) "No game at all," was the prompt retort. "Just getting a little business."

(022-089) "How?"

(022-090) "Well, there's a club [[downtown-new-york|downtown]]," said John, "where a lot of these petty

(022-091) crooks hang out. I used to deliver papers there. And I went around one

(022-092) night this month--"

(022-093) "_To drum up business?_"

(022-094) "Yes, sir." Roger looked at him aghast.

(022-095) "John," he asked, in deep reproach, "do you expect this office to feed the

(022-096) vanity of thieves?"

(022-097) "Where's the vanity," John rejoined, "in being called a crime wave?" And

(022-098) seeing the sudden tremor of mirth which had appeared on Roger's face, "Look

(022-099) here, Mr. Gale," he went eagerly on. "When every paper in the town is

(022-100) telling these fellers where they belong--calling 'em crooks, degenerates,

(022-101) and preaching regular sermons right into their faces--why shouldn't we help

(022-102) 'em to read the stuff? How do we know it won't do 'em good? It's [[the-church|church]] to

(022-103) 'em, that's what it is--and business for this office. Nine of these guys

(022-104) have sent in their money just in the last week or so--"

(022-105) "Look out, my boy," said Roger, with slow and solemn emphasis. "If you

(022-106) aren't extremely careful you'll find yourself a millionaire."

(022-107) "But wait a minute, Mr. Gale--"

(022-108) "Not in this office," Roger said. "Send 'em back, every one of 'em!

(022-109) Understand?"

(022-110) "Yes, sir," was the meek reply. And with a little sigh of regret John

(022-111) turned his wits to other kinds and conditions of New Yorkers who might care

(022-112) to see themselves in print.

(022-113) As they worked together day by day, Roger had occasional qualms over

(022-114) leaving John here in the hot town while he himself went up to the

(022-115) mountains. He even thought of writing to Edith that he was planning to

(022-116) bring John, too. But no, she wouldn't like it. So he did something else

(022-117) instead.

(022-118) "John," he said, one morning, "I'm going to raise your salary to a hundred

(022-119) dollars a month." Instantly from the lad's bright eyes there shot a look of

(022-120) triumph.

(022-121) "Thanks, Mr. Gale," was his hearty response.

(022-122) "And in the meantime, Johnny, I want you to take a good solid month off."

(022-123) "All right, sir, thank you," John replied. "But I guess it won't be quite a

(022-124) month. I don't feel as if I needed it."

(022-125) The next day at the office he appeared resplendent in a brand-new suit of

(022-126) clothes, a summer homespun of light gray set off by a tie of flaming red.

(022-127) There was nothing soft about that boy. No, Johnny knew how to look out for

(022-128) himself.

(022-129) And Roger went up to the farm.
