---
description: "George met him at the station, as he had done a year before. But at once"
id: ch23
label: "Chapter XXIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(023-001) [[george-sidney|George]] met him at the station, as he had done a year before. But at once

(023-002) [[roger-gale|Roger]] noticed a difference. In the short time since his father's death

(023-003) certain lines had come in the boy's freckled face, and they gave him a

(023-004) thoughtful, resolute look. George's voice was changing. One moment it was

(023-005) high and boyish, again a deep and manly bass. As he kept his eyes on the

(023-006) horses and talked about his mother, his grandfather from time to time threw

(023-007) curious side glances.

(023-008) "Oh, yes," George was saying, "mother's all right, she's doing fine. It was

(023-009) pretty bad at first, though. She wouldn't let me sit up with her any--she

(023-010) treated me like a regular kid. But any fellow with any sense could see how

(023-011) she was feeling. She'd get thinking of the accident." George stopped short

(023-012) and clamped his jaws. "You know, my dad did a wonderful thing," he

(023-013) continued presently. "Even when he was [[death|dying]], and mother and I were there

(023-014) by his bed, he remembered how she'd get thinking alone--all about the

(023-015) accident. You see he knew mother pretty darned well. So he told her to

(023-016) remember that he was the one to blame for it. If it hadn't been for him, he

(023-017) said, they would have gone [[family|home]] in the taxi. That's a pretty good point to

(023-018) keep in her mind. Don't you think so?" he inquired. And Roger glanced

(023-019) affectionately into the anxious face by his side.

(023-020) "Yes," he said, "it's a mighty good point. Did you think of it?"

(023-021) "Yes, sir," George replied. "I've told it to her a good many times--that

(023-022) and two other points I thought of."

(023-023) "What are they, son?" asked Roger.

(023-024) "First," the boy said awkwardly, "about how good she was to him. And

(023-025) second, that she let him buy the new car before he died. He had such a lot

(023-026) of fun out of that car--"

(023-027) On the last words the lad's changing voice went from an impressive bass to

(023-028) a most undignified treble. He savagely scowled.

(023-029) "Those three points," he continued, in more careful measured tones, "were

(023-030) about all I could think of. I had to use 'em over and over--on mother when

(023-031) things got bad, I mean." A flush of embarrassment came on his face. "And

(023-032) hold her and kiss her," he muttered. Then he whipped his horses. "We've had

(023-033) some pretty bad times this month," he continued, loud and manfully. "You

(023-034) see, mother isn't so young as she was. She's well on in her thirties." A

(023-035) glimmer of amusement appeared in Roger's heavy eyes. "But she don't cry

(023-036) often any more, and with you here we'll pull her through." He shot a quick

(023-037) look at his grandfather. "Gee, but I'm glad you're here!" he said.

(023-038) "So am I," said Roger. And with a little pressure of his hand on George's

(023-039) shoulder, "I guess you've had about your share. Now tell me the news. How

(023-040) are things on [[new-hampshire-farm|the farm]]?"

(023-041) With a breath of evident relief, the lad launched into the animal world.

(023-042) And soon he was talking eagerly.

(023-043) * * * * *

(023-044) In the next few days with his daughter Roger found that George was right.

(023-045) She had been through the worst of it. But she still had her reactions, her

(023-046) spells of emptiness, bleak despair, her moods of fierce rebellion or of

(023-047) sudden self-reproach for not having given [[bruce|Bruce]] more while he lived. And in

(023-048) such hours her father tried to comfort her with poor success.

(023-049) "Remember, child, I'm with you, and I know how it feels," he said. "I went

(023-050) through it all myself: When your mother died--"

(023-051) "But mother was so much older!" He looked at his daughter compassionately.

(023-052) "How old are you?" he inquired.

(023-053) "Thirty-six."

(023-054) "Your mother was thirty-nine," he replied. And at that [[edith-sidney|Edith]] turned and

(023-055) stared at him, bewildered, shocked, brought face to face with a new and

(023-056) momentous fact in her life.

(023-057) "Mother only my age when she died?"

(023-058) "Yes," said Roger gently, "only three years older." With a twinge of pain

(023-059) he noticed two quite visible streaks of gray in his daughter's soft blonde

(023-060) hair. "And she felt as you do now--as though she were just starting out.

(023-061) And I felt the same way, my dear. If I'm not mistaken, everyone does. You

(023-062) still feel young--but the new generation is already growing up--and you can

(023-063) feel yourself being pushed on. And it is hard--it is very hard." Clumsily

(023-064) he took her hand. "Don't let yourself drop out," he said. "Be as your

(023-065) mother would have been if she had been left instead of me. Go straight on

(023-066) with your [[childhood|children]]."

(023-067) To this note he could feel her respond. And at first, as he felt what a

(023-068) fight she was making, Roger glorified her pluck. As he watched her with her

(023-069) children at table, smiling at their talk with an evident effort to enter

(023-070) in, and again with her baby snug in her lap while she read bedtime stories

(023-071) to Bob and little Tad at her side, he kept noticing the resemblance between

(023-072) his daughter and his wife. How close were these two members of his family

(023-073) drawing together now, one of them living, the other dead.

(023-074) But later, as the weeks wore on, she began to plan for her children. She

(023-075) planned precisely how to fit them all into [[the-gale-home|the house]] in town, she planned

(023-076) the hours for their meals, for their going alone or with the nurse or a

(023-077) maid to their different private [[education|schools]], to music lessons, to dancing

(023-078) school and uptown to the park to play. She planned their fall clothes and

(023-079) she planned their friends. And there came to her father occasional moods of

(023-080) [[fear|anxiety]]. He remembered Bruce's grim remarks about those "simple" schools

(023-081) and clothes, the kind that always cost the most. And he began to realize

(023-082) what Bruce's existence must have been. For scarcely ever in their talks did

(023-083) Edith speak of anything outside of her family. Night after night, with a

(023-084) tensity born of her struggle with her grief, she talked about her children.

(023-085) And Roger was in Bruce's place, he was the one she planned with. At moments

(023-086) with a vague dismay he glimpsed the life ahead in his home.

(023-087) George was hard at [[work-and-vocation|work]] each day down by the broken dam at the mill. He had

(023-088) an idea he could patch it up, put the old water-wheel back into place and

(023-089) make it run a dynamo, by which he could light the [[home|house]] and barn and run

(023-090) the machines in the dairy. In his new rôle as the man of his family, George

(023-091) was planning out his career. He was wrestling with a book entitled "Our New

(023-092) Mother Earth" and a journal called "The Modern Farm." And to Roger he

(023-093) confided that he meant to be a farmer. He wanted to go in the autumn to the

(023-094) State Agricultural College. But when one day, very cautiously, Roger spoke

(023-095) to Edith of this, with a hard and jealous smile which quite transformed her

(023-096) features, she said,

(023-097) "Oh, I know all about that, father dear. It's just a stage he's going

(023-098) through. And it's the same way with [[elizabeth-sidney|Elizabeth]], too, and her crazy idea of

(023-099) becoming a [[medicine|doctor]]. She took that from [[allan-baird|Allan Baird]], and George took his from

(023-100) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]! They'll get over it soon enough--"

(023-101) "They won't get over it!" Roger cried. "Their [[dream|dreams]] are parts of something

(023-102) new! Something I'm quite vague about--but some of it has come to stay!

(023-103) You're [[loss|losing]] all your chances--just as I did years ago! You'll never know

(023-104) your children!"

(023-105) But he uttered this cry to himself alone. Outwardly he only frowned. And

(023-106) Edith had gone on to say,

(023-107) "I do hope that Deborah won't come up this summer. She's been very good and

(023-108) kind, of course, and if she comes she'll be doing it entirely on my

(023-109) account. But I don't [[poverty|want]] her here--I want her to marry, the sooner the

(023-110) better, and come to her senses--be happy, I mean. And I wish you would tell

(023-111) her so."

(023-112) Within a few days after this Deborah wrote to her father that she was

(023-113) coming the next week. He said nothing to Edith about it at first, he had

(023-114) William saddled and went for a ride to try to determine what he should do.

(023-115) But it was a ticklish business. For [[womens-roles|women]] were queer and touchy, and once

(023-116) more he felt the working of those uncanny family ties.

(023-117) "Deborah," he reflected, "is coming up here because she feels it's selfish

(023-118) of her to stay away. If she marries at once, as she told me herself, she

(023-119) thinks Edith will be hurt. Edith won't be hurt--and if Deborah comes,

(023-120) there'll be trouble every minute she stays. But can I tell her so? Not at

(023-121) all. I can't say, 'You're not wanted here.' If I do, _she'll_ be hurt. Oh

(023-122) Lord, these girls! And Deborah knows very well that if she does get married

(023-123) this month, with [[laura-sloane|Laura]] [[europe|abroad]] and Edith up here and only me at the [[marriage|wedding]],

(023-124) Edith will smile to herself and say, 'Now isn't that just like Deborah?'"

(023-125) As Roger slowly rode along a steep and winding mountain road, gloomily he

(023-126) reflected to what petty little troubles a family of women could descend, so

(023-127) soon after death itself. And he lifted his eyes up to the hills and decided

(023-128) to leave this matter alone. If women would be women, let them settle their

(023-129) own affairs. Deborah was due to arrive on the following Friday evening. All

(023-130) right, let her come, he thought. She would soon see she was in the way, and

(023-131) then in a little affectionate talk he would suggest that she marry right

(023-132) off and have a decent honeymoon before [[deborahs-school|the school]] year opened.

(023-133) So he dismissed it from his mind. And as he listened in the dusk to the

(023-134) numberless murmuring voices of living creatures large and small which rose

(023-135) out of the valley, and as from high above him the serenity of the mountains

(023-136) there towering over thousands of years stole into his spirit, Roger had a

(023-137) large quieting sense of something high and powerful looking down upon the

(023-138) earth, a sense of all humanity honeycombed with millions upon millions of

(023-139) small sorrows, absorbing joys and hopes and fears, and in spite of them all

(023-140) the Great Life sweeping on, with no Great Death to check its course, no

(023-141) immense catastrophe, all these little troubles like mere tiny specks of

(023-142) foam upon the surface of the tide.

(023-143) Deborah's visit, the following week, was as he had expected. Within an hour

(023-144) after her coming he could feel the tension grow. Deborah herself was tense,

(023-145) both from the work she had left in [[new-york-city|New York]] where she was soon to have five

(023-146) schools, and from the thought of her marriage, only a few weeks ahead. She

(023-147) said nothing about it, however, until as a sisterly duty Edith tried to

(023-148) draw her out by showing an interest in her plans. But the cloud of Bruce's

(023-149) death was there, and Deborah shunned the topic. She tried to talk of the

(023-150) children instead. But Edith at once was on the defensive, vigilant for

(023-151) trouble, and as she unfolded her winter plans she grew distinctly brief and

(023-152) curt.

(023-153) "If Deborah doesn't see it now, she's a fool," her father told himself.

(023-154) "I'll just wait a few days more, and then we'll have that little talk."
