---
description: "It had rained so hard for the past two days that no one had gone to the"
id: ch24
label: "Chapter XXIV: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(024-001) It had rained so hard for [[memory|the past]] two days that no one had gone to the

(024-002) village, which was nearly three miles from [[new-hampshire-farm|the farm]]. But when the storm was

(024-003) over at last, [[george-sidney|George]] and [[elizabeth-sidney|Elizabeth]] tramped down and came back at dusk with

(024-004) a bag full of mail. Their clothes were mud-bespattered and they hurried

(024-005) upstairs to change before supper, while [[roger-gale|Roger]] settled back in his chair and

(024-006) spread open his [[new-york-city|New York]] paper. It was July 30, 1914.

(024-007) From a habit grown out of thirty odd years of business life, Roger read his

(024-008) paper in a fashion of his own. By instinct his eye swept the page for news

(024-009) dealing with individual men, for it was upon people's names in print that

(024-010) he had made his living. And so when he looked at this strange front page it

(024-011) gave him a swift twinge of alarm. For the news was not of men but of

(024-012) nations. Austria was massing her troops along the Serbian frontier, and

(024-013) Germany, [[italy|Italy]], Russia, [[france|France]] and even England, all were in a turmoil,

(024-014) with panics in their capitals, money markets going wild.

(024-015) [[edith-sidney|Edith]] came down, in her neat black dress with its narrow white collar,

(024-016) ready for supper. She glanced at her father.

(024-017) "Why, what's the matter?"

(024-018) "Look at this." And he tossed her a paper.

(024-019) "Oh-h-h," she murmured softly. "Oh, how frightful that would be." And she

(024-020) read on with lips compressed. But soon there came from a room upstairs the

(024-021) sudden cry of one of her [[childhood|children]], followed by a shrill wail of distress.

(024-022) And dropping the paper, she hurried away.

(024-023) Roger continued his reading.

(024-024) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] came. She saw the paper Edith had dropped, picked it up and sat

(024-025) down to read, and there were a few moments of absolute silence. Then Roger

(024-026) heard a quivering breath, and glancing up he saw Deborah's eyes, intent and

(024-027) startled, moving down the columns of print in a swift, uncomprehending way.

(024-028) "Pretty serious business," he growled.

(024-029) "It can't happen!" she exclaimed.

(024-030) And they resumed their reading.

(024-031) In the next three days, as they read the news, they felt war like a

(024-032) whirlpool sucking in all their powers to think or feel, felt their own

(024-033) small personal plans whirled about like leaves in a storm. And while their

(024-034) minds--at first dazed and stunned by the thought of such appalling armies,

(024-035) battles, death and desolation--slowly cleared and they strove to think, and

(024-036) Roger thought of business shivered to atoms in every land, and Deborah

(024-037) thought of [[education|schools]] by thousands all over [[europe|Europe]] closing down, in cities and

(024-038) in villages, in valleys and on mountain sides, of homes in panic

(024-039) everywhere, of all ideals of brotherhood shaken, bending, tottering--war

(024-040) broke out in Europe.

(024-041) "What is this going to mean to me?"

(024-042) Millions of people were asking that. And so did Roger and Deborah. The same

(024-043) night they left for New York, while Edith with a sigh of relief settled

(024-044) back into her family.

(024-045) * * * * *

(024-046) The next morning at [[rogers-office|his office]] Roger found John waiting with misery stamped

(024-047) on his face. John had paid small heed to war. Barely stopping for sleep in

(024-048) the last two days he had gone through scores and hundreds of papers,

(024-049) angrily skipping all those names of kings and emperors and czars, and

(024-050) searching instead for [[america|American]] names, names of patrons--business! Gone!

(024-051) Each hour he had been opening mail and piling up letters cancelling

(024-052) contracts, ordering service discontinued.

(024-053) Roger sat down at his desk. As he worked and figured and dictated letters,

(024-054) glancing into the outer rooms he saw the long rows of girls at tables

(024-055) obviously trying to pretend that there was [[work-and-vocation|work]] for them to do. He felt

(024-056) them anxiously watching him--as in other offices everywhere millions of

(024-057) other employees kept furtively glancing at their chiefs.

(024-058) "[[war|War]]," he thought. "Shall I close _down?_" He shrank from what it would

(024-059) mean to those girls. "[[business|Business]] will pick up again soon. A few

(024-060) days--weeks--that's all I need."

(024-061) And he went to his bank. No credit there. He tried other sources, all he

(024-062) could think of, racking his brains as he went about town, but still he

(024-063) could not raise a loan. Finally he went to the firm which had once held a

(024-064) mortgage on his [[home|house]]. The chief partner had been close to [[bruce|Bruce]], an old

(024-065) college friend. And when even this friend refused him aid, "It's a question

(024-066) of Bruce's children," Roger muttered, reddening. He felt like a beggar, but

(024-067) he was getting desperate. The younger man had looked away and was nervously

(024-068) tapping his desk with his pen.

(024-069) "Bad as that, eh," he answered. "Then I guess it's got to be done." He

(024-070) looked anxiously up at Roger, who just at that moment appeared very old.

(024-071) "Don't worry, Mr. Gale," he said. "Somehow or other we'll carry you

(024-072) through."

(024-073) "Thank you, sir." Roger rose heavily, feeling weak, and took his departure.

(024-074) "This is war," he told himself, "and I've got to look after my own."

(024-075) But he had a sensation almost of guilt, as upon his return to his office he

(024-076) saw those suddenly watchful faces. He walked past them and went into his

(024-077) room, and again he searched for ways and means. He tried to see his

(024-078) business as it would be that autumn, to see the city, the nation, the world

(024-079) as it would be in the months ahead. Repeatedly he fought off his fears.

(024-080) But slowly and inexorably the sense of his helplessness grew clear.

(024-081) "No, I must shut down," he thought.

(024-082) * * * * *

(024-083) On his way [[family|home]] that evening, in a crush at a turbulent corner he saw a big

(024-084) truck jam into a taxi, and with a throb of rebellion he thought of his

(024-085) son-in-law who was dead. Just the turn of a hair and Bruce might have lived

(024-086) and been here to look after the children! At the prospect of the crisis,

(024-087) the strain he saw before him, Roger again felt weak and old. He shook off

(024-088) his [[fear|dread]] and strode angrily on.

(024-089) In his house, the rooms downstairs were still dismantled for the summer.

(024-090) There was emptiness and silence but no serenity in them now, only the quiet

(024-091) before the storm which he could feel from far and near was gathering about

(024-092) his home. He heard Deborah on the floor above, and went up and found her

(024-093) making his bed, for the chambermaid had not yet come. Her voice was a

(024-094) little unnatural.

(024-095) "It has been a hard day, hasn't it. I've got your bath-room ready," she

(024-096) said. "Don't you [[poverty|want]] a nice cool bath? Supper will be ready soon."

(024-097) When, a half hour later, somewhat refreshed, Roger came down to the table,

(024-098) he noticed it was set for two.

(024-099) "Isn't [[allan-baird|Allan]] coming?" he asked. Her mobile features tightened.

(024-100) "Not till later," she replied.

(024-101) They talked little and the meal was short. But afterwards, on the wooden

(024-102) porch, Deborah turned to her father,

(024-103) "Now tell me about your office," she said.

(024-104) "There's not enough business to pay the rent."

(024-105) "That won't last--"

(024-106) "I'm not so sure."

(024-107) "I am," she said determinedly. Her father slowly turned his head.

(024-108) "Are you, with this war?" he asked. Her eyes met his and moved away in a

(024-109) baffled, searching manner. "She has troubles of her own," he thought.

(024-110) "How much can we run [[the-gale-home|the house]] on, Deborah?" he asked her. At first she did

(024-111) not answer. "What was it--about six thousand last year?"

(024-112) "I think so," she said restlessly. "We can cut down on that, of course--"

(024-113) "With Edith and the children here?"

(024-114) "Edith will have to manage it! There are others to be thought of!"

(024-115) "The children in your schools, you mean."

(024-116) "Yes," she answered with a frown. "It will be a bad year for [[tenement-district|the tenements]].

(024-117) But please go on and tell me. What have you thought of doing?"

(024-118) "Mortgage the house again," he replied. "It hasn't been easy, for money is

(024-119) tight, but I think I'll be able to get enough to just about carry us

(024-120) through the year. At home, I mean," he added.

(024-121) "And the office?"

(024-122) "Shut down," he said. She turned on him fiercely.

(024-123) "You won't do that!"

(024-124) "What else can I do?"

(024-125) "Turn all those girls away?" she cried. At her tone his look grew troubled.

(024-126) "How can I help myself, Deborah? If I kept open it would cost me over five

(024-127) hundred a week to run. Have I five hundred dollars a week to lose?"

(024-128) "But I tell you it won't last!" she cried, and again the baffled, driven

(024-129) expression swept over her expressive face. "Can't you see this is only a

(024-130) panic--and keep going somehow? Can't you see what it means to the

(024-131) tenements? Hundreds of thousands are out of work! They're being turned off

(024-132) every day, every hour--employers all over are [[loss|losing]] their heads! And City

(024-133) Hall is as mad as the rest! They've decided already down there to

(024-134) retrench!"

(024-135) He turned with a quick jerk of his head:

(024-136) "Are they cutting you down?" She set her teeth:

(024-137) "Yes, they are. But the work in my schools is going on--every bit of it

(024-138) is--for every child! I'm going to find a way," she said. And he felt a

(024-139) thrill of compassion.

(024-140) "I'm sorry to hear it," he muttered.

(024-141) "You needn't be." She paused a moment, smiled and went on in a quieter

(024-142) voice: "Don't think I'm blind--I'm sensible--I see you can't lose five

(024-143) hundred a week. But why not try what other employers, quite a few, have

(024-144) decided to do? Call your people together, explain how it is, and ask them

(024-145) to choose a committee to help you find which ones need jobs the most. Keep

(024-146) all you can--on part time, of course--but at least pay them something,

(024-147) carry them through. You'll lose money by it, I haven't a doubt. But you've

(024-148) already found you can mortgage the house, and remember besides that I shall

(024-149) be here. I'm not going to marry now"--her father looked at her

(024-150) quickly--"and of course I'll expect to do my share toward meeting the

(024-151) expenses. Moreover, I know we can cut down."

(024-152) "Retrench," said Roger grimly. "Turn off the servants instead of the

(024-153) clerks."

(024-154) "No, only one of them, Martha upstairs--and she is to be married. We'll

(024-155) keep the cook and the waitress. Edith will have to give up her nurse--and

(024-156) it will be hard on her, of course--but she'll have to realize this is war,"

(024-157) Deborah said sharply. "Besides," she urged, "it's not going to last.

(024-158) Business everywhere will pick up--in a few weeks or months at most. The war

(024-159) _can't_ go on--it's too horribly big!" She broke off and anxiously looked

(024-160) at him. Her father was still frowning.

(024-161) "I'm asking you to risk a good deal," she continued, her voice intense and

(024-162) low. "But somehow, dearie, I always feel that this old house of ours is

(024-163) strong. It can _stand_ a good deal. We can all of us stand so much, as soon

(024-164) as we know we have to." The lines of her wide sensitive mouth tightened

(024-165) firmly once again. "It's all so vague and uncertain, I know. But one thing

(024-166) at least is sure. This is no time for people with money--no matter how

(024-167) little--to shut themselves up in their own little houses and let the rest

(024-168) starve or beg or steal. This is the time to do our share."

(024-169) And she waited. But he made no reply.

(024-170) "Every nation at war is doing it, dad--become like one big family--with

(024-171) everyone helping, doing his share. Must a nation be at war to do that?

(024-172) Can't we be brothers without the guns? Can't you see that we're all of us

(024-173) stunned, and trying to see what war will mean to all the children in the

(024-174) world? And while we're groping, groping, can't we give each other a hand?"

(024-175) Still he sat motionless there in the dark. At last he stirred heavily in

(024-176) his chair.

(024-177) "I guess you're right," he told her. "At least I'll think it over--and try

(024-178) to work out something along the lines you spoke of."

(024-179) Again there was a silence. Then his daughter turned to him with a little

(024-180) deprecating smile.

(024-181) "You'll forgive my--preaching to you, dad?"

(024-182) "No preaching," he said gruffly. "Just ordinary common sense."

(024-183) * * * * *

(024-184) A little later Allan came in, and Roger soon left them and went to bed.

(024-185) Alone with Baird she was silent a moment.

(024-186) "Well? Have you thought it over?" she asked. "Wasn't I right in what I

(024-187) said?" At the anxious ring in her low clear voice, leaning over he took her

(024-188) hand; and he felt it hot and trembling as it quickly closed on his. He

(024-189) stroked it slowly, soothingly. In the semi-darkness he seemed doubly tall

(024-190) and powerful.

(024-191) "Yes, I'm sure you were right," he said.

(024-192) "Spring at the latest--I'll marry you then--"

(024-193) Her eyes were intently fixed on his.

(024-194) "Come here!" she whispered sharply, and Baird bent over and held her

(024-195) tight. "Tighter!" she whispered. "Tighter!... There!... I said, spring at

(024-196) the latest! I can't lose you, Allan--now--"

(024-197) She suddenly quivered as though from fatigue.

(024-198) "I'm going to watch you close down there," he said in a moment, huskily.
