---
description: "It was only a few days later that Edith arrived with her children."
id: ch26
label: "Chapter XXVI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(026-001) It was only a few days later that [[edith-sidney|Edith]] arrived with her [[childhood|children]].

(026-002) [[roger-gale|Roger]] met her at the train at eight o'clock in the evening. The fast

(026-003) mountain express of the summer had been taken off some time before, so

(026-004) Edith had had to be up at dawn and to change cars several times on the

(026-005) trip. "She'll be worn out," he thought as he waited. The train was late. As

(026-006) he walked about the new station, that monstrous sparkling hive of travel

(026-007) with its huge halls and passageways, its little village of shops

(026-008) underground and its bewildering levels for trains, he remembered the

(026-009) interest [[bruce|Bruce]] had shown in watching this immense puzzle worked out, the

(026-010) day and night [[work-and-vocation|labor]] year after year without the stopping of a train, this

(026-011) mighty symbol of the times, of all the glorious power and speed in an age

(026-012) that had been as the breath to his nostrils. How Bruce had loved [[new-york-city|the city]]!

(026-013) As Roger paced slowly back and forth with his hands clasped behind his

(026-014) back, there came over his heavy visage a look of affection and regret which

(026-015) made even New Yorkers glance at him as they went nervously bustling by.

(026-016) From time to time he smiled to himself. "The Catskills will be Central

(026-017) Park! All this city needs is speed!"

(026-018) But suddenly he remembered that Bruce had always been here before to meet

(026-019) his wife and children, and that Edith on her approaching train must be

(026-020) dreading her arrival. And when at last the train rolled in, and he spied

(026-021) her shapely little head in the on-coming throng of travellers, Roger saw by

(026-022) her set steady smile and the strained expression on her face that he had

(026-023) guessed right. With a quick surge of compassion he pressed forward, kissed

(026-024) her awkwardly, squeezed her arm, then hastily greeted the children and

(026-025) hurried away to see to the trunks. That much of it was over. And to his

(026-026) relief, when they reached [[the-gale-home|the house]], Edith busied herself at once in

(026-027) helping the nurse put the children to bed. Later he came up and told her

(026-028) that he had had a light supper prepared.

(026-029) "Thank you, dear," she answered, "it was so thoughtful in you. But I'm too

(026-030) tired to eat anything." And then with a little assuring smile, "I'll be all

(026-031) right--I'm going to bed."

(026-032) "Good-night, child, get a fine long sleep."

(026-033) And Roger went down to his study, feeling they had made a good start.

(026-034) * * * * *

(026-035) "What has become of Martha?" Edith asked her father at breakfast the next

(026-036) morning.

(026-037) "She left last month to be married," he said.

(026-038) "And [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] hasn't replaced her yet?" In her voice was such a readiness

(026-039) for hostility toward her sister, that Roger shot an uneasy glance from

(026-040) under his thick grayish brows.

(026-041) "Has Deborah left the [[home|house]]?" he asked, to gain time for his answer.

(026-042) Edith's small lip slightly curled.

(026-043) "Oh, yes, long ago," she replied. "She had just a moment to see the

(026-044) children and then she had to be off to school--to her office, I mean. With

(026-045) so many [[education|schools]] on her hands these days, I don't wonder she hasn't had time

(026-046) for the servants."

(026-047) "No, no, you're mistaken," he said. "That isn't the trouble, it's not her

(026-048) fault. In fact it was all my idea."

(026-049) "_Your_ idea," she retorted, in an amused affectionate tone. And Roger

(026-050) grimly gathered himself. It would he extremely difficult breaking his

(026-051) unpleasant news.

(026-052) "Yes," he answered. "You see this damnable war [[europe|abroad]] has hit me in my

(026-053) business."

(026-054) "Oh, father! How?" she asked him. In an instant she was all alert. "You

(026-055) don't mean seriously?" she said.

(026-056) "Yes, I do," he answered, and he began to tell her why. But she soon grew

(026-057) impatient. [[business|Business]] details meant nothing to Edith. "I see," she kept

(026-058) saying, "yes, yes, I see." She wanted him to come to the point.

(026-059) "So I've had to mortgage the house," he concluded. "And for very little

(026-060) money, my dear. And a good deal of that--" he cleared his throat--"had to

(026-061) go back into the business."

(026-062) "I see," said Edith mechanically. Her mind was already far away, roving

(026-063) over her plans for the children. For in Roger's look of suspense she

(026-064) plainly read that other plans had been made for them in her absence.

(026-065) "Deborah's in this!" flashed through her mind. "Tell me what it will mean,"

(026-066) she said.

(026-067) "I'm afraid you'll have to try to do without your nurse for a while."

(026-068) "Let [[hannah|Hannah]] go? Oh, father!" And Edith flushed with quick dismay. "How can

(026-069) I, dad? Five children--five! And two of them so little they can't even

(026-070) dress themselves alone! And there are all their meals--their baths--and the

(026-071) older ones going uptown to school! I can't let them go way uptown on the

(026-072) 'bus or the trolley without a maid--"

(026-073) "But, Edith!" he interrupted, his face contracting with distress. "Don't

(026-074) you see that they can't go to school?" She turned on him. "Uptown, I mean,

(026-075) to those expensive private schools."

(026-076) "Father!" she demanded. "Do you mean you [[poverty|want]] my children to go to common

(026-077) public schools?" There was rage and amazement upon her pretty countenance,

(026-078) and with it an instant certainty too. Yes, this was Deborah's planning! But

(026-079) Roger thought that Edith's look was all directed at himself. And for the

(026-080) first time in his life he felt the shame and humility of the male provider

(026-081) no longer able to provide. He reddened and looked down at his plate.

(026-082) "You don't understand," he said. "I'm strapped, my child--I can't help

(026-083) it--I'm poor."

(026-084) "Oh. Oh, dad. I'm sorry." He glanced up at his daughter and saw tears

(026-085) welling in her eyes. How utterly miserable both of them were.

(026-086) "It's [[the-great-war|the war]]," he said harshly and proudly. This made a difference to his

(026-087) pride, but not to his daughter's [[fear|anxiety]]. She was not interested in the

(026-088) war, or in any other cause of the abyss she was facing. She strove to think

(026-089) clearly what to do. But no, she must do her thinking alone. With a sudden

(026-090) quiet she rose from the table, went around to her father's chair and kissed

(026-091) him very gently.

(026-092) "All right, dear--I see it all now--and I promise I'll try my best," she

(026-093) said.

(026-094) "You're a brave little woman," he replied.

(026-095) But after she had gone, he reflected. Why had he called her a brave little

(026-096) woman? Why had it all been so intense, the talk upon so heroic a plane? It

(026-097) would be hard on Edith, of course; but others were doing it, weren't they?

(026-098) Think of the [[womens-roles|women]] in Europe these days! After all, she'd be very

(026-099) comfortable here, and perhaps by Christmas times would change.

(026-100) He shook off these petty troubles and went to [[rogers-office|his office]] for the day.

(026-101) * * * * *

(026-102) As she busied herself unpacking the trunks, Edith strove to readjust her

(026-103) plans. By noon her head was throbbing, but she took little notice of that.

(026-104) She had a talk with Hannah, the devoted Irish girl who had been with her

(026-105) ever since [[george-sidney|George]] was born. It was difficult, it was brutal. It was almost

(026-106) as though in Edith's family there had been two mothers, and one was sending

(026-107) the other away.

(026-108) "There, there, poor child," Edith comforted her, "I'll find you another

(026-109) nice family soon where you can stay till I take you back. Don't you see it

(026-110) will not be for long?" And Hannah brightened a little.

(026-111) "But how in the wide wurrld," she asked, "will you ever do for the

(026-112) children, me gone?"

(026-113) "Oh, I'll manage," said Edith cheerfully. And that afternoon she began at

(026-114) once to rearrange her whole intricate schedule, with Hannah and school both

(026-115) omitted, to fit her children into the house. But instead of this, as the

(026-116) days wore on, [[courage|nerve]]-racking days of worry and toil, sternly and quite

(026-117) unconsciously she fitted the house to her children. And nobody made her

(026-118) aware of the fact. All summer long in [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]], everyone by tacit

(026-119) consent had made way for her, had deferred to her [[death|grief]] in the little

(026-120) things that make up the everyday life in a [[family|home]]. And to this precedent once

(026-121) established Edith now clung unawares.

(026-122) Her new day gave her small time to think. It began at five in the morning,

(026-123) when Roger was awakened by the gleeful cries of the two wee boys who slept

(026-124) with their mother in the next room, the room which had been Deborah's. And

(026-125) Edith was busy from that time on. First came the washing and dressing and

(026-126) breakfast, which was a merry, boisterous meal. Then the baby was taken out

(026-127) to his carriage on the porch at the back of the house. And after that, in

(026-128) her father's study from which he had fled with his morning cigar, for two

(026-129) hours Edith held school for her children, trying her best to be patient and

(026-130) clear, with text-books she had purchased from their former schools uptown.

(026-131) For two severe hours, shutting the world all out of her head, she tried to

(026-132) teach them about it. At eleven, their nerves on edge like her own, she sent

(026-133) them outdoors "to play," intrusting the small ones to [[betsy|Betsy]] and George, who

(026-134) took them to [[washington-square|Washington Square]] nearby with strict injunctions to keep them

(026-135) away from all other children. No doubt there were "nice" children there,

(026-136) but she herself could not be along to distinguish the "nice" from the

(026-137) "common"--for until one o'clock she was busy at home, bathing the baby and

(026-138) making the beds, and then hurrying to the kitchen to pasteurize the baby's

(026-139) milk and keep a vigilant oversight on the cooking of the midday meal. And

(026-140) the old cook's growing resentment made it far from easy.

(026-141) After luncheon, thank heaven, came their naps. And all afternoon, while

(026-142) again they went out, Edith would look over their wardrobes, mend and alter

(026-143) and patch and contrive how to make last winter's clothes look new. At times

(026-144) she would drop her work in her lap and stare wretchedly before her. This

(026-145) was what she had never known; this was what made life around her grim and

(026-146) hard, relentless, frightening; this was what it was to be poor. How it

(026-147) changed the whole city of New York. Behind it, the sinister cause of it

(026-148) all, she thought confusedly now and then of the Great Death across the sea,

(026-149) of the armies, smoking battle-fields, the shrieks of the dying, the

(026-150) villages blazing, the women and children flying away. But never for more

(026-151) than a moment. The war was so remote and dim. And soon she would turn back

(026-152) again to her own beloved children, whose lives, so full of happiness, so

(026-153) rich in promise hitherto, were now so cramped and thwarted. Each day was

(026-154) harder than the last. It was becoming unbearable!

(026-155) No, they must go back to school. But how to manage it? How? How? It would

(026-156) cost eight hundred dollars, and this would take nearly all the money she

(026-157) would be able to secure by the sale of her few possessions. And then what?

(026-158) What of [[disease|sickness]], and the other contingencies which still lay ahead of her?

(026-159) How old her father seemed, these days! In his heavy shock of hair the

(026-160) flecks of white had doubled in size, were merging one into the other, and

(026-161) his tall, stooping, massive frame had lost its look of ruggedness. Suppose,

(026-162) suppose.... Her breath came fast. Was his life insured, she wondered.

(026-163) On such afternoons, in the upstairs room as the dusk crept in and

(026-164) deepened, she would bend close to her sewing--planning, planning, planning.

(026-165) At last she would hear the children trooping merrily into the house. And

(026-166) making a very real effort, which at times was in truth heroic, to smile,

(026-167) she would rise and light the gas, would welcome them gaily and join in

(026-168) their chatter and bustle about on the countless tasks of washing them,

(026-169) getting their suppers, undressing the small ones and hearing their prayers.

(026-170) With smiling good-night kisses she would tuck her two babies into their

(026-171) cribs. Afterward, just for a moment or two, she would linger under the gas

(026-172) jet, her face still smiling, for a last look. A last good-night. Then

(026-173) darkness.

(026-174) Darkness settling over her spirit, together with loneliness and fatigue.

(026-175) She would go into Betsy's room and throw herself dressed on her daughter's

(026-176) bed, and a dull complete indifference to everything under the moon and the

(026-177) stars would creep from her body up into her mind. At times she would try to

(026-178) fight it off. To-night at dinner she must not be what she knew she had been

(026-179) the night before, a wet blanket upon all the talk. But if they only knew

(026-180) how hard it was--what a perfect--hell it was! Her breath coming faster, she

(026-181) would dig her nails into the palms of her hands. One night she noticed and

(026-182) looked at her hand, and saw the skin was actually cut and a little blood

(026-183) was appearing. She had read of women doing this, but she had never done it

(026-184) before--not even when her babies were born. She had gripped Bruce's hand

(026-185) instead.
