---
description: "Roger found her like that one evening. He heard what he thought was a sob"
id: ch27
label: "Chapter XXVII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(027-001) [[roger-gale|Roger]] found her like that one evening. He heard what he thought was a sob

(027-002) from the room, for she had forgotten to close the door. He came into the

(027-003) doorway but drew back, and closed the door with barely a sound. Frowning

(027-004) and irresolute, he stood for a moment in the hall, then turned and went

(027-005) into his room. Soon he heard [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] enter [[the-gale-home|the house]] and come slowly up the

(027-006) stairs. She too had had a hard day, he recalled, a day all filled with

(027-007) turbulence, with problems and with vexing toil, in her enormous family. And

(027-008) he felt he could not blame her for not being of more help at [[family|home]]. Still,

(027-009) he had been disappointed of late in her manner toward her sister. He had

(027-010) hoped she would draw closer to [[edith-sidney|Edith]], now that again they were living

(027-011) together in their old home where they had been born. But no, it had worked

(027-012) just the opposite way. They were getting upon each other's nerves. Why

(027-013) couldn't she make overtures, small kindly proffers of help and advice and

(027-014) sympathy, the womanly things?

(027-015) From his room he heard her knock softly at the same door he had closed. And

(027-016) he heard her low clear voice:

(027-017) "Are you there, Edith dear?" He listened a moment intently, but he could

(027-018) not hear the reply. Then Deborah said, "Oh, you poor thing. I'm awfully

(027-019) sorry. Edith--don't bother to come downstairs--let me bring you up your

(027-020) supper." A pause. "I wish you would. I'd [[love-and-courtship|love]] to."

(027-021) He heard Deborah come by his door and go up the second flight of stairs to

(027-022) the room she had taken on the third floor.

(027-023) "I was wrong," he reflected, "she has been trying--but it doesn't do any

(027-024) good. Women simply haven't it in 'em to see each other's point of view.

(027-025) Deborah doesn't admire Edith--she can't, she only pities her and puts her

(027-026) down as out of date. And Edith feels that, and it gets her riled, and she

(027-027) sets herself like an angry old hen against all Deborah's new ideas. Why the

(027-028) devil can't they live and let live?"

(027-029) And he hesitated savagely between a pearl gray _and_ a black cravat. Then

(027-030) he heard another step on the stairs. It was much slower than Deborah's, and

(027-031) cautious and dogged, one foot lifted carefully after the other. It was

(027-032) John, who had finished his kitchen supper and was silently making his way

(027-033) up through the [[home|house]] to his room at the top, there to keep out of sight for

(027-034) the evening. And it came into Roger's mind that John had been acting in

(027-035) just this fashion ever since Edith had been in the house.

(027-036) "We'll have trouble there, too!" he told himself, as he jerked the black

(027-037) satin cravat into place, a tie he thoroughly disliked. Yes, black, by

(027-038) [[george-sidney|George]], he felt like it to-night! These [[womens-roles|women]]! These evenings! This worry!

(027-039) This war! This world gone raving, driveling mad!

(027-040) And frowning with annoyance, Roger went down to his dinner.

(027-041) As he waited he grew impatient. He had eaten no lunch, he was hungry; and

(027-042) he was very tired, too, for he had had his own hard day. Pshaw! He got up

(027-043) angrily. _Somebody_ must be genial here. He went into the [[the-dining-room|dining room]] and

(027-044) poured himself a good stiff drink. Roger had never been much of a drinker.

(027-045) Ever since his marriage, cigars had been his only vice. But of late he had

(027-046) been having curious little sinking spells. They worried him, and he told

(027-047) himself he could not afford to get either too tired or too faint.

(027-048) Nevertheless, he reflected, it was setting a bad example for George. But

(027-049) glancing into his study he saw that the lad was completely absorbed. With

(027-050) knees drawn up, his long lank form all hunched and huddled on the lounge,

(027-051) hair rumpled, George was reading a book which had a cover of tough gray

(027-052) cloth. At the sight of it his grandfather smiled, for he had seen it once

(027-053) before. Where George had obtained it, the Lord only knew. Its title was

(027-054) "Bulls and Breeding." A thoroughly practical little book, but nothing for

(027-055) George's mother to see. As his grandfather entered behind him, the boy

(027-056) looked up with a guilty start, and resumed with a short breath of relief.

(027-057) [[elizabeth-sidney|Young Elizabeth]], too, had a furtive air, for instead of preparing her

(027-058) history lesson she was deep in the evening paper reading about [[the-great-war|the war]]

(027-059) [[europe|abroad]]. Stout and florid, rather plain, but with a frank, attractive face

(027-060) and honest, clear, appealing eyes, this curious creature of thirteen was

(027-061) sitting firmly in her chair with her feet planted wide apart, eagerly

(027-062) scanning an account of the [[work-and-vocation|work]] of [[america|American]] surgeons in [[france|France]]. And again

(027-063) Roger smiled to himself. (He was feeling so much better now.) So [[betsy|Betsy]] was

(027-064) still thinking of becoming a surgeon. He wondered what she would take up

(027-065) next. In [[memory|the past]] two years in swift succession she had made up her mind to

(027-066) be a novelist, an actress and a women's college president. And Roger liked

(027-067) this tremendously.

(027-068) He loved to watch these two in the house. Here again his family was

(027-069) widening out before him, with new figures arising to draw his attention

(027-070) this way and that. But these were bright distractions. He took a deep,

(027-071) amused delight in watching these two youngsters caught between two fires,

(027-072) on the one side their mother and upon the other their aunt; both obviously

(027-073) drawn toward Deborah, a figure who stood in their regard for all that

(027-074) thrilling outside world, that heaving sparkling ocean on which they too

(027-075) would soon embark; both sternly repressing their eagerness as an insult to

(027-076) their mother, whom they loved and pitied so, regarding her as a brave and

(027-077) dear but rapidly ageing creature "well on in her thirties," whom they must

(027-078) cherish and preserve. They both had such solemn thoughts as they looked at

(027-079) Edith in her chair. But as Roger watched them, with their love and their

(027-080) solemnity, their guilt and their perplexity, with quiet enjoyment he would

(027-081) wait to see the change he knew would come. And it always did. The sudden

(027-082) picking up of a book, the vanishing of an anxious frown, and in an instant

(027-083) their young minds had turned happily back into themselves, into their own

(027-084) engrossing lives, their plans, their intimate [[ambition|dreams and ambitions]], all so

(027-085) curiously bound up with memories of small happenings which had struck them

(027-086) as funny that day and at which they would suddenly chuckle aloud.

(027-087) And this was only one stage in their growth. What would be the next, he

(027-088) asked, and all the others after that? What kind of world would they live

(027-089) in? Please heaven, there would be no wars. Many old things, no doubt, would

(027-090) be changed, by the work of Deborah and her kind--but not too many, Roger

(027-091) hoped. And these [[youth|young people]], meanwhile, would be bringing up [[childhood|children]] in

(027-092) their turn. So the family would go on, and multiply and scatter wide, never

(027-093) to unite again. And he thought he could catch glimpses, very small and far

(027-094) away but bright as patches of sunlight upon distant mountain tops, into the

(027-095) widening vista of those many lives ahead. A wistful look crept over his

(027-096) face.

(027-097) "In their lives too we shall be there, the dim strong figures of the past."

(027-098) * * * * *

(027-099) Deborah came into the room, and at once the whole atmosphere changed. Her

(027-100) niece sprang up delightedly.

(027-101) "Why, Auntie, how lovely you look!" she exclaimed. And Roger eyed Deborah

(027-102) in surprise. Though she did not believe in [[grief|mourning]], she had been wearing

(027-103) dark gowns of late to avoid hurting Edith's feelings. But to-night she had

(027-104) donned bright colors instead; her dress was as near décolleté as anything

(027-105) that Deborah wore, and there was a band of dull blue velvet bound about

(027-106) her hair.

(027-107) "Thanks, dearie," she said, smiling. "Shall we go in to dinner now?" she

(027-108) added to her father. "Edith said not to wait for her--and I'll have to be

(027-109) off rather early this evening."

(027-110) "What is it to-night?" he inquired.

(027-111) "A big meeting at Cooper Union."

(027-112) And at dinner she went on to say that in her five [[education|schools]] the neighborhood

(027-113) clubs had combined to hold this meeting, and she herself was to preside. At

(027-114) once her young niece was all animation.

(027-115) "Oh, I wish I could go and hear you!" she sighed.

(027-116) "Afraid you can't, Betsy," her aunt replied. And at this, with an

(027-117) instinctive glance toward the door where her mother would soon come in to

(027-118) stop by her mere presence all such conversation, Elizabeth eagerly threw

(027-119) out one inquiry after the other, pell mell.

(027-120) "How on earth do you do it?" she wanted to know. "How do you get a speech

(027-121) ready, Aunt Deborah--how much of it do you write out ahead? Aren't you just

(027-122) the least bit nervous--now, I mean--this minute? And how will you feel on

(027-123) the platform? _What on earth do you do with your feet?_"

(027-124) As the girl bent forward there with her gaze fixed ardently on her aunt,

(027-125) her grandfather thought in half comic dismay, "Lord, now she'll [[poverty|want]] to be

(027-126) a great speaker--like her aunt. And she will tell her mother so!"

(027-127) "What's the meeting all about?" he inquired. And Deborah began to explain.

(027-128) In her five schools the poverty was rapidly becoming worse. Each week more

(027-129) children stayed away or came to school ragged and unkempt, some without any

(027-130) overcoats, small pitiful mites wearing shoes so old as barely to stick on

(027-131) their feet. And when the teachers and visitors followed these children into

(027-132) their homes they found bare, dirty, chilly rooms where the little folk

(027-133) shivered and wailed for food and the mothers looked distracted, gaunt and

(027-134) sullen and half crazed. Over three hundred thousand workers were idle in

(027-135) [[new-york-city|the city]]. Meanwhile, to make matters worse, half the money from uptown

(027-136) which had gone in former years into work for [[tenement-district|the tenements]] was going over

(027-137) to Belgium instead. And the same relentless drain of war was felt by the

(027-138) tenement people themselves; for all of them were foreigners, and from their

(027-139) relatives abroad, in those wide zones of Europe already blackened and laid

(027-140) waste, in endless torrents through the mails came wild appeals for money.

(027-141) In such homes her children lived. And Deborah had set her mind on vigorous

(027-142) measures of relief. Landlords must be made to wait and the city be

(027-143) persuaded to give work to the most needy, food and fuel must be secured. As

(027-144) she spoke of the task before her, with a flush of animation upon her bright

(027-145) expressive face at the thought that in less than an hour she would be

(027-146) facing thousands of people, the gloom of the picture she painted was

(027-147) dispelled in the spirit she showed.

(027-148) "These things always work out," she declared, with an impatient shrug of

(027-149) her shoulders. And watching her admiringly, young Betsy thought, "How

(027-150) strong she is! What a wonderful grown-up woman!" And Roger watching

(027-151) thought, "How young."

(027-152) * * * * *

(027-153) "What things?" It was Edith's voice at the door, and among those at the

(027-154) table there was a little stir of alarm. She had entered unnoticed and now

(027-155) took her seat. She was looking pale and tired. "What things work out so

(027-156) finely?" she asked, and with a glance at Deborah's gown,

(027-157) "Where are you going?" she added.

(027-158) "To a meeting," Deborah answered.

(027-159) "Oh." And Edith began her soup. In the awkward pause that followed, twice

(027-160) Deborah started to speak to her sister, but checked herself, for at other

(027-161) dinners just like this she had made such dismal failures.

(027-162) "By the way, Edith," she said, at last, "I've been thinking of all that

(027-163) furniture of yours which is lying in storage." Her sister looked up at her,

(027-164) startled.

(027-165) "What about it?" she asked.

(027-166) "There's so much of it you don't care for," Deborah answered quietly. "Why

(027-167) don't you let a part of it go? I mean the few pieces you've always

(027-168) disliked."

(027-169) "For what purpose?"

(027-170) "Why, it seems such a pity not to have [[hannah|Hannah]] back in the house. She would

(027-171) make things so much easier." Roger felt a glow of relief.

(027-172) "A capital plan!" he declared at once.

(027-173) "It would be," Edith corrected him, "if I hadn't already made _other_

(027-174) plans." And then in a brisk, breathless tone, "You see I've made up my

(027-175) mind," she said, "to sell not only part but _all_ my furniture--very

(027-176) soon--and a few other belongings as well--and use the money to put George

(027-177) and Elizabeth and little Bob back in the schools where they belong."

(027-178) "Mother!" gasped Elizabeth, and with a prolonged "Oh-h" of delight she ran

(027-179) around to her mother's chair.

(027-180) "But look here," George blurted worriedly, "I don't like it, mother, darned

(027-181) if I do! You're selling everything--just for school!"

(027-182) "School is rather important, George," was Edith's tart rejoinder. "If you

(027-183) don't think so, ask your aunt." "What do you think of it, Auntie?" he

(027-184) asked. The cloud which had come on Deborah's face was lifted in an instant.

(027-185) "I think, George," she answered gently, "that you'd better let your mother

(027-186) do what she thinks best for you. It _will_ make things easier here in the

(027-187) house," she added, to her sister, "but I wish you could have Hannah, too."

(027-188) "Oh, I'll manage nicely now," said Edith. And with a slight smile of

(027-189) triumph she resumed her dinner.

(027-190) "The war won't last forever," muttered Roger uneasily. And to himself: "But

(027-191) suppose it _should_ last--a year or more." He did not approve of Edith's

(027-192) scheme. "It's burning her bridges all at once, for something that isn't

(027-193) essential," he thought. But he would not tell her so.

(027-194) Meanwhile Deborah glanced at the clock.

(027-195) "Oh! It's nearly eight o'clock! I must hurry or I'll be late," she said.

(027-196) "Good-night, all--"

(027-197) And she left them.

(027-198) Roger followed her into the hall.

(027-199) "What do you think of this?" he demanded. Her reply was a tolerant shrug.

(027-200) "It's her own money, father--"

(027-201) "All her money!" he rejoined. "Every dollar she has in the world!"

(027-202) "But I don't just see how it can be helped."

(027-203) "Can't you talk to her, show her what folly it is?"

(027-204) "Hardly," said Deborah, smiling. Already she had on her coat and hat and

(027-205) was turning to go. And her father scowled with annoyance. She was always

(027-206) going, he told himself, leaving him to handle her sister alone. He would

(027-207) like to go out himself in the evenings--yes, by George, this very night--it

(027-208) would act like a tonic on his mind. Just for a moment, standing there, he

(027-209) saw Cooper Union packed to the doors, he heard the ringing speeches, the

(027-210) cheers. But no, it was not to be thought of. With this silent war going on

(027-211) in his house he knew he must stay neutral. Watchful waiting was his course.

(027-212) If he went out with Deborah, Edith would be distinctly hurt, and sitting

(027-213) all evening here alone she would draw still deeper into herself. And so it

(027-214) would be night after night, as it had been for many weeks. He would be

(027-215) cooped up at home while Deborah did the running about.... In half the time

(027-216) it takes to tell it, Roger had worked himself into a state where he felt

(027-217) like a mighty badly used man.

(027-218) "I wish you _would_ speak to her," he said. "I wish you could manage to

(027-219) find time to be here more in the evenings. Edith worries so much and she's

(027-220) trying so hard. A little sympathy now and then--"

(027-221) "But she doesn't seem to want any from me," said his daughter, a bit

(027-222) impatiently. "I know it's hard--of course it is. But what can I do? She

(027-223) won't let me help. And besides--there are other families, you

(027-224) know--thousands--really suffering--for the lack of all that we have here."

(027-225) She smiled and kissed him quickly. "Good-night, dad dear, I've got to run."

(027-226) And the door closed behind her.
