---
description: "After dinner that night, in the living room the two older children studied"
id: ch28
label: "Chapter XXVIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(028-001) After dinner that night, in the living room the two older [[childhood|children]] studied

(028-002) their lessons and [[edith-sidney|Edith]] sat mending a pair of rompers for little Tad.

(028-003) Presently [[roger-gale|Roger]] came out from his den with the evening paper in his hand

(028-004) and sat down close beside her. He did this conscientiously almost every

(028-005) evening. With a sigh he opened his paper to read, again there was silence

(028-006) in the room, and in this silence Roger's mind roamed far away across the

(028-007) sea.

(028-008) For the front page of his paper was filled with the usual headlines,

(028-009) tidings which a year before would have made a man's heart jump into his

(028-010) throat, but which were getting commonplace now. Dead and wounded by the

(028-011) thousands, famine, bombs and shrapnel, hideous atrocities, submarines and

(028-012) floating mines, words once remote but now familiar, always there on the

(028-013) front page and penetrating into his soul, becoming a part of Roger Gale, so

(028-014) that never again when [[the-great-war|the war]] was done would he be the same man he was

(028-015) before. For he had forever lost his [[religion|faith]] in the sanity and steadiness of

(028-016) the great mind of humanity. Roger had thought of mankind as mature, but

(028-017) there had come to him of late the same feeling he had had before in the

(028-018) bosom of his family. Mankind had suddenly unmasked and shown itself for

(028-019) what it was--still only a precocious child, with a terrible precocity. For

(028-020) its growth had been one sided. Its strength was growing at a speed

(028-021) breathless and astounding. But its vision and its poise, its sense of human

(028-022) [[law|justice]], of kindliness and tolerance and of generous brotherly [[love-and-courtship|love]], these

(028-023) had been neglected and were being left behind. Vaguely he thought of its

(028-024) ships of steel, its railroads and its flaming mills, its miracles, its

(028-025) prodigies. And the picture rose in his mind of a child, standing there of

(028-026) giant's size with dangerous playthings in its hands, and boastfully

(028-027) declaring,

(028-028) "I can thunder over the earth, dive in the ocean, soar on the clouds! I can

(028-029) shiver to atoms a mountain, I can drench whole lands with blood! I can look

(028-030) up and laugh at God!"

(028-031) And Roger frowned as he read the news. What strange new century lay ahead?

(028-032) What convulsing throes of change? What was in store for his children?

(028-033) Tighter set his heavy jaw.

(028-034) "It shall be good," he told himself with a grim determination. "For them

(028-035) there shall be better things. Something great and splendid shall come out

(028-036) of it at last. They will look back upon this time as I look on the French

(028-037) Revolution."

(028-038) He tried to peer into that world ahead, dazzling, distant as the sun. But

(028-039) then with a sigh he returned to the news, and little by little his mind

(028-040) again was gripped and held by the most compelling of all appeals so far

(028-041) revealed in humanity's growth, the appeal of war to the mind of a man. He

(028-042) frowned as he read, but he read on. Why didn't England send over more men?

(028-043) The clock struck nine.

(028-044) "Now, [[george-sidney|George]]. Now, [[elizabeth-sidney|Elizabeth]]," Edith said. With the usual delay and

(028-045) reluctance the children brought their [[work-and-vocation|work]] to an end, kissed their mother

(028-046) and went up to bed. And Edith continued sewing. Presently she smiled to

(028-047) herself. Little Tad had been so droll that day.

(028-048) On the third page of his paper, Roger's glance was arrested by a full

(028-049) column story concerning [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s meeting that night. And as in a long

(028-050) interview he read here in the public print the same things she had told him

(028-051) at supper, he felt a little glow of pride. Yes, this daughter of his was a

(028-052) wonderful woman, living a big useful life, taking a leading part in work

(028-053) which would certainly brighten the lives of millions of children still

(028-054) unborn. Again he felt the tonic of it. Here was a glimmer of [[dream|hope]] in the

(028-055) world, here was an antidote to war. He finished the column and glanced up.

(028-056) Edith was still sewing. He thought of her plan to sell all she possessed in

(028-057) order to put her children back in their expensive [[education|schools]] uptown.

(028-058) "Why can't she save her money?" he thought. "God knows there's little

(028-059) enough of it left. But I can't tell her that. If I do she'll sell

(028-060) everything, hand me the cash and tell me she's sorry to be such a burden.

(028-061) She'll sit like a thundercloud in my [[home|house]]."

(028-062) No, he could say nothing to stop her. And over the top of his paper her

(028-063) father shot a look at her of keen exasperation. Why risk everything she had

(028-064) to get these needless frills and fads? Why must she cram her life so full

(028-065) of petty plans and worries and titty-tatty little jobs? For the Lord's

(028-066) sake, leave their clothes alone! And why these careful little rules for

(028-067) every minute of their day, for their washing, their dressing, their eating,

(028-068) their napping, their play and the very air they breathed! He crumpled his

(028-069) paper impatiently. She was always talking of being old-fashioned. Well

(028-070) then, why not be that way? Let her live as her grandmother had, up there in

(028-071) the mountain farmhouse. _She_ had not been so particular. With one hired

(028-072) girl she had thought herself lucky. And not only had she cooked and sewed,

(028-073) but she had spun and woven too, had churned and made cheese and pickles and

(028-074) jam and quilts and even mattresses. Once in two months she had cut Roger's

(028-075) hair, and the rest of the time she had let him alone, except for something

(028-076) really worth while--a broken arm, for example, or [[the-church|church]]. She had stuck to

(028-077) the essentials!... But Edith was not old-fashioned, nor was she alive to

(028-078) this [[modernity|modern age]]. In short, she was neither here nor there!

(028-079) Then from the nursery above, her smallest boy was heard to cry. With a

(028-080) little sigh of weariness, quickly she rose and went upstairs, and a few

(028-081) moments later to Roger's ears came a low, sweet, soothing lullaby. Years

(028-082) ago Edith had asked him to teach her some of his mother's cradle songs. And

(028-083) the one which she was singing to-night was a song he had heard when he was

(028-084) small, when the mountain storms had shrieked and beat upon the rattling old

(028-085) house and he had been frightened and had cried out and his mother had come

(028-086) to his bed in the dark. He felt as though she were near him now. And as he

(028-087) listened to the song, from the deep well of sentiment which was a part of

(028-088) Roger Gale rose memories that changed his mood, and with it his sense of

(028-089) proportions.

(028-090) Here was motherhood of the genuine kind, not orating in Cooper Union in the

(028-091) name of every child in [[new-york-city|New York]], but crooning low and tenderly, soothing

(028-092) one little child to sleep, one of the five she herself had borne, in agony,

(028-093) without complaint. How Edith had slaved and sacrificed, how bravely she had

(028-094) rallied after the death of her husband. He remembered her a few hours ago

(028-095) on the bed upstairs, spent and in anguish, sobbing, alone. And [[regret|remorse]] came

(028-096) over him. Deborah's talk at dinner had twisted his thinking, he told

(028-097) himself. Well, that was Deborah's way of life. She had her enormous family

(028-098) and Edith had her small one, and in this hell of misery which war was

(028-099) spreading over the earth each mother was up in arms for her brood. And, by

(028-100) George, of the two he didn't know but that he preferred his own flesh and

(028-101) blood. All very noble, Miss Deborah, and very dramatic, to open your arms

(028-102) to all the children under the moon and get your name in the papers. But

(028-103) there was something pretty fine in just sitting at [[family|home]] and singing to one.

(028-104) "All right, little mother, you go straight ahead. This is war and panic and

(028-105) hard times. You're perfectly right to look after your own."

(028-106) He would show Edith he did not begrudge her this use of her small

(028-107) property. And more than that, he would do what he could to take her out of

(028-108) her loneliness. How about reading aloud to her? He had been a capital

(028-109) reader, during [[judith-gale|Judith]]'s lifetime, for he had always enjoyed it so. Roger

(028-110) rose and went to his shelves and began to look over the volumes there.

(028-111) Perhaps a book of travel.... Stoddard's "Lectures on Japan."

(028-112) Meanwhile Edith came into the room, sat down and took up her sewing. As she

(028-113) did so he turned and glanced at her, and she smiled brightly back at him.

(028-114) Yes, he thought with a genial glow, from this night on he would do his

(028-115) part. He came back to his chair with a book in his hand, prepared to start

(028-116) on his new course.

(028-117) "Father," she said quietly. Her eyes were on the work in her lap.

(028-118) "Yes, my child, what is it?"

(028-119) "It's about John," she answered. And with a movement of alarm he looked at

(028-120) his daughter intently.

(028-121) "What's the matter with John?" he inquired.

(028-122) "He has [[disease|tuberculosis]]," she said.

(028-123) "He has no such thing!" her father retorted. "John has Pott's Disease of

(028-124) the spine!"

(028-125) "Yes, I know he has," she replied. "And I'm sorry for him, poor lad. But in

(028-126) the last year," she added, "certain complications have come. And now he's

(028-127) tubercular as well."

(028-128) "How do you know? He doesn't cough--his lungs are sound as yours or mine!"

(028-129) "No, it's--" Edith pursed her lips. "It's different," she said softly.

(028-130) "Who told you?" he demanded.

(028-131) "Not Deborah," was the quick response. "She knew it, I'm certain, for I

(028-132) find that she's been having Mrs. Neale, the woman who comes in to wash, do

(028-133) John's things in a separate tub. I found her doing it yesterday, and she

(028-134) told me what Deborah had said."

(028-135) "It's the first I'd heard of it," Roger put in.

(028-136) "I know it is," she answered. "For if you'd heard of it before, I don't

(028-137) believe you'd have been as ready as Deborah was, apparently, to risk

(028-138) infecting the children here." Edith's voice was gentle, slow and

(028-139) relentless. There was still a reflection in her eyes of the tenderness

(028-140) which had been there as she had soothed her child to sleep. "As time goes

(028-141) on, John is bound to get worse. The risk will be greater every week."

(028-142) "Oh, pshaw!" cried her father. "No such thing! You're just scaring yourself

(028-143) over nothing at all!"

(028-144) "[[doctor-lake|Doctor Lake]] didn't think I was." Lake was the big child specialist in

(028-145) whose care [[ediths-children|Edith's children]] had been for years. "I talked to him to-day on

(028-146) the telephone, and he said we should get John out of [[the-gale-home|the house]]."

(028-147) Roger heartily damned [[doctor|Doctor]] Lake!

(028-148) "It's easy to find a good home for the boy," Edith went on quietly, "close

(028-149) by, if you like--in some respectable family that will be only too thankful

(028-150) to take in a boarder."

(028-151) "How about the danger to that family's children?" Roger asked malignantly.

(028-152) "Very well, father, do as you please. Take any risk you [[poverty|want]] to."

(028-153) "I'm taking no risk," he retorted. "If there were any risk they would have

(028-154) told me--[[allan-baird|Allan]] and Deborah would, I mean."

(028-155) "They wouldn't!" burst from Edith with a vehemence which startled him.

(028-156) "They'd take the same risk for my children they would for any street urchin

(028-157) in town! All children are the same in their eyes--and if you feel as they

(028-158) do--"

(028-159) "I don't feel as they do!"

(028-160) "Don't you? Then I'm telling you that Doctor Lake said there was very

(028-161) serious risk--every day this boy remains in the house!" Roger rose angrily

(028-162) from his chair:

(028-163) "So you want me to turn him out! To-night!"

(028-164) "No, I want you to wait a few days--until we can find him a decent home."

(028-165) "All right, I won't do it!"

(028-166) "Very well, father--it's your house, not mine."

(028-167) For a few moments longer she sat at her sewing, while her father walked the

(028-168) floor. Then abruptly she rose, her eyes brimming with tears, and left the

(028-169) room. And he heard a sob as she went upstairs.

(028-170) "Now she'll shut herself up with her children," he reflected savagely, "and

(028-171) hold the fort till I come to terms!" Rather than risk a hair on their

(028-172) heads, Edith would turn the whole world out of doors! He thought of Deborah

(028-173) and he groaned. She would have to be told of this; and when she was, what a

(028-174) row there would be! For [[johnny-geer|Johnny]] was one of _her_ family. He glanced at the

(028-175) clock. She'd be coming home soon. Should he tell her? Not to-night! Just

(028-176) for one evening he'd had enough!

(028-177) He picked up the book he had meant to read--Stoddard's "Lectures on Japan."

(028-178) And Roger snorted wrathfully. By George, how _he'd_ like to go to Japan--or

(028-179) to darkest Africa! Anywhere!
