---
description: "But later in the evening, when Allan and Deborah came in, Roger, who in the"
id: ch29
label: "Chapter XXIX: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(029-001) But later in the evening, when [[allan-baird|Allan]] and [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] came in, [[roger-gale|Roger]], who in the

(029-002) meantime had had a good hour in Japan and was somewhat relaxed and soothed,

(029-003) decided at once this was the time to tell her and have done with it. For

(029-004) Deborah was flushed with triumph, the meeting had been a huge success.

(029-005) Cooper Union had been packed to the walls, with an overflow meeting out on

(029-006) the street; thousands of dollars had been pledged and some big politicians

(029-007) had promised support; and men and [[womens-roles|women]], rich and poor, had volunteered

(029-008) their services. She started to tell him about it, but noticed his troubled

(029-009) expression and asked him what was on his mind.

(029-010) "Oh, nothing tremendous," Roger said. "I hate to be any damper to-night. I

(029-011) hadn't meant to tell you to-night--but I think I will now, for you look as

(029-012) though you could find a solution for anything."

(029-013) "Then I must look like an idiot," his daughter said good-humoredly. "What

(029-014) is it?" she demanded.

(029-015) "It's about John." Her countenance changed.

(029-016) "Oh. Is he worse?"

(029-017) "[[edith-sidney|Edith]] thinks he is--and she says it's not safe."

(029-018) "I see--she wants him out of [[the-gale-home|the house]]. Tell me what she said to you." As

(029-019) he did so she listened intently, and turning to Allan at the end, "What do

(029-020) you say to this, Allan?" she asked. "Is there any real risk to the

(029-021) [[childhood|children]]?"

(029-022) "A little," he responded. "As much as they take every day in the trolley

(029-023) going to school."

(029-024) "They never go in the trolley," Deborah answered dryly. "They always go on

(029-025) the top of the 'bus." She was silent for a moment. "Well, there's no use

(029-026) discussing it. If Edith feels that way, John must go. The [[home|house]] won't be

(029-027) livable till he does."

(029-028) Roger looked at her in surprise. He felt both relieved and disappointed.

(029-029) "John's only one of thousands to her," he told himself aggrievedly. "He

(029-030) isn't close to her, she hasn't room, she has a whole mass meeting in her

(029-031) head. But I haven't, by [[george-sidney|George]], I like the boy--and I'm the one who will

(029-032) have to tell him to pack up and leave the house! Isn't it the very devil,

(029-033) how things all come back on me?"

(029-034) "Look here, father," Deborah said, "suppose you let me manage this." And

(029-035) Roger's heavy visage cleared.

(029-036) "You mean you'll tell him?"

(029-037) "Yes," she replied, "and he'll understand it perfectly. I think he has been

(029-038) expecting it. I have, for a good many weeks," she added, with some

(029-039) bitterness. "And I know some people who will be glad enough to take him in.

(029-040) I'll see that he's made comfortable. Only--" her face clouded.

(029-041) "It has meant a lot to him, being here," her father put in gruffly.

(029-042) "Oh, John's used to getting knocks in this world." Her quiet voice grew

(029-043) hard and stern. "I wasn't thinking of John just now. What frightens me at

(029-044) times like this is Edith," she said slowly. "No, not just

(029-045) Edith--motherhood. I see it in so many mothers these days--in the women

(029-046) [[downtown-new-york|downtown]], in their fight for their children against all other children on

(029-047) earth. It's the hardest thing we have to do--to try to make them see and

(029-048) feel outside of their own small tenement homes--and help each other--pull

(029-049) together. They can't see it's their only chance! And all because of this

(029-050) mother [[love-and-courtship|love]]! It's so blind sometimes, like an animal!" She broke off, and

(029-051) for a moment she seemed to be looking deep into herself. "And I suppose

(029-052) we're all like that, we women are," she muttered, "when we marry and have

(029-053) children. If the pinch is ever hard enough--"

(029-054) "_You_ wouldn't be," said Allan. And a sudden sharp uneasiness came into

(029-055) Roger's mind.

(029-056) "When are you two to be married?" he asked, without stopping to think. And

(029-057) at once he regretted his question. With a quick impatient look at him,

(029-058) Allan bent over a book on the table.

(029-059) "I don't know," Deborah answered. "Next spring, I [[dream|hope]]." The frown was

(029-060) still on her face.

(029-061) "Don't make it too long," said her father brusquely. He left them and went

(029-062) up to bed.

(029-063) * * * * *

(029-064) Deborah sat motionless. She wished Allan would go, for she guessed what was

(029-065) coming and did not feel equal to it to-night. All at once she felt tired

(029-066) and unnerved from her long exciting evening. If only she could let go of

(029-067) herself and have a good cry. She locked her hands together and looked up at

(029-068) him with impatience. He was still at the table, his back was turned.

(029-069) "Don't you _know_ I love you?" she was thinking fiercely. "Can't you see

(029-070) it--haven't you seen it--growing, growing--day after day? But I don't [[poverty|want]]

(029-071) you here to-night! Why can't you see you must leave me alone? Now! This

(029-072) minute!"

(029-073) He turned and came over in front of her, and stood looking steadily down.

(029-074) "I wonder," he said slowly, "how well you understand yourself."

(029-075) "I think I do," she muttered. With a sudden twitching of her lip she looked

(029-076) quickly up at him. "Go on, Allan--let's talk it all over now if you must!"

(029-077) "Not if you feel like that," he said. At his tone of displeasure she caught

(029-078) his hand.

(029-079) "Yes, yes, I want to! Please!" she cried. "It's better--really! Believe me,

(029-080) it is--"

(029-081) He hesitated a moment, his wide generous mouth set hard, and then in a tone

(029-082) as sharp as hers he demanded, "Are you sure you'll marry me next spring?

(029-083) Are you sure you _hope_ you will next spring? Are you sure this sister of

(029-084) yours in the house, on your nerves day and night, with this blind narrow

(029-085) motherhood, this motherhood which frightens you--isn't frightening you too

(029-086) much?"

(029-087) "No--a little--but not too much." Her deep sweet voice was trembling.

(029-088) "You're the one who frightens me. If you only knew! When you come like

(029-089) this--with all you've done for me back of you--"

(029-090) "Deborah! Don't be a fool!"

(029-091) "Oh, I know you say you've done nothing, except what you've been glad to

(029-092) do! You love me like that! But it's just that love! Giving up all your

(029-093) practice little by little, and your reputation uptown--all for the sake of

(029-094) me, Allan, me!"

(029-095) "You're wrong," he replied. "Compared to what I'm getting, I've given up

(029-096) nothing! Can't you see? You're just as narrow in your school as Edith is

(029-097) right here in her [[family|home]]! You look upon my [[the-hospital|hospital]] as a mere annex to your

(029-098) [[education|schools]], when the truth of it is that the [[work-and-vocation|work]] down there is a chance I've

(029-099) wanted all my life! Can't you understand," he cried, "that instead of your

(029-100) being in debt to me it's I who am in debt to you? You're a suffragist, eh,

(029-101) a feminist--whatever you want to call it! All right! So you want to be

(029-102) equal with man! Then, for God's sake, why not begin? _Feel_ equal! I'm no

(029-103) annex to you, nor you to me! It has happened, thank God, that our work fits

(029-104) in--each with the other!"

(029-105) He stopped and stared, seemed to shake himself; he walked the floor. And

(029-106) when he turned back his expression had changed.

(029-107) "Look here, Deborah," he asked, with an appealing humorous smile, "will you

(029-108) tell me what I'm driving at?"

(029-109) Deborah threw back her head and laughed, and her laughter thrilled with

(029-110) relief. "How sure I feel now that I love him," she thought.

(029-111) "You've proved I owe you nothing!" she cried. "And that men and women of

(029-112) our kind can work on splendidly side by side, and never bother our poor

(029-113) little heads about anything else--even marriage!"

(029-114) "We will, though!" he retorted. The next moment she was in his arms. "Now,

(029-115) Deborah, listen to reason, child. Why can't you marry me right away?"

(029-116) "Because," she said, "when I marry you I'm going to have you all to

(029-117) myself--for weeks and weeks as we planned before! And afterwards, with a

(029-118) wonderful start--and with [[the-great-war|the war]] over, work less hard and the world less

(029-119) dark and gloomy--we're going to find that at last we can live! But this

(029-120) winter it couldn't be like that. This winter we've got to go on with our

(029-121) work--and without any more silly worries or talk about whether or not we're

(029-122) in love. _For we are_!" Her upturned face was close to his, and for some

(029-123) moments nothing was said, "Well?" she asked. "Are you satisfied?"

(029-124) "No--I want to get married. But it is now a quarter past one. And I'm your

(029-125) [[doctor|physician]]. Go straight to bed."

(029-126) She stopped him a minute at the front door:

(029-127) "Are you sure, absolutely, you understand?"

(029-128) He told her he did. But as he walked home he reflected. How tense she had

(029-129) been in the way she had talked. Yes, the long strain was telling. "Why was

(029-130) she so anxious to get me out of the house," he asked, "when we were alone

(029-131) for the first time in days? And why, if she's really sure of her love, does

(029-132) she hate the idea that she's in my debt?"

(029-133) He walked faster, for the night was cold. And there was a chill, too, in

(029-134) this long waiting game.

(029-135) * * * * *

(029-136) Roger heard Deborah come up to bed, and he wondered what they had been

(029-137) talking about. Of the topic he himself had broached--each other, love and

(029-138) marriage?

(029-139) "Possibly--for a minute or two--but no more," he grumbled. "For don't

(029-140) forget there's work to discuss, there's that mass meeting still on her

(029-141) mind. And God knows a woman's mind is never any child's play. But when you

(029-142) load a mass meeting on top--"

(029-143) Here he yawned long and noisily. His head ached, he felt sore and

(029-144) weak--"from the evening's entertainment my other daughter gave me." No, he

(029-145) was through, he had had enough. They could settle things to suit

(029-146) themselves. Let Edith squander her money on frills, the more expensive the

(029-147) better. Let her turn poor [[johnny-geer|Johnny]] out of the house, let her give full play

(029-148) to her motherhood. And if that scared Deborah out of marrying, let her stay

(029-149) single and die an old maid. He had worried enough for his family. He wanted

(029-150) a little peace in his house.

(029-151) Drowsily he closed his eyes, and a picture came into his mind of [[new-york-city|the city]]

(029-152) as he had seen it only a few nights before. It had been so cool, so calm

(029-153) and still. At dusk he had been in the building of the great tower on

(029-154) Madison Square; and when he had finished his business there, on an impulse

(029-155) he had gone up to the top, and through a wide low window had stood a few

(029-156) moments looking down. A soft light snow was falling; and from high up in

(029-157) the storm, through the silent whirling flakes, he had looked far down upon

(029-158) lights below, in groups and clusters, dancing lines, between tall phantom

(029-159) buildings, blurred and ghostly, faint, unreal. From all that bustle and

(029-160) fever of life there had risen to him barely a sound. And the town had

(029-161) seemed small and lonely, a little glow in the infinite dark, fulfilling its

(029-162) allotted place for its moment in eternity. Suddenly from close over his

(029-163) head like a brazen voice out of the sky, hard and deafening and clear, the

(029-164) great bell had boomed the hour. Then again had come the silence, and the

(029-165) cool, soft, whirling snow.

(029-166) Like a dream it faded all away, and with a curious smile on his face

(029-167) presently Roger fell asleep.
