---
description: "And now he felt the approach at last of another season of quiet, one of"
id: ch30
label: "Chapter XXX: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(030-001) And now he felt the approach at last of another season of quiet, one of

(030-002) those uneventful times which come in family histories. As he washed and

(030-003) dressed for dinner, one night a little later, he thought with satisfaction,

(030-004) "How nicely things are smoothing out." His dressing for dinner, as a rule,

(030-005) consisted in changing his low wing collar and his large round detachable

(030-006) cuffs; but to-night he changed his cravat as well, from a black to a pearl

(030-007) gray one. He hoped the whole winter would be pearl gray.

(030-008) The little storm which [[edith-sidney|Edith]] had raised over John's presence in [[the-gale-home|the house]]

(030-009) had been allayed. [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] had talked to John, and had moved him with his

(030-010) belongings to a comfortable sunny room in the small but neat apartment of a

(030-011) Scotch family nearby. And John had been so sensible. "Oh, I'm fine, thank

(030-012) you," he had answered simply, when in [[rogers-office|the office]] [[roger-gale|Roger]] had asked him about

(030-013) his new [[family|home]]. So that incident was closed. Already Edith was disinfecting

(030-014) John's old room to her heart's content, for [[george-sidney|George]] was to occupy it now.

(030-015) She was having the woodwork repainted and a new paper put on the walls. She

(030-016) had already purchased a small new rug, and a bed and a bureau and one easy

(030-017) chair, and was making a pair of fresh pretty curtains. All right, let her

(030-018) do it--if only there could be peace in the [[home|house]].

(030-019) With his cravat adjusted and his thick-curling silver hair trim from having

(030-020) just been cut by "Louis" over at the Brevoort, Roger went comfortably down

(030-021) to his dinner. Edith greeted him with a smile.

(030-022) "Deborah's dining out," she said.

(030-023) "Very well," he replied, "so much the better. We'll go right in--I'm

(030-024) hungry. And we'll have the evening to ourselves. No big ideas nor problems.

(030-025) Eh, daughter?" He slipped his hand in hers, and she gave it a little

(030-026) affectionate squeeze. With John safely out of the way, and not only the

(030-027) [[medicine|health]] of her [[childhood|children]] but their proper [[education|schooling]] assured, Edith was

(030-028) herself again, placid, sweet and kindly. And dinner that night was a

(030-029) cheerful meal. Later, in the living room, as Roger contentedly lit his

(030-030) cigar, Edith gave an appreciative sniff.

(030-031) "You do smoke such good cigars, father," she said, smiling over her needle.

(030-032) And glancing up at her daughter, "[[betsy|Betsy]], dear," she added, "go and get your

(030-033) grandfather's evening paper."

(030-034) In quiet perusal of the news he spent the first part of his evening. The

(030-035) war did not bother him to-night, for there had come a lull in the fighting,

(030-036) as though even war could know its place. And times were better over here.

(030-037) As, skipping all news from [[europe|abroad]] his eye roved over the pages for what his

(030-038) business depended upon, Roger began to find it now. The old familiar

(030-039) headliness were reappearing side by side--high finance exposures, graft,

(030-040) the antics and didos cut up by the sons and daughters of big millionaires;

(030-041) and after them in cheery succession the Yale-Harvard game, a new man for

(030-042) the Giants, a new college building for Cornell, a new city plan for

(030-043) Seattle, a woman senator in Arizona and in Chicago a "sporting mayor." In

(030-044) brief, all over the U.S.A., men and [[womens-roles|women]] [[generational-change|old and new]] had risen up, to

(030-045) power, fame, notoriety, whatever you chose to call it. Men and women?

(030-046) Hardly. "Children" was the better word. But the thought did not trouble

(030-047) Roger to-night. He had instead a heartening sense of the youth, the wild

(030-048) exuberance, the boundless vigor in his native land. He could feel it rising

(030-049) once again. Life was soon to go on as before; people were growing hungry to

(030-050) see the names of their countrymen back in the headlines where they

(030-051) belonged. And Roger's business was picking up. He was not sure of the

(030-052) figure of his deficit last week--he had always been vague on the

(030-053) book-keeping side--but he knew it was down considerably.

(030-054) When Betsy and George had gone to bed, Roger put down his paper.

(030-055) "Look here, Edith," he proposed, "how'd you like me to read aloud while you

(030-056) sew?" She looked up with a smile of pleased surprise.

(030-057) "Why, father dear, I'd [[love-and-courtship|love]] it." At once, she bent over her needle again,

(030-058) so that if there were any awkwardness attending this small change in their

(030-059) lives it did not reveal itself in her pretty countenance. "What shall we

(030-060) read?" she affably asked.

(030-061) "I've got a capital book," he replied. "It's about travel in Japan."

(030-062) "I'd like nothing better," Edith replied. And with a slight glow of pride

(030-063) in himself Roger took his book in hand. The experiment was a decided

(030-064) success. He read again the next night and the next, while Edith sat at her

(030-065) sewing. And so this hour's companionship, from nine to ten in the evening,

(030-066) became a regular [[tradition|custom]]--just one hour and no more, which Roger spent with

(030-067) his daughter, intimately and pleasantly. Yes, life was certainly smoothing

(030-068) out.

(030-069) Edith's three older children had been reinstated in school. And although at

(030-070) first, when deprived of their aid, she had found it nearly impossible to

(030-071) keep her two small boys amused and give them besides the four hours a day

(030-072) of fresh air they required, she had soon met this trouble by the same

(030-073) simple process as before. Of her few possessions still unsold, she had

(030-074) disposed of nearly all, and with a small fund thus secured she had sent for

(030-075) [[hannah|Hannah]] to return. The house was running beautifully.

(030-076) Christmas, too, was drawing near. And though Roger knew that in Edith's

(030-077) heart was a cold [[fear|dread]] of this season, she bravely kept it to herself; and

(030-078) she set about so determinedly to make a merry holiday, that her father

(030-079) admiring her pluck drew closer still to his daughter. He entered into her

(030-080) Christmas plans and into all the conspiracies which were whispered about

(030-081) the house. Great secrets, anxious consultations, found in him a ready

(030-082) listener.

(030-083) So passed three blessed quiet weeks, and he had high hopes for the winter.
