---
description: "If there were any cloud upon his horizon, it was the thought of Laura. She"
id: ch31
label: "Chapter XXXI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(031-001) If there were any cloud upon his horizon, it was the thought of [[laura-sloane|Laura]]. She

(031-002) had barely been to [[the-gale-home|the house]] since [[edith-sidney|Edith]] had come back to town; and at

(031-003) times, especially in the days when things had looked dark for [[roger-gale|Roger]], he had

(031-004) caught himself reproaching this giddy-gaddy youngest child, so engrossed in

(031-005) her small "ménage" that apparently she could not spare a thought for her

(031-006) widowed sister. Laura on her return from [[europe|abroad]] had brought as a gift for

(031-007) Edith a [[grief|mourning]] gown from [[paris|Paris]], a most alluring creation--so much so, in

(031-008) fact, that Edith had felt it simply indecent, insulting, and had returned

(031-009) it to her sister with a stilted note of thanks. But Roger did not know of

(031-010) this. There were so many ways, he thought, in which Laura might have been

(031-011) nice to Edith. She had a gorgeous limousine in which she might so easily

(031-012) have come and taken her sister off on little trips uptown. But no, she kept

(031-013) her car to herself. And from her small apartment, where a maid whom she had

(031-014) brought from [[rome|Rome]] dressed her several times each day, that limousine rushed

(031-015) her noiselessly forth, gay and wild as ever, immaculate and elegant,

(031-016) radiant and very rich. To what places did she go? What new friends was she

(031-017) making? What was Laura up to?

(031-018) He did not like her manner, one evening when she came to the [[home|house]]. As he

(031-019) helped her off with her cloak, a sleek supple leopard skin which fitted her

(031-020) figure like a glove, he asked,

(031-021) "Where's Hal this evening?" And she answered lightly,

(031-022) "Oh, don't ask _me_ what he does with himself."

(031-023) "You mean, I suppose," said Edith, with quiet disapproval, "that he is

(031-024) rushed to death this year with all this business from [[the-great-war|the war]]."

(031-025) "Yes, it's business," Laura replied, as she deftly smoothed and patted her

(031-026) soft, abundant, reddish hair. "And it's war, too," she added.

(031-027) "What do you mean?" her father asked. He knew what she meant, war with her

(031-028) husband. But before Laura could answer him, Edith cut in hastily, for two

(031-029) of her [[childhood|children]] were present. At dinner she turned the talk to the war. But

(031-030) even on this topic, Laura's remarks were disturbing. She did not consider

(031-031) the war wholly bad--by no means, it had many good points. It was clearing

(031-032) away a lot of old rubbish, customs, superstitions and institutions out of

(031-033) date. "Musty old relics," she called them. She spoke as though repeating

(031-034) what someone else had told her. Laura with her chicken's mind could never

(031-035) have thought it all out by herself. When asked what she meant, she was

(031-036) smilingly vague, with a glance at Edith's youngsters. But she threw out

(031-037) hints about the [[the-church|church]] and even [[religion|Christianity]], as though it were falling to

(031-038) pieces. She spoke of a second Renaissance, "a glorious pagan era" coming.

(031-039) And then she exploded a little bomb by inquiring of Edith.

(031-040) "What do you think the girls over there are going to do for husbands, with

(031-041) half the marriageable men either killed or hopelessly damaged? They're not

(031-042) going to be nuns all their lives!"

(031-043) Again her sister cut her off, and the rest of the brief evening was

(031-044) decidedly awkward. Yes, she was changing, growing fast. And Roger did not

(031-045) like it. Here she was spending money like water, absorbed in her pleasures,

(031-046) having no baby, apparently at loose ends with her husband, and through it

(031-047) all so cocksure of herself and her outrageous views about war, and smiling

(031-048) about them with such an air, and in her whole manner, such a tone of amused

(031-049) superiority. She talked about a world for the strong, bits of gabble from

(031-050) Nietzsche and that sort of rot; she spoke blithely of a Rome reborn, the

(031-051) "Wings of the Eagles" heard again. This part of it she had taken, no doubt,

(031-052) from her new [[italy|Italian]] friend, her husband's shrapnel partner.

(031-053) Pshaw! What was Laura up to?

(031-054) But that was only one evening. It was not repeated, another month went

(031-055) quickly by, and Roger had soon shaken it from him, for he had troubles

(031-056) enough at [[family|home]]. One daughter at a time, he had thought. And as the dark

(031-057) clouds close above him had cleared, the other cloud too had drifted away,

(031-058) until it was small, just on the horizon, far away from Roger's house. What

(031-059) was Laura up to? He barely ever thought of that now.

(031-060) * * * * *

(031-061) But one night when he came home, Edith, who sat in the living room reading

(031-062) aloud to her smaller boys, gave him a significant look which warned him

(031-063) something had happened. And turning to take off his overcoat, in the hall

(031-064) he almost stumbled upon a pile of hand luggage, two smart patent leather

(031-065) bags, a hat trunk and a sable cloak.

(031-066) "Hello," he exclaimed. "What's this? Who's here?"

(031-067) "Laura," Edith answered. "She's up in [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s room, I think--they've been

(031-068) up there for over an hour." Roger looked indignantly in at his daughter.

(031-069) "What has happened?" he asked.

(031-070) "I'm afraid I can't tell you," Edith replied. "They didn't seem to need me.

(031-071) They made it rather plain, in fact. Another quarrel, I presume. She came

(031-072) into the house like a whirlwind, asked at once for Deborah and flew up to

(031-073) Deborah's room."

(031-074) "Pshaw!" Roger heavily mounted the stairs. He at least did not feel like

(031-075) flying. A whirlwind, eh--a nice evening ahead!

(031-076) * * * * *

(031-077) Meanwhile, in her room upstairs Deborah sat motionless, sternly holding her

(031-078) feelings down, while in a tone now kindly but more often full of a sharp

(031-079) dismay, she threw out question after question to Laura who was walking the

(031-080) floor in a quick, feverish sort of way, with gestures half hysterical, her

(031-081) voice bursting with emotions of mingled fright and rage.

(031-082) "No, this time it's divorce!" she declared, at the end of her first

(031-083) outburst, in which she had told in fragments of her husband's double life.

(031-084) "I've stood it long enough! I'm through!"

(031-085) "You mean you don't care for him," Deborah said. She was fighting for time

(031-086) to think it out. "You [[poverty|want]] a divorce. Very well, Laura dear--but how do you

(031-087) think you are going to get it? The laws are rather strict in this state.

(031-088) They allow but one cause. Have you any proofs?"

(031-089) "No, I haven't--but I don't need any proofs! He wants it as badly as I do!

(031-090) Wait--I'll give you his very words!" Laura's face grew white with fury.

(031-091) "'It's entirely up to you, Sweetie'--the beast!--'You can have any kind of

(031-092) divorce you like. You can let me bring suit on the quiet or you can try to

(031-093) fight me in court, climb up into the witness chair in front of the

(031-094) reporters and tell them all about yourself!'"

(031-095) "_Your husband is to bring suit against you_?" Deborah's voice was loud and

(031-096) harsh. "For God's sake, Laura, what do you mean?"

(031-097) "Mean? I mean that _he has proofs_! He has used a detective, the mean

(031-098) little cur, and he's treating me like the dirt under his feet! Just as

(031-099) though it were one thing for a man, and another--quite--for a woman! He

(031-100) even had the [[courage|nerve]] to be mad, to get on a high horse, call me names! Turn

(031-101) me!--turn me out on the street!" Deborah winced as though from a blow. "Oh,

(031-102) it was funny, funny!" Laura was almost sobbing now.

(031-103) "Stop, this minute!" Deborah said. "You say that you've been doing--what he

(031-104) has?" she demanded.

(031-105) "Why shouldn't I? What do you know about it? Are you going to turn against

(031-106) me, too?"

(031-107) "I am--pretty nearly--"

(031-108) "Oh, good God!" Laura tossed up her hands and went on with her walking.

(031-109) "Quiet! Please try to be clear and explain."

(031-110) "Explain--to you? How can I? _You_ don't understand--you know nothing about

(031-111) it--all you know about is [[education|schools]]! You're simply a nun when it comes to

(031-112) this. I see it now--I didn't before--I thought you a modern woman--with

(031-113) your mind open to new ideas. But it isn't, it seems, when it comes to a

(031-114) pinch--it's shut as tight as Edith's is--"

(031-115) "Yes, tight!"

(031-116) "Thank you very much! Then for the [[love-and-courtship|love]] of Heaven will you kindly leave me

(031-117) alone! I'll have a talk with father!"

(031-118) "You will _not_ have a talk with father--"

(031-119) "I most certainly will--and he'll understand! He's a man, at least--and he

(031-120) led a man's life before he was married!"

(031-121) "Laura!"

(031-122) "_You_ can't see it in him--_but I can_!"

(031-123) "You'll say not a word to him, not one word! He has had enough this year as

(031-124) it is!"

(031-125) "Has he? Then I'm sorry! If _you_ were any help to me--instead of acting

(031-126) like a nun--"

(031-127) "Will you please stop talking like a fool?"

(031-128) "I'm not! I'm speaking the truth and you know it! You know no more about

(031-129) love like mine than a nun of the middle ages! You needn't tell me about

(031-130) [[allan-baird|Allan Baird]]. You think you're in love with him, don't you? Well then, I'll

(031-131) tell you that you're not--your love is the kind that can wait for

(031-132) years--because it's cold, it's cold, it's cold--it's all in your mind and

(031-133) your reason! And so I say you're no help to me now! Here--look at yourself

(031-134) in the glass over there! You're just plain angry--frightened!"

(031-135) "Yes--I am--I'm frightened." While she strove to think clearly, to form

(031-136) some plan, she let her young sister talk rapidly on:

(031-137) "I know you are! And you can't be fair! You're like nearly all [[america|American]]

(031-138) [[womens-roles|women]]--married or single, young or old--you're all of you scared to death

(031-139) about sex--just as your Puritan mothers were! And you leave it alone--you

(031-140) keep it down--you never give it a chance--you're afraid! But I'm not

(031-141) afraid--and I'm living my life! And let me tell you I'm not alone! There

(031-142) are hundreds and thousands doing the same--right here in [[new-york-city|New York City]]

(031-143) to-night! It's been so abroad for years and years--in Rome and Berlin, in

(031-144) Paris and London--and now, thank God, it has come over here! If our

(031-145) husbands can do it, why can't we? And we are--we're starting--it's come

(031-146) with the war! You think war is hell and nothing else, don't you--but you're

(031-147) wrong! It's not only killing men--it's killing a lot of hypocrisies

(031-148) too--it's giving a jolt to marriage! You'll see what the women will do soon

(031-149) enough--when there aren't enough men any longer--"

(031-150) "Suppose you stop this tirade and tell me exactly what you've done,"

(031-151) Deborah interrupted. A simple course of action had just flashed into her

(031-152) mind.

(031-153) "All right, I will. I'm not ashamed. I've given you this 'tirade' to show

(031-154) you exactly how I feel--that it's not any question of sin or guilt or any

(031-155) musty old rubbish like that! I know I'm right! I know just what I'm doing!"

(031-156) "Who's the man? That Italian?"

(031-157) "Yes."

(031-158) "Where is he?"

(031-159) "Right here in New York."

(031-160) "Does he mean to stand by you?"

(031-161) "Of course he does."

(031-162) "Will he marry you, Laura?"

(031-163) "Yes, he will--the minute I'm free from my beast of a husband!"

(031-164) "And your husband will keep his suit quiet, you said, if you agree not to

(031-165) fight him."

(031-166) "Yes."

(031-167) Deborah rose abruptly.

(031-168) "Then will you stay right here to-night, and leave this matter to me?" she

(031-169) asked.

(031-170) "What do _you_ mean to do?"

(031-171) "See your husband."

(031-172) "What for? When?"

(031-173) "To-night, if I can. I want to be sure."

(031-174) Laura looked for the moment nonplussed.

(031-175) "And what of my wishes?" she inquired.

(031-176) "_Your_ wishes," said Deborah steadily. "You want a divorce, don't you--so

(031-177) do I. And you want it quiet--and so do I. I want it so hard that I want to

(031-178) make sure." Deborah's tone was kinder now, and she came over close to her

(031-179) sister. "Look here, Laura, if I've been hard, forgive me--please--and let

(031-180) me help. I'm not so narrow as you think. I've been through a good deal of

(031-181) this before--[[downtown-new-york|downtown]], I mean, with girls in my school. They come to me, we

(031-182) have long talks. Maybe I _am_ a nun--as you say--but I'm one with a

(031-183) confessional. Not for sins," she added, as Laura looked up angrily. "Sins

(031-184) don't interest me very much. But troubles do. And heaven knows that

(031-185) marriage is one," she said with a curious bitterness. "And when it has

(031-186) failed and there's no love left--as in your case--I'm for divorce. Only--"

(031-187) her wide sensitive lips quivered just a little, "I'm sorry it had to come

(031-188) like this. But I love you, dear, and I want to help, I want to see you

(031-189) safely through. And while I'm doing it, if we can, I want to keep dad out

(031-190) of it--at least until it's settled." She paused a moment. "So if you agree,

(031-191) I'll go to your husband. I want to be sure, absolutely, just what we can

(031-192) count on. And until I come back, stay here in my room. You don't want to

(031-193) talk to father and Edith--"

(031-194) "Most certainly not!" Laura muttered.

(031-195) "Good. Then stay here until I return. I'll send you up some supper."

(031-196) "I don't want any, thank you."

(031-197) Laura went and threw herself on the bed, while her sister finished

(031-198) dressing.

(031-199) "It's decent of you, Deborah." Her voice was muffled and relaxed. "I wasn't

(031-200) fair," she added. "I'm sorry for some of the things I said."

(031-201) "[[About]] me and marriage?" Deborah looked at herself in the glass in a

(031-202) peculiar searching way. A slight spasm crossed her features. "I'm not sure

(031-203) but that you were right. At times I feel far from certain," she said. Laura

(031-204) lifted her head from the pillow, watched her sister a moment, dropped back.

(031-205) "Don't let this affect _you_, Deborah."

(031-206) "Oh, don't worry, dearie." And Deborah moved toward the door. "My affair is

(031-207) just mine, you see, and this won't make any difference."

(031-208) But in her heart she knew it would. What an utter loathing she had to-night

(031-209) for all that people meant by sex! Suddenly she was quivering, her limbs and

(031-210) her whole body hot.

(031-211) "You say I'm cold," she was thinking. "Cold toward Allan, calm and cool,

(031-212) nothing but mind and reason! You say it means little to me, all that! But

(031-213) if I had had trouble with Allan, would I have come running home to talk?

(031-214) Wouldn't I have hugged it tight? And isn't that love? What do _you_ know of

(031-215) me and the life I've led? Do you know how it feels to want to [[work-and-vocation|work]], to be

(031-216) something yourself, without any man? And can't _that_ be a passion? Have

(031-217) you had to live with Edith here and see what motherhood can be, what it can

(031-218) do to a woman? And now you come with _another_ side, just as narrow as

(031-219) hers, devouring everything else in sight! And because I'm a little afraid

(031-220) of that, for myself and all I want to do, you say I don't know what love

(031-221) is! But I do! And my love's worth more than yours! It's deeper, richer, it

(031-222) will last!... Then why do I loathe it _all_ to-night?... But I don't, I

(031-223) only loathe _your_ side!... But yours is the very heart of it!... All

(031-224) right, then what am I going to do?"

(031-225) She was going slowly down the stairs. She stopped for a moment, frowning.
