---
description: "But as he watched Laura in the house, Roger's first emotions were"
id: ch33
label: "Chapter XXXIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(033-001) But as he watched [[laura-sloane|Laura]] in [[the-gale-home|the house]], [[roger-gale|Roger]]'s first emotions were

(033-002) complicated more and more by a feeling of bewilderment. At dinner the next

(033-003) evening he noticed with astonishment that she appeared like her natural

(033-004) self. "She's acting," he decided. But this explanation he soon dismissed.

(033-005) No, it was something deeper. She was actually unashamed, unafraid. That

(033-006) first display of feelings, the night of her arrival, had been only the

(033-007) scare of an hour. Within a few days she was back on her feet; and her cure

(033-008) for her trouble, if trouble she felt, was not less but more pleasure, as

(033-009) always. She went out nearly every evening now; and when she had spent what

(033-010) money she had, she sold a part of her jewelry to the little old Galician

(033-011) Jew in the shop around the corner. Yes, she was her natural self. And she

(033-012) was as before to her father. Her attitude said plainly,

(033-013) "It isn't fair to you, poor dear, to expect you to fully understand how

(033-014) right I am in this affair. And considering your point of view, you're

(033-015) acting very nicely."

(033-016) Often as she talked to him a note of good-humored forgiveness crept into

(033-017) his daughter's voice. And looking at her grimly out of the corner of his

(033-018) eye, he saw that she looked down on him, far, far down from heights above.

(033-019) "Yes," he thought, "this is modern." Then he grew angry all at once. "No,"

(033-020) he added, "this is wrong! You can't fool me, young woman, you know it as

(033-021) well as I do myself! You're not going to carry this off with an air--not

(033-022) with your father! No, by [[george-sidney|George]]!"

(033-023) And he would grow abrupt and stern. But days would pass and in spite of

(033-024) himself into their talks would creep a natural friendly tone. Again he

(033-025) found himself friends with her--friends as though nothing whatever had

(033-026) happened! Could it be that a woman who had so sinned could go right on?

(033-027) Here was Laura, serenely unconscious of guilt, and smiling into her future,

(033-028) dreaming still of happiness, quite plainly sure of it, in fact! With a

(033-029) curious dismayed relief Roger would scowl at this daughter of his--a

(033-030) radiant enigma in his quiet sober [[home|house]].

(033-031) But [[edith-sidney|Edith]] was not at all perplexed. When she learned from [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] that

(033-032) there was soon to be a divorce, she came at once to her father. Her face

(033-033) was like a thundercloud.

(033-034) "A nice example for my [[childhood|children]]!" she indignantly exclaimed.

(033-035) "I'm sorry, my dear. But what can I do?"

(033-036) "You can make her go back to her husband, can't you?"

(033-037) "No, I can't," he flatly replied.

(033-038) "Then I'd better try it myself!"

(033-039) "You'll do no such thing!" he retorted. "I've gone clear to the bottom of

(033-040) this--and I say you're to leave her alone!"

(033-041) "Very well," she answered. And she did leave her sister alone, so severely

(033-042) that Laura soon avoided being [[family|home]] for lunch or dinner. She had taken the

(033-043) room which George had occupied ever since John had been turned out, and

(033-044) there she breakfasted late in bed, until Edith put a stop to it. They

(033-045) barely spoke to each other now. Laura still smiled defiance.

(033-046) Days passed. Christmas came at last, and despite Edith's glum resolution to

(033-047) make it a happy time for the children, the happiness soon petered out.

(033-048) After the tree in the morning, the day hung heavy on the house. Roger

(033-049) buried himself in his study. Laura had motored off into the country with a

(033-050) gay party of her friends. Or was this just a ruse, he wondered, and was

(033-051) she spending the day with her lover? Well, what if she was? Could he lock

(033-052) her in?

(033-053) [[About]] twilight he thought he heard her return, and later from his bedroom

(033-054) he heard her voice and Edith's. Both voices sounded angry, but he would not

(033-055) interfere.

(033-056) At the Christmas dinner that evening Laura did not put in an appearance,

(033-057) but Edith sat stiff and silent there; and despite the obvious efforts which

(033-058) Deborah and [[allan-baird|Allan]] made to be genial with the children, the very air in the

(033-059) room was charged with the feeling of trouble close ahead. Again Roger

(033-060) retreated into his den, and presently Laura came to him.

(033-061) "Good-night--I'm going out," she said, and she pressed her cheek lightly to

(033-062) his own. "What a dear you've been to me, dad," she murmured. And then she

(033-063) was gone.

(033-064) A few minutes later Edith came in. She held a small note in her hand, which

(033-065) Roger saw was addressed to himself.

(033-066) "Well, father, I learned this afternoon what you've been keeping from me,"

(033-067) she said. Roger gave her a steady look.

(033-068) "You did, eh--Laura told you?"

(033-069) "Yes, she did!" his daughter exclaimed. "And I can't help wondering,

(033-070) father--"

(033-071) "Why did she tell you? Have you been at her again to-day?"

(033-072) "Again? Not at all," she answered. "I've done as you asked me to, let her

(033-073) alone. But to-day--mother's day--I got thinking of _her_."

(033-074) "Leave your mother out of it, please. What did you say to Laura?"

(033-075) "I tried to make her go back, of course--"

(033-076) "And she told you--"

(033-077) "He wouldn't have her! And then in a perfect tantrum she went on to tell me

(033-078) why!" Edith's eyes were cold with disgust. "And I'm wondering why you let

(033-079) her stay here--in the same house with my children!"

(033-080) Roger reached out his hand.

(033-081) "Give me that note," he commanded. He read it quickly and handed it back.

(033-082) The note was from Laura, a hasty good-bye.

(033-083) "Edith will explain," she wrote, "and you will see I cannot stay any

(033-084) longer. It is simply too impossible. I am going to the man I [[love-and-courtship|love]]--and in a

(033-085) few days we shall sail for Naples. I know you will not interfere. It will

(033-086) make the divorce even simpler and everything easier all round. Please don't

(033-087) worry about me. We shall soon be married over there. You have been so dear

(033-088) and sensible and I do so love you for it." Then came her name scrawled

(033-089) hastily. And at the bottom of the page: "I have paid every bill I can think

(033-090) of."

(033-091) Edith read it in silence, her color slowly mounting.

(033-092) "All right," said her father, "your children are safe." She gave him a

(033-093) quick angry look, burst into tears and ran out of the room.

(033-094) Roger sat without moving, his heavy face impassive. And so he remained for

(033-095) a long time. Well, _Laura_ was gone--no mistake about that--and this time

(033-096) she was gone for good. She was going to live in [[rome|Rome]]. Try to stop her? No.

(033-097) What good would it do? Wings of the Eagles, Rome reborn. That was it, she

(033-098) had hit it, struck the keynote of this new age. Rome reborn, all clean,

(033-099) old-fashioned Christian living swept away by millions of men at each

(033-100) others' throats like so many wolves. And at last quite openly to himself

(033-101) Roger admitted that he felt old. Old and beaten, out of date. Moments

(033-102) passed, and hours--he took little note of time. Nor did he see on the

(033-103) mantle the dark visage of "The Thinker" there, resting on the huge clinched

(033-104) fist and brooding down upon him. Lower, imperceptibly, he sank into his

(033-105) leather chair.

(033-106) Quiet had returned to his house.
