---
description: "There came a season of sleet and rain when the smaller children were shut"
id: ch35
label: "Chapter XXXV: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(035-001) There came a season of sleet and rain when the smaller [[childhood|children]] were shut

(035-002) indoors and it was hard to keep them amused. They did not look well, and

(035-003) [[edith-sidney|Edith]] was worried. She had always dreaded the spring, and to carry her

(035-004) family safely through she had taken them, in former years, to Atlantic City

(035-005) for two weeks. That of course was impossible now. Trouble was bound to

(035-006) come, she thought. And it was not long in coming. Bobby, who was ten years

(035-007) old and went to school with his brother [[george-sidney|George]], caught a wretched cold one

(035-008) day. Edith popped him into bed, but despite her many precautions he gave

(035-009) his cold to [[bruce|Bruce]] and Tad.

(035-010) "Suppose I ask [[allan-baird|Allan Baird]] to come," [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] suggested. "He's wonderful

(035-011) with children, you know."

(035-012) Edith curtly accepted his services. She felt he had been sent for to

(035-013) prevent her getting [[doctor-lake|Doctor Lake]]. But she said nothing. She would wait.

(035-014) Through long hard days and longer nights she slaved upstairs. All Deborah's

(035-015) proffers of aid she declined. She kept [[elizabeth-sidney|Elizabeth]] [[family|home]] from school to help

(035-016) her with the many meals, the medicines and the endless task of keeping her

(035-017) lively patients in bed. She herself played with them by the hour, while the

(035-018) ache in her head was a torment. At night she was up at the slightest sound.

(035-019) Heavy circles came under her eyes. Within a few days her baby, Bruce, had

(035-020) developed pneumonia.

(035-021) That evening after dinner, while Deborah was sitting with [[roger-gale|Roger]] in the

(035-022) living room, she heard her sister coming downstairs. She listened acutely,

(035-023) and glancing around she saw that Roger was listening, too. Edith passed the

(035-024) doorway and went on down the hall, where they heard her voice at the

(035-025) telephone. She came back and looked in at the door.

(035-026) "I've called [[doctor|Doctor]] Lake," she said. "I've just taken Bruce's temperature.

(035-027) It's a hundred and five and two fifths." Deborah glanced up with a start.

(035-028) "Oh, Edith!" she said softly. Her sister turned and looked at her.

(035-029) "I ought to have had him before," she said. "When he comes, please bring

(035-030) him right up to the room." And she hurried upstairs.

(035-031) "Pshaw!" breathed Roger anxiously. He had seen Bruce an hour ago; and the

(035-032) sight of the tiny boy, so exhausted and so still, had given him a sudden

(035-033) scare. Could it be that _this_ would happen? Roger rose and walked the

(035-034) floor. Edith was right, he told himself, they should have had Lake long

(035-035) before. And they would have, by George, if it had not been for Deborah's

(035-036) interference! He glanced at her indignantly. Bringing in Baird to save

(035-037) money, eh? Well, it was just about time they stopped saving money on their

(035-038) own flesh and blood! What had Bruce to do with tenement babies? But he had

(035-039) had tenement treatment, just that! Deborah had had her way at last with

(035-040) [[ediths-children|Edith's children]], and one of them might have to pay with its life! Again

(035-041) Roger glared at his silent daughter. And now, even in his excited state, he

(035-042) noticed how still and rigid she was, how unnatural the look she bent on the

(035-043) book held tightly in her hands.

(035-044) Still Deborah said nothing. She could feel her father's anger. Both he and

(035-045) Edith held her to blame. She felt herself in a position where she could not

(035-046) move a hand. She was stunned, and could not think clearly. A vivid picture

(035-047) was in her mind, vivid as a burning flame which left everything else in

(035-048) darkness. It was of Bruce, one adorable baby, fighting for breath. "What

(035-049) would I do if he were mine?"

(035-050) When the [[medicine|doctor]] arrived she took him upstairs and then came down to her

(035-051) father.

(035-052) "Well?" he demanded.

(035-053) "I don't know. We'll have to wait." And they both sat silent. At last they

(035-054) heard a door open and close, and presently steps coming down the stairs.

(035-055) Roger went out into the hall:

(035-056) "Come right in here, doctor, won't you? I [[poverty|want]] to hear about this myself."

(035-057) "Very well, sir." And Lake entered the room, with Edith close behind him.

(035-058) He took no notice of anyone else. "Write this down," he said to her. "And

(035-059) give it to the nurse when she comes." A heavy man of middle age, with

(035-060) curious dark impassive eyes that at times showed an ironic light, Lake was

(035-061) a despot in a world of mothers to whom his word was law. He was busy

(035-062) to-night, with no time to waste, and his low harsh voice now rattled out

(035-063) orders which Edith wrote down in feverish haste--an hourly schedule, night

(035-064) and day. He named a long list of things needed at once. "Night nurse will

(035-065) be here in an hour," he ended. "Day nurse, to-morrow, eight a.m. Get sleep

(035-066) yourself and plenty of it. As it is you're not fit to take care of a cat."

(035-067) Abruptly he turned and left the room. Edith followed. The street door

(035-068) closed, and in a moment after that his motor was off with a muffled roar.

(035-069) Edith came back, picked up her directions and turned to her sister:

(035-070) "Will you go up and sit with Bruce? I'll telephone the druggist," she said.

(035-071) Deborah went to the sick room. Bruce's small face, peaked and gray in the

(035-072) soft dim light, turned as she entered and came to the bed.

(035-073) "Well, dear?" she whispered. The small boy's eyes, large and heavy with

(035-074) fever, looked straight into hers.

(035-075) "Sick," said the baby hoarsely. The next instant he tossed up his hands and

(035-076) went through a spasm, trying to breathe. It passed, he relaxed a little,

(035-077) and again stared solemnly at his aunt. "Sick," he repeated. "Wery sick."

(035-078) Deborah sat silent. The child had another fight for his breath; and this

(035-079) time as he did so, Deborah's body contracted, too. A few moments later

(035-080) Edith came in. Deborah returned downstairs, and for over an hour she sat by

(035-081) herself. Roger was in his study, [[betsy|Betsy]] and George had gone to bed. The

(035-082) night nurse arrived and was taken upstairs. Still Deborah's mind felt numb

(035-083) and cold. Instinctively again and again it kept groping toward one point:

(035-084) "If I had a baby as sick as that, what would I do? What would I do?"

(035-085) When the doorbell rang again, she frowned, rose quickly and went to the

(035-086) door. It was Allan.

(035-087) "Allan--come in here, will you?" she said, and he followed her into the

(035-088) living room.

(035-089) "What is it?" he inquired.

(035-090) "Bruce is worse."

(035-091) "Oh--I'm sorry. Why didn't Edith let me know?"

(035-092) "She had Lake to-night," said Deborah. He knitted his brows in annoyance,

(035-093) then smiled.

(035-094) "Well, I don't mind that," he replied. "I'm rather glad. She'll feel easier

(035-095) now. What did he tell her?"

(035-096) "He seemed to consider it serious--by the number of things he ordered."

(035-097) "Two nurses, of course--"

(035-098) "Yes, day and night." Deborah was silent a moment.

(035-099) "I may be wrong," she continued, "but I still feel sure the child will

(035-100) live. But I know it means a long hard fight. The expense of it all will be

(035-101) heavy."

(035-102) "Well?"

(035-103) "Whatever it is, I'll meet it," she said. "Father can't, he has reached the

(035-104) end. But even if he could help still, it wouldn't make much difference in

(035-105) what I've been deciding. Because when I was with Bruce to-night, I saw as

(035-106) clear as I see you now that if I had a child like that--as sick as

(035-107) that--I'd sacrifice anything--everything--[[education|schools]], tenement children,

(035-108) thousands! I'd use the money which should have been theirs, and the time

(035-109) and the attention! I'd shut them all out, they could starve if they liked!

(035-110) I'd be like Edith--exactly! I'd center on this one child of mine!"

(035-111) Deborah turned her eyes to his, stern and gleaming with her pain. And she

(035-112) continued sharply:

(035-113) "But I don't mean to shut those children out! And so it's clear as day to

(035-114) me that I can't ever marry you! That baby to-night was the finishing

(035-115) stroke!"

(035-116) She made a quick restless movement. Baird leaned slowly forward. Her hands

(035-117) in her lap were clenched together. He took them both and held them hard.

(035-118) "No, this isn't clear," he said. "I can feel it in your hands. This is

(035-119) nerves. This is the child upstairs. This is Edith in [[the-gale-home|the house]]. This is

(035-120) school, the end of the long winter's strain."

(035-121) "No, it's what I've decided!"

(035-122) "But this is the wrong decision," Allan answered steadily.

(035-123) "It's made!"

(035-124) "Not yet, it isn't, not to-night. We won't talk of it now, you're in no

(035-125) condition." Deborah's wide sensitive lips began to quiver suddenly:

(035-126) "We _will_ talk of it now, or never at all! I want it settled--done with!

(035-127) I've had enough--it's killing me!"

(035-128) "No," was Allan's firm reply, "in a few days things will change. Edith's

(035-129) child will be out of danger, your other troubles will clear away!"

(035-130) "But what of next winter, and the next? What of Edith's children? Can't you

(035-131) see what a load they are on my father? Can't you see he's ageing fast?"

(035-132) "Suppose he dies," Baird answered. "It will leave them on your hands.

(035-133) You'll have _these_ children, won't you, whether you marry or whether you

(035-134) don't! And so will I! I'm their guardian!"

(035-135) "That won't be the same," she cried, "as having children of our own--"

(035-136) "Look into my eyes."

(035-137) "I'm looking--" Her own eyes were bright with tears.

(035-138) "Why are you always so afraid of becoming a mother?" Allan asked. In his

(035-139) gruff low voice was a fierce appeal. "It's this obsession in your mind that

(035-140) you'll be a mother like Edith. And that's absurd! You never will! You say

(035-141) you're afraid of not keeping school the first thing in your life! But you

(035-142) always do and you always will! You're putting it ahead of me now!"

(035-143) "Yes, I can put it ahead of _you_! But I couldn't put it ahead of _my

(035-144) child_!" He winced at this and she noticed it. "Because you are strong, and

(035-145) the child would be weak! The child would be like Bruce to-night!"

(035-146) "Are you sure if you marry you must have a child?"

(035-147) "Yes," she answered huskily, "if I married you I'd want a child. And that

(035-148) want in me would grow and grow until it made both of us wretched. I'm that

(035-149) kind of a woman. That's why my [[work-and-vocation|work]] has succeeded so far--because I've a

(035-150) [[love-and-courtship|passion]] for children! They're not my work, they're my very life!" She bowed

(035-151) her head, her mouth set hard. "But so are you," she whispered. "And since

(035-152) this is settled, Allan, what do you think? Shall we try to go on--working

(035-153) together side by side--seeing each other every day as we have been doing

(035-154) all these months? Rather hard on both of us, don't you think? I do, I feel

(035-155) that way," she said. Again her features quivered. "The kind of feeling I

(035-156) have--for you--would make that rather--difficult!"

(035-157) His grip tightened on her hands.

(035-158) "I won't give you up," he said. "Later you will change your mind."

(035-159) He left the room and went out of the [[home|house]]. Deborah sat rigid. She

(035-160) trembled and the tears came. She brushed them angrily away. Struggling to

(035-161) control herself, presently she grew quieter. Frowning, with her clear gray

(035-162) eyes intently staring before her, she did not see her father come into the

(035-163) doorway. He stopped with a jerk at sight of her face.

(035-164) "What's the matter?" he asked. She started.

(035-165) "Nothing's the matter! How is Bruce?"

(035-166) "I don't know. Who went out a few minutes ago?"

(035-167) "Allan Baird," she answered.

(035-168) "Oh. You explained to him, of course, about Lake--"

(035-169) "Yes, he understands," she said. "He won't come here after this--"

(035-170) Roger looked at her sharply, wondering just what she meant. He hesitated.

(035-171) No, he would wait.

(035-172) "Good-night," he said, and went upstairs.
