---
description: "On the morrow Bruce did not grow better. If anything, the child grew worse."
id: ch36
label: "Chapter XXXVI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(036-001) On the morrow [[bruce|Bruce]] did not grow better. If anything, the child grew worse.

(036-002) But by the next morning the crisis had passed. In [[the-gale-home|the house]] the tension

(036-003) relaxed, and [[roger-gale|Roger]] suddenly felt so weak that he went to see his own

(036-004) [[doctor|physician]]. They had a long and serious talk. Later he went to [[rogers-office|his office]],

(036-005) but he gave little heed to his [[work-and-vocation|work]]. Sitting there at his desk, he stared

(036-006) through the window far out over [[new-york-city|the city]]. A plan was forming in his mind.

(036-007) At [[family|home]] that night, at dinner, he kept watching [[deborah-gale|Deborah]], who looked tired

(036-008) and pale and rather relaxed. And as soon as she was out of the [[home|house]] he

(036-009) telephoned [[allan-baird|Allan]] to come at once.

(036-010) "It's something which can't wait," he urged.

(036-011) "Very well, I'll come right up."

(036-012) When Baird arrived a little later, Roger opened the door himself, and they

(036-013) went back into his study.

(036-014) "Sit down," he said. "Smoke, Allan?"

(036-015) "No, thanks." Baird looked doubly tall and lean, his face had a gaunt

(036-016) appearance; and as he sat down, his lithe supple right hand slowly closed

(036-017) on the arm of his chair.

(036-018) "Now then," began Roger, "there are two things we [[poverty|want]] to get clear on. The

(036-019) first is about yourself and Deborah. There has been trouble, hasn't there?"

(036-020) "Yes."

(036-021) "She has made up her mind not to marry you."

(036-022) "Yes."

(036-023) "I guessed as much." And Roger paused. "Do you mind my asking questions?

(036-024) "No--"

(036-025) "Are you still in [[love-and-courtship|love]] with her, Allan?"

(036-026) "I am."

(036-027) "And she with you?"

(036-028) "I think so."

(036-029) "Then it's the same old trouble."

(036-030) "Yes." And he told a part of what she had said. As he talked in clear,

(036-031) terse, even tones, Baird's steady eyes had a tortured light, the look of a

(036-032) man who has almost reached the end of his endurance. Roger smoked in

(036-033) silence.

(036-034) "What do you propose to do?"

(036-035) "Wait," said Allan, "a few days more. Then try again. If I fail I'm

(036-036) through." Roger shot a quick look at him.

(036-037) "I don't think you'll fail, my boy--and what's more I think I can help you.

(036-038) This is a large house, Allan--there's more in it than you know. My second

(036-039) point concerns myself. I'm going to die within a year."

(036-040) As Baird turned on him suddenly, Roger grimly smiled and said, "We won't go

(036-041) into the details, but I've been examined lately and I have quite positive

(036-042) knowledge of what I've suspected for some time. So far, I have told no one

(036-043) but you. And I'm telling you only because of the bearing it has on

(036-044) Deborah." Roger leaned forward heavily. "She's the one of my daughters who

(036-045) means the most, now that I'm so near the end. When I die next year that may

(036-046) be all--I may simply end--a blank, a grave--I am not sure. But I've made up

(036-047) my mind above everything else to see Deborah happy before I go. And I mean

(036-048) to do it by setting her free--so free I think it will frighten her."

(036-049) Roger went on to explain his plan, and they talked together for some time.

(036-050) * * * * *

(036-051) Another week had soon gone by. Bruce still recovered rapidly, and the other

(036-052) sick [[childhood|children]] were up and about. Deborah, in the meantime, had barely been

(036-053) in the house at all. But late on Saturday evening Roger found her in her

(036-054) room. She was working. He came behind her.

(036-055) "What is it, dad?"

(036-056) "Busy, eh?" He hesitated, and laid his hand on her shoulder with a little

(036-057) affectionate pressure. "You've kept so busy lately," he said, "I haven't

(036-058) had time to see anything of you. How's your work going?"

(036-059) "Much better, thanks--now that the winter is over."

(036-060) He questioned her about her [[education|schools]]. And then after a brief pause,

(036-061) "Well, daughter," he said, "it has been a great fight, and I'm proud of you

(036-062) for it. And if I've got anything to say--" his hand was still on her

(036-063) shoulder, and he felt her tighten suddenly--"it isn't by way of

(036-064) criticism--please be sure of that ahead. In this damnable war my [[religion|faith]] in

(036-065) men has been badly shaken up. Humanity seems to me still a child--a child

(036-066) who needs to go to school. God knows we need men and [[womens-roles|women]] like you--and

(036-067) I'm proud of all you've accomplished, I'd be the last man to hold you back.

(036-068) I only want to help you go on--by seeing to it that you are free--from

(036-069) anything which can hinder you." He stopped again for a moment.

(036-070) "To begin with," he said, "I understand you're not going to marry Allan

(036-071) Baird." She stirred slightly:

(036-072) "Did he tell you so?"

(036-073) "Yes--I asked him," Roger replied. "I had Allan here a few nights ago, and

(036-074) he told me you had decided to give up your happiness for the sake of all

(036-075) those children in that big family of yours. You felt you must keep yourself

(036-076) free for them. Very well, if that is your decision I propose to clear the

(036-077) way." She looked intently up at his face. "You're not free now," he

(036-078) continued. "We have [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and her children here. And I'm growing old--that

(036-079) has got to be thought of--I don't want to leave them on your hands. So as

(036-080) soon as the baby is well enough, I'm going to move them up to the

(036-081) mountains--not only for the summer--they are to stay the whole year

(036-082) 'round. From this time on they're to make it their home."

(036-083) "Father! But they can't do that! Think of the winters!" Deborah cried.

(036-084) "It's already settled," he answered. "I've talked to Edith and she has

(036-085) agreed. She has always loved [[new-hampshire-farm|the farm]], and it will be good for her

(036-086) children. In the meantime I've been talking to [[george-sidney|George]]. 'George,' I told

(036-087) him, 'I'm going to talk to you, man to man, about a man's job I want you to

(036-088) tackle.'"

(036-089) "The farm? But, dearie! He's only a boy!"

(036-090) "He's nearly seventeen," said Roger, "and a young moose for his age. And

(036-091) [[dave-royce|old Dave Royce]] will still be there. It's the work George has been dreaming

(036-092) about ever since he was a child. You should have seen how he was thrilled

(036-093) by the scheme. I told him we'd spend the summer together up there laying

(036-094) all our plans, investing our money carefully to make every dollar count."

(036-095) "What money?" Deborah sharply asked. But her father was talking steadily

(036-096) on:

(036-097) "We already have a fine lot of cattle. We'll add to it and enlarge the barn

(036-098) and put in some new equipment. In short, we'll put it in fine shape, make

(036-099) it a first [[social-class|class]] dairy farm. 'And then, George,' I said to him, 'I'm going

(036-100) to turn it over to you. I shall give the farm to your mother, and the rest

(036-101) of the money I have I mean to invest in her name down here, so that she'll

(036-102) have a small income until you can make your dairy pay.'"

(036-103) "What money are you speaking of?" Deborah's voice was thick and hard, her

(036-104) sensitive lips were parted and she was breathing quickly.

(036-105) "I've sold the house," he told her. Convulsively she gripped his arms:

(036-106) "Then tell me where _you_ mean to live!"

(036-107) "I'm not going to live--I'm going to die--very soon--I have definite

(036-108) knowledge."

(036-109) Without speaking Deborah rose; her face went white. Her father kept tight

(036-110) hold of her hands, and he felt them trembling, growing cold.

(036-111) "You're soon to be free of everyone," he continued painfully. "I know this

(036-112) is hurting you, but I see so plain, so plain, my child, just what it is

(036-113) I've got to do. I'm trying to clear the way for you to make a simple

(036-114) definite choice--a choice which is going to settle your life one way or the

(036-115) other. I want to make sure you see what you're doing. Because you mean so

(036-116) much to me. We're flesh and blood--eh, my daughter?--and in this family of

(036-117) ours we've been the closest ones of all!" She seemed to sway a little.

(036-118) "_You're not going to die_!" she whispered.

(036-119) "So it hurts you to lose me," he replied. "It will be hard to be so free.

(036-120) Would you rather not have had me at all? I've been quite a load on your

(036-121) back, you know. A fearful job you had of it, dragging me up when I was

(036-122) down. And since then Edith and Bruce and the rest, what burdens they have

(036-123) been at times. What sharp worries, heavy sorrows, days and nights you and I

(036-124) have gone through, when we should have been quietly resting--free--to keep

(036-125) up our strength for our next day's work. Suppose you had missed them, lived

(036-126) alone, would you have worked better? You don't know. But you will know

(036-127) soon, you're to give it a trial. For I've cleared the way--so that if you

(036-128) throw over Baird to be free you shall get the freedom you feel you need!"

(036-129) "Father! Please! Is this fair? Is this kind?" She asked in a harsh

(036-130) frightened tone. Her eyes were wet with angry tears.

(036-131) "This isn't a time to be kind, my dear." His voice was quivering like her

(036-132) own. "I'm bungling it--I'm bungling it--but you must let me stumble along

(036-133) and try to show you what I mean. You will have your work, your crowded

(036-134) schools, to which you'll be able to give your life. But I look ahead, I

(036-135) who know you--and I don't see you happy, I don't even see you whole. For

(036-136) you there will be no family. None of the intimate sorrows and joys that

(036-137) have been in this house will come to you. I look back and I see them

(036-138) all--for a man who has come so near the end gets a larger vision." He shut

(036-139) his eyes, his jaw set tight. "I look into my family back and back, and I

(036-140) see how it has been made of many [[generational-change|generations]]. Certain figures stand out in

(036-141) my mind--they cover over a hundred years. And I see how much they've meant

(036-142) to me. I see that I've been one of them--a link in a long chain of

(036-143) lives--all inter-bound and reaching on. In my life they have all been

(036-144) here--as I shall be in lives to come.

(036-145) "And this is what I want for you." He held her close a moment. The tears

(036-146) were rolling down her cheeks. "Until now you have been one of us, too. You

(036-147) have never once been free. You have been the one in this house to step in

(036-148) and take hold and try to decide what's best to be done. I'm not putting you

(036-149) up on a pedestal, I don't say you've made no mistakes--but I say you're the

(036-150) kind of a woman who craves what's in a family. You're the one of my

(036-151) daughters who has loved this house the most!"

(036-152) "Yes," she said, "I've loved this house--"

(036-153) "But now for you all this will stop--quite suddenly," he told her. "This

(036-154) house of ours will soon be sold. And within a few months I shall be dead,

(036-155) and your family will have dropped out of your life."

(036-156) "Stop! Can't you? Stop! It's brutal! It isn't true about you!" she cried.

(036-157) "I won't believe it!" Her voice broke.

(036-158) "Go and see my physician," he said.

(036-159) "How long have you known it? Why didn't you tell me?"

(036-160) "Because we had troubles enough as it was, other things to think of. But

(036-161) there's only one thing now, this freedom you are facing."

(036-162) "Please! Please!" she cried imploringly. "I don't want to talk of myself

(036-163) but of you! This physician--"

(036-164) "No," he answered with stern pain, "you'll have to hear me out, my child.

(036-165) We're talking of you--of you alone when I am gone. How will it be? Are you

(036-166) quite sure? You will have your work, that vision of yours, and I know how

(036-167) close it has been to you, vivid and warm, almost like a friend. But so was

(036-168) my business once like that, when I was as young as you. And the business

(036-169) grew and it got cold--impersonal, a mere machine. Thank God I had a family.

(036-170) Isn't your work growing too? Are you sure it won't become a machine? And

(036-171) won't you lose touch with the children then, unless you have a child of

(036-172) your own? Friends won't be enough, you'll find, they're not bound up into

(036-173) yourself. The world may reach a stage at last where we shall live on in the

(036-174) lives of all--we may all be one big family. But that time is still far

(036-175) off--we hold to our own flesh and blood. And so I'm sure it will be with

(036-176) you. You see you have been young, my dear, and your spirit has been fresh

(036-177) and new. But how are you going to keep it so, without the ties you've

(036-178) always had?" He felt the violent clutch of her hand.

(036-179) "_You won't die_!" she whispered. But he went on relentlessly:

(036-180) "And what will you do without Allan Baird? For you see you have not even

(036-181) worked alone. You have had this man who has loved you there. I've seen how

(036-182) much he has helped you--how you have grown and he has grown since you two

(036-183) got together. And if you throw him over now, it seems to me you are not

(036-184) only [[loss|losing]] what has done the most for your work, but you're running away

(036-185) from life as well. You've never won by doing that, you've always won by

(036-186) meeting life, never evading it, taking it all, living it full, taking

(036-187) chances! If you marry Baird, I see you both go on together in your work,

(036-188) while in your home you struggle through the troubles, tangles, joys and

(036-189) griefs which most of us mortals know so well! I see you in a world of

(036-190) children, but with children, too, of your own--to keep your spirit always

(036-191) young! Living on in your children's lives!"

(036-192) Roger stopped abruptly. He groped for something more to say.

(036-193) "On the one side, all that," he muttered, "and on the other, a lonely life

(036-194) which will soon grow old."

(036-195) There fell a dangerous silence. And sharply without warning, the influence,

(036-196) deep and invisible, of many generations of stolid folk in [[new-england|New England]] made

(036-197) itself felt in each of them. Father and daughter grew awkward, both. The

(036-198) talk had been too emotional. Each made, as by an instinct, a quick strong

(036-199) effort at self-control, and felt about for some way to get back upon their

(036-200) old easy footing. Roger turned to his daughter. Her head was still bent,

(036-201) her hands clasped tight, but she was frowning down at them now, although

(036-202) her face was still wet with tears. She drew a deep unsteady breath.

(036-203) "Well, Deborah," he said simply, "here I've gone stumbling on like a fool.

(036-204) I don't know what I've said or how you have listened."

(036-205) "I've listened," she said thickly.

(036-206) "I have tried," he went on in a steadier tone, "to give you some feeling of

(036-207) what is ahead--and to speak for your mother as well as myself. And more

(036-208) than that--much more than that--for the world has changed since she was

(036-209) here. God knows I've tried to be modern." A humorous glint came into his

(036-210) eyes, "Downright modern," he declared. "Have I asked you to give up your

(036-211) career? Not at all, I've asked you to marry Baird, and go right on with him

(036-212) in your work. And if you can't marry Allan Baird, after what he has done

(036-213) for you, how in God's name can you modern women ever marry anyone? Now what

(036-214) do you say? Will you marry him? Don't laugh at me! I'm serious! Talk!"

(036-215) But Deborah was laughing--although her father felt her hands still cold

(036-216) and trembling in his. Her gray eyes, bright and luminous, were shining up

(036-217) into his own.

(036-218) "What a time you've been having, haven't you, dear!" his daughter cried

(036-219) unsteadily. "Fairly lying awake at night and racking your brains for

(036-220) everything modern I've ever said--to turn it and twist it and use it

(036-221) against me!"

(036-222) "Well?" he demanded. "How does it twist?"

(036-223) "It twists hard, thank you," she declared. "You've turned and twisted me

(036-224) about till I barely see how I can live at all!"

(036-225) "You can, though! Marry Allan Baird!"

(036-226) "I'll think it over--later on."

(036-227) "What is there left to think about? Can you point to one hole in all I've

(036-228) said?"

(036-229) "Yes, a good many--and one right off."

(036-230) "Out with it!"

(036-231) "You're not [[death|dying]]," Deborah told him calmly, "I feel quite certain you'll

(036-232) live for years."

(036-233) "Oh, you do, eh--then see my physician!"

(036-234) "I will, I'll see him to-morrow. How long did you give yourself? Just a few

(036-235) months?"

(036-236) "No, he said it might be more," admitted Roger grudgingly. "If I had no

(036-237) worries to wear me out--"

(036-238) "Me, you mean."

(036-239) "Exactly."

(036-240) "Well, you've worried quite enough. You're going to leave it to me to

(036-241) decide."

(036-242) "Very well," he agreed. He looked at her. "You have listened--hard?" he

(036-243) gruffly asked.

(036-244) "Yes, dear." Her hands slowly tightened on his. "But don't speak of this

(036-245) again. You're to leave it to me. You promise?"

(036-246) "Yes."

(036-247) And Roger left her.

(036-248) He went to bed but he could not sleep. With a sudden sag in his spirits he

(036-249) felt what a bungler he had been. He was not used to these solemn talks, he

(036-250) told himself irately. What a fool to try it! And how had Deborah taken it

(036-251) all? He did not mind her laughter, nor that lighter tone of hers. It was

(036-252) only her way of ending the talk, an easy way out for both of them. But what

(036-253) had she thought underneath? Had his points gone home? He tried to remember

(036-254) them. Pshaw! He had been too excited, and he could recall scarcely

(036-255) anything. He had not meant to speak of Baird--he had meant to leave him

(036-256) out! Yes, how he must have bungled it! Doubtless she was smiling still.

(036-257) Even the news about himself she had not taken seriously.

(036-258) But as he thought about that news, Roger's mood completely changed. The

(036-259) talk of the evening grew remote, his family no longer real, mere little

(036-260) figures, shadowy, receding swiftly far away.... Much quieter now, he lay a

(036-261) long time listening to the life of the house, the occasional sounds from

(036-262) the various rooms. From the nursery adjoining came little Bruce's piping

(036-263) laugh, and Roger could hear the nurse moving about. Afterwards for a long

(036-264) time he could hear only creaks and breathings. Never had the old house

(036-265) seemed so like a living creature. For nearly forty years it had held all

(036-266) that he had loved and known, all he had been sure of. Outside of it was the

(036-267) strange, the new, the uncertain, the vast unknown, stretching away to

(036-268) infinity....

(036-269) Again he heard Bruce's gay little laugh. What did it remind him of? He

(036-270) puzzled. Then he had it. Edith had been a baby here. Her cradle had been in

(036-271) this very room, close by the bed. And how she had laughed! What gurgles and

(036-272) ripples of bursting glee! The first child in his family....
