---
description: "It was a clear beautiful afternoon toward the end of May. And as the train"
id: ch38
label: "Chapter XXXVIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(038-001) It was a clear beautiful afternoon toward the end of May. And as the train

(038-002) puffing up the grade wound along the Connecticut River, [[roger-gale|Roger]] sat looking

(038-003) out of the window. The orchards were pink and white on the hills. Slowly

(038-004) the day wore away. The river narrowed, the hills reared high, and in the

(038-005) sloping meadows gray ribs and shoulders of granite appeared. The air had a

(038-006) tang of [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]]. Everywhere were signs of spring, of new vigor and

(038-007) fresh life. But the voices at each station sounded drowsier than at the

(038-008) last, the eyes appeared more stolid, and to Roger it felt like a journey

(038-009) far back into [[tradition|old ways]] of living, old beliefs and old ideals. He had always

(038-010) had this feeling, and always he had relished it, this dive into his

(038-011) boyhood. But it was different to-day, for this was more than a journey, it

(038-012) was a migration, too. Close about him in the car were [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and her

(038-013) [[childhood|children]], bound for a new [[family|home]] up there in the very heart and stronghold of

(038-014) all old things in [[america|America]].

(038-015) Old things dear to Edith's heart. As she sat by the window staring out, he

(038-016) watched her shapely little head; he noted the hardening lines on her

(038-017) forehead and the gray which had come in her hair. It had been no easy move

(038-018) for her, this, she'd shown pluck to take it so quietly. He saw her smile a

(038-019) little, then frown and go on with her thinking. What was she thinking

(038-020) about, he wondered--all she had left behind in [[new-york-city|New York]], or the rest of her

(038-021) life which lay ahead? She had always longed for things simple and old.

(038-022) Well, she would have them now with a vengeance, summer and winter, the year

(038-023) 'round, in the battered frame [[home|house]] on the mountain side, the birthplace of

(038-024) her family. A [[memory|recollection]] came to him of a summer's dusk two years ago

(038-025) and a woman with a lawn mower cutting the grass on the family graves. Would

(038-026) Edith ever be like that, a mere custodian of the past? If she did, he

(038-027) thought, she would be false to the very traditions she tried to preserve.

(038-028) For her forefathers had never been mere guardians of things gone by. Always

(038-029) they had been pioneers. That house had not been old to them, but a

(038-030) thrilling new adventure. Their old homes they had left behind, far down in

(038-031) the valleys to the east. And even those valley homes had been new to the

(038-032) rugged men come over the sea. Would Edith ever understand? Would she see

(038-033) that for herself the new must emerge from her children, from the ideas,

(038-034) desires and plans already teeming in their minds? Would she show keen

(038-035) interest, sympathy? Would she be able to keep her hold?

(038-036) In the seat behind her mother, [[betsy|Betsy]] was sitting with [[bruce|Bruce]] in her lap,

(038-037) looking over a picture book. Quietly Roger watched the girl.

(038-038) "What are you going to be?" he asked. "A woman's college president, a

(038-039) surgeon or a senator? And what will your mother think of you then?"

(038-040) They changed cars, and on a train made up of antiquated coaches they wound

(038-041) through a side valley, down which rushing and tumbling came the river that

(038-042) bore Roger's name. He went into the smoking car, and presently [[george-sidney|George]]

(038-043) joined him there. George did not yet smoke, (with his elders), but he had

(038-044) bought a package of gum and he was chewing absorbedly. Plainly the lad was

(038-045) excited over the great existence which he saw opening close ahead. Roger

(038-046) glanced at the boy's broad shoulders, noticed the eager lines of his jaw,

(038-047) looked down at his enormous hands, unformed as yet, ungainly; but in them

(038-048) was a hungriness that caused a glow in Roger's breast. One more of the

(038-049) family starting out.

(038-050) "It's all going to depend on you," Roger gravely counseled. "Your whole

(038-051) life will depend on the start you make. Either you're going to settle down,

(038-052) like so many of your neighbors up there, or you're going to hustle, plan

(038-053) out your day, keep on with your studies and go to college--the State

(038-054) Agricultural College, I mean. In short, keep up to date, my boy, and become

(038-055) in time a big figure in farming."

(038-056) "I'm going to do it," George replied. His grandfather glanced again at his

(038-057) face, so scowling, so determined. And a gleam of compassion and yearning

(038-058) came for a moment in Roger's eyes. His heavy hand lay on George's knee.

(038-059) "That's right, son," he grunted. "Make the family proud of you. I'll do all

(038-060) I can to help you start. My business is picking up, thank God, and I'll be

(038-061) able to back you now. I'll stay up here a good part of the summer. We've

(038-062) both of us got a lot to learn--and not only from books--we [[poverty|want]] to remember

(038-063) we've plenty to learn from the neighbors, too. Take [[dave-royce|old Dave Royce]], for

(038-064) instance, who when all is said and done has worked our farm for twenty odd

(038-065) years and never once run me into debt."

(038-066) "But, Gee!" demurred George. "He's so 'way out of date!"

(038-067) "I know he is, son, but we've got to go slow." And Roger's look passed

(038-068) furtively along the faces in the car. "We don't want to forget," he warned,

(038-069) "that this is still [[new-england|New England]]. Every new idea we have we want to go easy

(038-070) with, snake it in."

(038-071) "I've got an awful lot of 'em," the boy muttered hungrily.

(038-072) * * * * *

(038-073) At the farm, the next morning at daybreak, Roger was awakened by the sound

(038-074) of George's voice. It was just beneath his window:

(038-075) "But cattle are only part of it, Dave," the boy declared, in earnest tones,

(038-076) "just part of what we can have up here. Think what we've got--over three

(038-077) hundred acres! And we want to make every acre count! We want to get in a

(038-078) whole lot more of hogs--Belted Hampshires, if we can afford 'em--and a

(038-079) couple of hundred hens. White Leghorns ought to fill the bill. Of course

(038-080) that's just a starter. I've got a scheme for some incubators--electric--run

(038-081) by the dynamo which we'll put in down by the dam. And we can do wonders

(038-082) with bees, too, Dave--I've got a book on 'em I'd like you to read. And

(038-083) besides, there's big money in squab these days. Rich [[womens-roles|women]] in New York

(038-084) hotels eat thousands of 'em every night. And ducks, of course, and turkeys.

(038-085) I'd like a white gobbler right at the start, if we knew where we could get

(038-086) one cheap." The voice broke off and there was a pause. "We can do an awful

(038-087) lot with this place."

(038-088) Then Dave's deep drawl:

(038-089) "That's so, George--yes, I guess that's so. Only we don't want to fool

(038-090) ourselves. That ain't Noah's Ark over thar--it's a barn. And just for a

(038-091) starter, if I was you--" Here Dave deliberated. "Of course it's none of my

(038-092) business," he said, "it's for you and your grandfather to decide--and I

(038-093) don't propose to interfere in what ain't any of my affair--"

(038-094) "Yes, yes, Dave, sure! That's all right! But go on! _What_, just for a

(038-095) starter?"

(038-096) "Cows," came the tranquil answer. "I've been hunting around since you wrut

(038-097) me last month. And I know of three good milkers--"

(038-098) "Three? Why, Dave, I wrote we want thirty or forty!"

(038-099) "Yes--you wrut," Dave answered. "But I've druv all around these parts--and

(038-100) there ain't but three that I can find. And I ain't so sure of that third

(038-101) one. She looks like she might--" George cut in.

(038-102) "But you only had a buggy, Dave! Gee! I'm going to have a Ford!"

(038-103) "That so, George?"

(038-104) "You bet it's so! And we'll go on a cow hunt all over the State!"

(038-105) "Well--I dunno but what you're right," Dave responded cautiously. "You

(038-106) might get more cows if you had a Ford--an' got so you could run it. Yes, I

(038-107) guess it's a pretty good scheme. I believe in being conservative,

(038-108) George--but I dunno now but what a Ford--"

(038-109) Their voices passed from under the window, and Roger relaxed and smiled to

(038-110) himself. It was a good beginning, he thought.

(038-111) They bought a Ford soon afterwards and in the next few weeks of June they

(038-112) searched the farms for miles around, slowly adding to their herd. To

(038-113) Roger's surprise he found many signs of a new life stirring there--the

(038-114) farmers buying "autos" and improved machinery, thinking of new processes;

(038-115) and down in the lower valleys they found several big stock farms which were

(038-116) decidedly modern affairs. At one such place, the man in charge took a fancy

(038-117) to George and asked him to drop over often.

(038-118) "You bet I'll drop over often!" George replied, as he climbed excitedly

(038-119) into his Ford. "I want to see more of those milking machines! We're going

(038-120) to have 'em some day ourselves! A dynamo too!"

(038-121) And at home, down by the ruined mill he again set about rebuilding the dam.

(038-122) Roger felt himself growing stronger. His sleeps were sound, and his

(038-123) appetite had come back to a surprising degree. The mountain air had got

(038-124) into his blood and George's warm vigor into his soul. One afternoon,

(038-125) watching the herd come home, some thirty huge animals swinging along with a

(038-126) slow heavy power in their limbs, he breathed the strong sweet scent of them

(038-127) on the mountain breeze. George came running by them and stopped a moment by

(038-128) Roger's side, watching closely and eagerly every animal as it passed. And

(038-129) Roger glanced at George's face. The herd passed on and George followed

(038-130) behind, his collie dog leaping and barking beside him. And Roger looked up

(038-131) at a billowy cloud resting on a mountain top and wondered whether after all

(038-132) that New York [[medicine|doctor]] had been right.

(038-133) He followed the herd into the barn. In two long rows, the great heads of

(038-134) the cattle turned hungrily, lowing and sniffing deep, breathing harshly,

(038-135) stamping, as the fodder cart came down the lines. What a splendidly

(038-136) wholesome [[work-and-vocation|work]] for a lad, growing up with his roots in the soil, in these

(038-137) massive simple forces of life. What of Edith's other children? Would they

(038-138) be willing to stay here long? Each morning Roger breakfasted with Bruce the

(038-139) baby by his side. "What a thing for you, little lad," he thought, "if you

(038-140) could live here all your days. But will you? Will you want to stay? Won't

(038-141) you, too, get the fever, as I did, for the city?" In the joyous, shining,

(038-142) mysterious eyes of the baby he found no reply. He had many long talks with

(038-143) Betsy, who was eager to go away to school, and with Bob and little Tad who

(038-144) were going to school in the village that fall. And the feeling came to

(038-145) Roger that surely he would see these lives, at least for many years ahead.

(038-146) They were so familiar and so real, so fresh and filled with hopes and

(038-147) [[dream|dreams]]. And he felt himself so a part of them all.

(038-148) But one morning, climbing the steep upper field to a spring George wanted

(038-149) to show him, Roger suddenly swayed, turned faint. He caught hold of a

(038-150) boulder on the wall and held himself rigid, breathing hard. It passed, and

(038-151) he looked at his grandson. But George had noticed nothing. The boy had

(038-152) turned and his brown eyes were fixed on a fallow field below. Wistfully

(038-153) Roger watched his face. They both stood motionless for a long time.

(038-154) As the summer drew slowly to a close, Roger spent many quiet hours alone by

(038-155) the copse of birches, where the glory of autumn was already stealing in and

(038-156) out among the tall slender stems of the trees. And he thought of the silent

(038-157) winter there, and of the spring which would come again, and the long

(038-158) fragrant summer. And he watched the glow on the mountains above and the

(038-159) rolling splendors of the clouds. At dusk he heard the voices of animals,

(038-160) birds and insects, murmuring up from all the broad valley, then gradually

(038-161) sinking to deep repose, many never to wake again. And the span of his life,

(038-162) from the boyhood which he could recall so vividly here among these

(038-163) children, seemed brief to him as a summer's day, only a part of a mighty

(038-164) whole made up of the innumerable lives, the many [[generational-change|generations]], of his

(038-165) family, his own flesh and blood, come out of a past he could never know,

(038-166) and going on without him now, branching, dividing, widening out to what his

(038-167) eyes would never see.

(038-168) Vaguely he pictured them groping their way, just as he himself had done. It

(038-169) seemed to Roger that all his days he had been only entering life, as some

(038-170) rich bewildering thicket like this copse of birches here, never getting

(038-171) very deep, never seeing very clearly, never understanding all. And so it

(038-172) had been with his children, and so it was with these children of Edith's,

(038-173) and so it would be with those many others--always groping, blundering,

(038-174) starting--children, only children all. And yet what lives they were to

(038-175) lead, what joys and revelations and disasters would be theirs, in the

(038-176) strange remote world they would live in--"my flesh and blood that I never

(038-177) shall know."

(038-178) But the stars were quiet and serene. The meadows and the forests on the

(038-179) broad sweep of the mountain side took on still brighter, warmer hues. And

(038-180) there was no gloom in these long good-byes.

(038-181) * * * * *

(038-182) On a frosty night in September, he left the farm to go to the city. From

(038-183) his seat in the small automobile Roger looked back at the pleasant old

(038-184) house with its brightly lighted windows, and then he turned to George by

(038-185) his side:

(038-186) "We're in good shape for the winter, son."

(038-187) But George did not get his full meaning.

(038-188) At the little station, there were no other passengers. They walked the

(038-189) platform for some time. Then the train with a scream came around the curve.

(038-190) A quick grip on George's hand, and Roger climbed into the car. Inside, a

(038-191) moment later, he looked out through the window. By a trainman with a

(038-192) lantern, George stood watching, smiling up, and he waved his hand as the

(038-193) train pulled out.
