---
description: "The next morning on his arrival in town, Roger went to his office. He had"
id: ch39
label: "Chapter XXXIX: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(039-001) The next morning on his arrival in town, [[roger-gale|Roger]] went to [[rogers-office|his office]]. He had

(039-002) little cause for uneasiness there, for twice in the summer he had come down

(039-003) to keep an eye on the business, while John had taken brief vacations at a

(039-004) seaside place nearby. The boy had no color now in his cheeks; as always,

(039-005) they were a sallow gray with the skin drawn tight over high cheek bones;

(039-006) his vigor was all in his eyes. But here was a new John, nevertheless, a

(039-007) successful man of affairs. He had on a spruce new suit of brown, no cheap

(039-008) ready-made affair but one carefully fitted to conceal and soften his

(039-009) deformity. He was wearing a bright blue tie and a cornflower in his

(039-010) buttonhole, and his sandy hair was sleekly brushed. He showed Roger into

(039-011) his private room, a small place he had partitioned off, where over his desk

(039-012) was a motto in gold: "This is no place for your troubles or mine."

(039-013) "Lord, but you've got yourself fixed up fine in here," said Roger. John

(039-014) smiled broadly. "And you're looking like a new man, [[johnny-geer|Johnny]]."

(039-015) "I had a great time at the seashore. Learned to sail a boat alone. What do

(039-016) you think of this chair of mine?" And John complacently displayed the

(039-017) ingenious contrivance in front of his desk, somewhat like a bicycle seat.

(039-018) It was made of steel and leather pads.

(039-019) "Wonderful," said Roger. "Where'd you ever pick it up?"

(039-020) "I had it made," was the grave reply. "When a fellow has got up in life

(039-021) enough to have a stenographer, it's high time he was sitting down."

(039-022) "Let's see you do it." John sat down. "Now how is business?" Roger asked.

(039-023) "Great. Since the little slump we had in August it has taken a new

(039-024) start--and not only war business, at that--the old people are sending in

(039-025) orders again. I tell you what it is, Mr. Gale, this country is right on the

(039-026) edge of a boom!"

(039-027) And the junior member of the firm tilted triumphantly back in his chair.

(039-028) With the solid comfort which comes to a man when he returns to find his

(039-029) affairs all going well, Roger worked on until five o'clock, and then he

(039-030) started for his [[family|home]].

(039-031) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] had not yet come in, and a deep silence reigned in [[the-gale-home|the house]]. He

(039-032) looked through the rooms downstairs, and with content he noticed how little

(039-033) had been altered. His beloved study had not been touched. On the third

(039-034) floor, in the large back room, he found John comfortably installed. There

(039-035) were gay prints upon the walls, fresh curtains at the windows, a mandolin

(039-036) lying on a chair. And Roger, glancing down at the keen glad face of his

(039-037) partner, told himself that the [[medicine|doctor]] who had said this lad would die was a

(039-038) fool.

(039-039) "These doctors fool themselves often," he thought.

(039-040) Deborah and [[allan-baird|Allan]] had the front room on the floor below. Roger went in, and

(039-041) for a moment he stood looking about him. How restful and how radiant was

(039-042) this large old-fashioned chamber, so softly lighted, waiting. Through a

(039-043) passageway lined with cupboards he went into his room at the back. Deborah

(039-044) had repapered it, but with a pattern so similar that Roger did not notice

(039-045) the change. He only felt a vague freshness here, as though even this old

(039-046) chamber, too, were making a new start in life. And he felt as though he

(039-047) were to live here for years. Slowly he unpacked his trunk and took a bath

(039-048) and dressed at his leisure. Then he heard Deborah's voice at the door.

(039-049) "Come in, come in!" he answered.

(039-050) "Why, father! Dearie!" Deborah cried "Oh, how well you're looking, dad!"

(039-051) And she kissed him happily. "Oh, but I'm glad to have you back--"

(039-052) "That's good," he said, and he squeezed her hand "Here, come to the light,

(039-053) let me look at you." He saw her cheeks a little flushed, the gladness in

(039-054) her steady eyes. "Happy? Everything just right?" His daughter nodded,

(039-055) smiling, and he gave a whimsical frown. "No ups and down at all? That's

(039-056) bad."

(039-057) "Oh, yes, plenty--but all so small."

(039-058) "Good fellow to live with."

(039-059) "Very."

(039-060) "And your [[work-and-vocation|work]]?

(039-061) "It's going splendidly. I'll tell you about it this evening, after you give

(039-062) me the news from [[new-hampshire-farm|the farm]]."

(039-063) They chatted on for a short while, but he saw she was barely listening.

(039-064) "Can't you guess what it means," she asked him softly, "to a woman of my

(039-065) age--after she has been so afraid she was too old, that she'd married too

(039-066) late--to know at last--to be sure at last--that she's to have a baby, dad?"

(039-067) He drew back a little, and a lump rose in his throat.

(039-068) "By [[george-sidney|George]]!" he huskily exclaimed. "Oh, my dear, my dear!" And he held her

(039-069) close in his arms for some time, till both of them grew sensible.

(039-070) Soon after she had gone to her room, he heard Allan coming upstairs. He

(039-071) heard her low sweet cry of welcome, a silence, then their voices. He heard

(039-072) them laughing together and later Deborah humming a song. And still thinking

(039-073) of what she had told him, he felt himself so close to it all. And again the

(039-074) feeling came to him that surely he would live here for years.

(039-075) Allan came in and they had a talk.

(039-076) "Deborah says she has told you the news."

(039-077) "Yes. Everything's all right, I suppose--her condition, I mean," said

(039-078) Roger.

(039-079) "Couldn't be better."

(039-080) "Just as I thought."

(039-081) "Those six weeks we had up in Maine--"

(039-082) "Yes, you both show it. Working hard?"

(039-083) "Yes--"

(039-084) "And Deborah?" Roger asked.

(039-085) "You'll have to help me hold her in."

(039-086) They talked a few moments longer and went down to the living room. John was

(039-087) there with Deborah. All four went in to dinner. And through the

(039-088) conversation, from time to time Roger noticed the looks that went back and

(039-089) forth between husband and wife; and again he caught Deborah smiling as

(039-090) though oblivious of them all. After dinner she went with him into his den.

(039-091) "Well! Do you like the [[home|house]]?" she inquired.

(039-092) "Better than ever," he replied.

(039-093) "I wonder if you'll mind it. There'll be people coming to dinner, you

(039-094) know--"

(039-095) "That won't bother me any," he said.

(039-096) "And committee meetings now and then. But you're safe in here, it's a good

(039-097) thick door."

(039-098) "Let 'em talk," he retorted, "as hard as they please. You're married

(039-099) now--they can't scare me a bit. Only at ten o'clock, by George, you've got

(039-100) to knock off and go to bed."

(039-101) "Oh, I'll take care of myself," she said.

(039-102) "If you don't, Allan will. We've had a talk."

(039-103) "Scheming already."

(039-104) "Yes. When will it be?"

(039-105) "In April, I think."

(039-106) "You'll quit work in your [[education|schools]]?"

(039-107) "A month before."

(039-108) "And in the meantime, not too hard."

(039-109) "No, and not too easy. I'm so sure now that I can do both." And Deborah

(039-110) kissed him gently. "I'm so happy, dearie--and oh, so very glad you're

(039-111) here!"

(039-112) There followed for Roger, after that, many quiet evenings at home,

(039-113) untroubled days in his office. Seldom did he notice the [[modernity|progress]] of his

(039-114) ailment. His attention was upon his house, as this woman who mothered

(039-115) thousands of [[childhood|children]] worked on for her great family, putting all in order,

(039-116) making ready for the crisis ahead when she would become the mother of one.

(039-117) Now even more than ever before, her work came crowding into his home. The

(039-118) house was old, but the house was new. For from schools and libraries, cafés

(039-119) and tenements and streets, the mighty formless hunger which had once so

(039-120) thrilled her father poured into the house itself and soon became a part of

(039-121) it. He felt the presence of [[deborahs-school|the school]]. He heard the daily gossip of that

(039-122) bewildering system of which his daughter was a part: a world in itself,

(039-123) with its politics, its many jarring factions, its jealousies, dissensions,

(039-124) its varied personalities, ambitions and conspiracies; but in spite of these

(039-125) confusions its more progressive elements downing all distrusts and fears

(039-126) and drawing steadily closer to life, fearlessly rousing everywhere the

(039-127) hunger in people to live and learn and to take from this amazing world all

(039-128) the riches that it holds: the school with its great challenge steadily

(039-129) increasing its demands in the name of its children, demands which went deep

(039-130) down into conditions in [[tenement-district|the tenements]] and ramified through politics to the

(039-131) City Hall, to Albany, and even away to Washington--while day by day and

(039-132) week by week, from cities, towns and villages came the vast prophetic story

(039-133) of the free public schools of the land.

(039-134) And meanwhile, in the tenements, still groping and testing, feeling her

(039-135) way, keeping close watch on her great brood, their wakening desires, their

(039-136) widening curiosities, Deborah was bringing them, children, mothers and

(039-137) fathers too, together through the one big [[dream|hope]] of brighter and more ample

(039-138) lives for everybody's children. Step by step this hope was spread out into

(039-139) the surrounding swamps and jungles of blind driven lives, to find

(039-140) surprising treasures there deep buried under dirt and din, locked in the

(039-141) common heart of mankind--old songs and fables, hopes and dreams and visions

(039-142) of immortal light, handed down from father to son, nurtured, guarded,

(039-143) breathed upon and clothed anew by countless [[generational-change|generations]], innumerable

(039-144) millions of simple men and [[womens-roles|women]] blindly struggling toward the sun. Over

(039-145) the door of one of the schools, were these words carved in the stone:

(039-146) "Humanity is still a child. Our parents are all people who have lived upon

(039-147) the earth--our children, all who are to come. And the dawn at last is

(039-148) breaking. The great day has just begun."

(039-149) This spirit of triumphal life poured deep into Roger's house. It was as

(039-150) though his daughter, in these last months which she had left for undivided

(039-151) service, were strengthening her [[religion|faith]] in it all and pledging her

(039-152) devotion--as communing with herself she felt the crisis drawing near.
