---
description: "There came an interruption. One night when Deborah was out and Roger sat in"
id: ch40
label: "Chapter XL: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(040-001) There came an interruption. One night when [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] was out and [[roger-gale|Roger]] sat in

(040-002) his study alone, the maid came in highly flustered and said,

(040-003) "Mr. Gale! It's Miss [[laura-sloane|Laura]] to see you!"

(040-004) He turned with a startled jerk of his head and his face slowly reddened.

(040-005) But when he saw the maid's eager expression and saw that she was expecting

(040-006) a scene, with a frown of displeasure he rose from his chair.

(040-007) "Very well," he said, and he went to his daughter. He found her in the

(040-008) living room. No repentant Magdalene, but quite unabashed and at her ease,

(040-009) she came to her father quickly.

(040-010) "Oh, dad, I'm so glad to see you, dear!" And she gave him a swift impetuous

(040-011) kiss, her rich lips for an instant pressing warmly to his cheek.

(040-012) "Laura!" he said thickly. "Come into my study, will you? I'm alone this

(040-013) evening."

(040-014) "I'm so glad you are!" she replied. She followed him in and he closed the

(040-015) door. He glanced at her confusedly. In her warmth, her elegance, an

(040-016) indefinable change in the tone and accent of her high magnetic voice, and

(040-017) in her ardent smiling eyes, she seemed to him more the foreigner now. And

(040-018) Roger's thoughts were in a whirl. What had happened? Had she married again?

(040-019) "Is [[edith-sidney|Edith]] here still?" she was asking.

(040-020) "No, she's up in [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]]. She's living there," he answered.

(040-021) "Edith? In the mountains?" demanded Laura, in surprise. And she asked

(040-022) innumerable questions. He replied to each one of them carefully, slowly,

(040-023) meanwhile getting control of himself.

(040-024) "And Deborah married--married at last! How has it worked? Is she happy,

(040-025) dad?"

(040-026) "Very," he said.

(040-027) "And is she still keeping up her [[education|schools]]?"

(040-028) "Yes, for the present. She'll have to stop soon." Laura leaned forward,

(040-029) curious:

(040-030) "Tell me, dad--a baby?"

(040-031) "Yes." She stared a moment.

(040-032) "Deborah!" she softly exclaimed; and in a moment, "I wonder."

(040-033) "What do you mean?" her father asked, but Laura evaded his question. She

(040-034) plied him with her inquiries for a few minutes longer, then turned to him

(040-035) with a challenging smile:

(040-036) "Well, father, don't you think you had better ask me now about myself?" He

(040-037) looked away a moment, but turned resolutely back:

(040-038) "I suppose so. When did you land?"

(040-039) "This morning, dear, from [[italy|Italy]]--with my husband," she replied. And Roger

(040-040) started slightly. "I [[poverty|want]] you to meet him soon," she said.

(040-041) "Very well," he answered. At his disturbed, almost guilty expression Laura

(040-042) laughed a little and rose and came over and hugged him tight.

(040-043) "Oh, but, father dearest--it's working out so splendidly! I want you to

(040-044) know him and see for yourself! We've come to live in [[new-york-city|New York]] for a

(040-045) while--he has more to do here about war supplies."

(040-046) "More shrapnel, eh, machine guns. More wholesale death," her father

(040-047) growled. But Laura smiled good-naturedly.

(040-048) "Yes, [[love-and-courtship|love]], from [[america|America]]. Aren't you all ashamed of yourselves--scrambling

(040-049) so, to get rich quick--out of this war you disapprove of."

(040-050) "_You_ look a bit rich," her father retorted.

(040-051) "Rather--for the moment," was her cheerful answer.

(040-052) "And you still like living in Italy?"

(040-053) "Tremendously! [[rome|Rome]] is wonderful now!"

(040-054) "Reborn, eh. Wings of the Eagles."

(040-055) "Yes, and we're doing rather well."

(040-056) "I haven't noticed it," Roger said. "Why don't you send a few of your

(040-057) troops to help those plucky Frenchmen?"

(040-058) "Because," she replied, "we have a feeling that this is a war where we had

(040-059) much better help ourselves."

(040-060) "High ideals," he snorted.

(040-061) "Rome reborn," she remarked, unabashed. And her father scowled at her

(040-062) whimsically.

(040-063) "You're a heathen. I give you up," he declared. Laura had risen, smiling.

(040-064) "Oh, no, don't give me up," she said. "For you see," she added softly, "I'm

(040-065) a heathen with a great deal of love in her heart for thee, my dearest dad.

(040-066) May I bring him down, my husband?"

(040-067) "Yes--"

(040-068) "I'll telephone to Deborah to-morrow and arrange it."

(040-069) When she had gone he returned to his chair and sat for a long time in a

(040-070) daze. He was still disturbed and bewildered. What a daughter of his! And

(040-071) what did it mean? Could she really go on being happy like this? Sinning?

(040-072) Yes, she was sinning! Laura had broken her marriage vows, she had "run off

(040-073) with another fellah." Those were the plain ugly facts. And now, divorced

(040-074) and re-married, she was careering gayly on! And her views of [[the-great-war|the war]] were

(040-075) plain heathenish! And yet there was something about her--yes, he thought,

(040-076) he loved her still! What for? For being so happy! And yet she was wrong to

(040-077) be happy, all wrong! His thoughts went 'round in circles.

(040-078) And his confusion and dismay grew even deeper the next night when Laura

(040-079) brought her new husband to dine. For in place of the dark polished

(040-080) scoundrel whom Roger had expected, here was a spruce and affable [[childhood|youth]] with

(040-081) thick light hair and ruddy cheeks, a brisk pleasant manner of talking and a

(040-082) decidedly forcible way of putting the case of his country at war. They kept

(040-083) the conversation to that. For despite Deborah's friendly air, she showed

(040-084) plainly that she wanted to keep the talk impersonal. And Laura, rather

(040-085) amused at this, replied by treating Deborah and [[allan-baird|Allan]] and her father, too,

(040-086) with a bantering forbearance for their old-fashioned, narrow views and

(040-087) Deborah's religion of brotherhood, democracy. All that to Laura was passé.

(040-088) From time to time Roger glanced at her face, into her clear and luminous

(040-089) eyes so warm with the joy of living with this new man, her second. How his

(040-090) family had split apart. He wrote Edith the news of her sister, and he

(040-091) received but a brief reply. Nor did Deborah speak of it often. She seemed

(040-092) to want to forget Laura's life as the crisis in her own drew near.
