---
description: "Deborah had not yet stopped work. Again and again she put it off. For in"
id: ch41
label: "Chapter XLI: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(041-001) [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] had not yet stopped [[work-and-vocation|work]]. Again and again she put it off. For in

(041-002) her busy office so many demands both [[generational-change|old and new]] kept pressing in upon her,

(041-003) such unexpected questions and vexing little problems kept cropping up as

(041-004) Deborah tried to arrange her work for the colleague who was to take her

(041-005) place in the spring, that day after day she lingered there--until one

(041-006) afternoon in March her husband went to her office, gave her an hour to

(041-007) finish up, and then brought her [[family|home]] with him. She had a fit of the blues

(041-008) that night. [[allan-baird|Allan]] was called out on a case, and a little while later [[roger-gale|Roger]]

(041-009) found his daughter alone in the living room, a book unopened in her lap,

(041-010) her gray eyes glistening with tears. She smiled when she caught sight of

(041-011) him.

(041-012) "It's so silly!" she muttered unsteadily. "Just my condition, I suppose. I

(041-013) feel as though I had done with school for the remainder of my days!...

(041-014) Better leave me now, dearie," she added. "I'm not very proud of myself

(041-015) to-night--but I'll be all right in the morning."

(041-016) The next day she was herself again, and went quietly on with her

(041-017) preparations for the coming of her child. But still the ceaseless interests

(041-018) of those hordes of other [[childhood|children]] followed her into [[the-gale-home|the house]]. Not only her

(041-019) successor but principals and teachers came for counsel or assistance. And

(041-020) later, when reluctantly she refused to see such visitors, still the

(041-021) telephone kept ringing and letters poured in by every mail. For in her

(041-022) larger family there were weddings, births and deaths, and the endless

(041-023) savage struggle for life; and there were many climaxes of [[dream|dreams]] and

(041-024) aspirations, of loves and bitter jealousies. And out of all this straining

(041-025) and this fever of humanity, came messages to Deborah: last appeals for aid

(041-026) and advice, and gifts for the child who was to be born; tiny garments

(041-027) quaintly made by [[womens-roles|women]] and girls from [[italy|Italy]], from Russia and from Poland;

(041-028) baby blankets, wraps and toys and curious charms and amulets. There were so

(041-029) many of these gifts.

(041-030) "There's enough for forty babies," Deborah told her father. "What on earth

(041-031) am I to do, to avoid hurting anyone's feelings? And isn't it rather awful,

(041-032) the way these inequalities will crop up in spite of you? I know of eight

(041-033) tenement babies born down there in this one week. How much fuss and

(041-034) feathers is made over them, and their coming into the world, poor mites?"

(041-035) Roger smiled at his daughter.

(041-036) "You remind me of Jekyll and Hyde," he said.

(041-037) "Father! What a horrible thought! What have Jekyll and Hyde to do with me?"

(041-038) "Nothing, my dear," he answered. "Only it's queer and a little uncanny,

(041-039) something I've never seen before, this double mother life of yours."

(041-040) * * * * *

(041-041) It was only a few days later when coming home one evening he found that

(041-042) Deborah's [[medicine|doctor]] had put her to bed and installed a nurse. There followed a

(041-043) week of keen suspense when Roger stayed home from [[rogers-office|the office]]. She liked to

(041-044) have him with her, and sitting at her bedside he saw how changed his

(041-045) daughter was, how far in these few hours she had drawn into herself. He had

(041-046) suspected for some time that all was not well with Deborah, and Allan

(041-047) confirmed his suspicions. There was to be grave danger both for the mother

(041-048) and the child. It would come out all right, of course, he strove to

(041-049) reassure himself. Nothing else could happen now, with her life so

(041-050) splendidly settled at last. That Fate could be so pitiless--no, it was

(041-051) unthinkable!

(041-052) "This is what comes of your modern woman!" Roger exclaimed to Allan one

(041-053) night. "This is the price she's paying for those [[courage|nerve]]-racking years of

(041-054) work!"

(041-055) The crisis came toward the end of the week. And while for one entire night

(041-056) and through the day that followed and far into the next night the doctors

(041-057) and nurses fought for life in the room upstairs, Roger waited, left to

(041-058) himself, sitting in his study or restlessly moving through the [[home|house]]. And

(041-059) still that thought was with him--the price! It was kept in his mind by the

(041-060) anxious demands which her big family made for news. The telephone kept

(041-061) ringing. Women in motors from uptown and humbler visitors young and old

(041-062) kept coming to make inquiries. More gifts were brought and flowers. And

(041-063) Roger saw these people, and as he answered their questions he fairly

(041-064) scowled in their faces--unconsciously, for his mind was not clear.

(041-065) Reporters came. Barely an hour passed without bringing a man or a woman

(041-066) from some one of the papers. He gave them only brief replies. Why couldn't

(041-067) they leave his house alone? He saw her name in headlines: "Deborah Gale at

(041-068) Point of [[death|Death]]." And he turned angrily away. Vividly, on the second night,

(041-069) there came to him a picture of Deborah's birth so long ago in this same

(041-070) house. How safe it had been, how different, how secluded and shut in. No

(041-071) world had clamored _then_ for news. And so vivid did this picture grow,

(041-072) that when at last there came to his ears the shrill clear cry of a new

(041-073) life, it was some time before he could be sure whether this were not still

(041-074) his dream of that other night so long ago.

(041-075) But now a nurse had led him upstairs, and he stood by a cradle looking down

(041-076) at a small wrinkled face almost wholly concealed by a soft woolly blanket.

(041-077) And presently Allan behind him said,

(041-078) "It's a boy, and he's to be named after you." Roger looked up.

(041-079) "How's the mother?" he asked.

(041-080) "Almost out of danger," was the reply. Then Roger glanced at Allan's face

(041-081) and saw how drawn and gray it was. He drew a long breath and turned back to

(041-082) the child. Allan had gone and so had the nurse, and he was alone by the

(041-083) cradle. Relief and peace and happiness stole into his spirit. He felt the

(041-084) deep remoteness of this strange new little creature from all the clamoring

(041-085) world without--which he himself was soon to leave. The thought grew

(041-086) clearer, clearer, as with a curious steady smile Roger stood there looking

(041-087) down.

(041-088) "Well, little brother, you're here, thank God. And nobody knows how close

(041-089) we'll be--for a little while," he thought. "For we're almost out of the

(041-090) world, you and I."

(041-091) * * * * *

(041-092) Days passed, Deborah's strength increased, and soon they let Roger come

(041-093) into the room. She, too, was remote from the world for a time. That great

(041-094) family outside was anxious no longer, it left her alone. But soon it would

(041-095) demand her. Never again, he told himself, would she be so close, so

(041-096) intimate, as here in her bed with this child of hers to whom she had given

(041-097) her father's name. "These hours are my real good-byes."

(041-098) Two long quiet weeks of this happiness, and then in a twinkling it was

(041-099) gone. The child fell sick, within a few hours its small existence hung by a

(041-100) thread--and to Roger's startled eyes a new Deborah was revealed! Tense and

(041-101) silent on her bed, her sensitive lips compressed with pain, her birthmark

(041-102) showing a jagged line of fiery red upon her brow as her ears kept straining

(041-103) to catch every sound from the nursery adjoining, through hours of stern

(041-104) anguish she became the kind of mother that she had once so

(041-105) dreaded--shutting out everything else in the world: people, [[education|schools]], all

(041-106) other children, rich or poor, well, sick or dying! Here was the crisis of

(041-107) Deborah's life!

(041-108) One night as she lay listening, with her hand gripping Roger's tight,

(041-109) frowning abruptly she said to him, in a harsh, unnatural voice:

(041-110) "They don't care any longer, none of them care! _I'm_ safe and they've

(041-111) stopped worrying, for they know they'll soon have me back at work! The

(041-112) work," she added fiercely, "that made my body what it is, not fit to bear a

(041-113) baby!" She threw a quick and tortured look toward the door of the other

(041-114) room. "My work for those others, all those years, will be to blame if this

(041-115) one dies! And if it doesn't live I'm through! I won't go on! I couldn't!

(041-116) I'd be too bitter after this--toward all of them--_those children_!"

(041-117) These last two words were whispers so bitter they made Roger cold.

(041-118) "But this child is going to live," he responded hoarsely. Its mother stared

(041-119) up with a quivering frown. The next moment her limbs contracted as from an

(041-120) electric shock. There had come a faint wail from the other room.

(041-121) And this went on for three days and nights. Again Roger lived as in a

(041-122) dream. He saw haggard faces from time to time of doctors, nurses, servants.

(041-123) He saw Allan now and then, his tall ungainly figure stooped, his features

(041-124) gaunt, his strong wide jaw set like a vise, but his eyes kind and steady

(041-125) still, his low voice reassuring. And Roger noticed John at times hobbling

(041-126) quickly down a hall and stopping on his crutches before a closed door,

(041-127) listening. Then these figures would recede, and it was as though he were

(041-128) alone in the dark.

(041-129) At last the nightmare ended. One afternoon as he sat in his study, Allan

(041-130) came in slowly and dropped exhausted into a chair. He turned to Roger with

(041-131) a smile.

(041-132) "Safe now, I think," he said quietly.

(041-133) Roger went to Deborah and found her asleep, her face at peace. He went to

(041-134) his room and fell himself into a long dreamless slumber.

(041-135) In the days which followed, again he sat at her bedside and together they

(041-136) watched the child in her arms. So feeble still the small creature appeared

(041-137) that they both spoke in whispers. But as little by little its strength

(041-138) returned, Deborah too became herself. And though still jealously watchful

(041-139) of its every movement, she had time for other thinking. She had talks with

(041-140) her husband, not only about their baby but about his work and hers. Slowly

(041-141) her old interest in all they had had in common returned, and to the

(041-142) messages from outside she gave again a kindlier ear.

(041-143) "Allan tells me," she said one day, when she was alone with her father,

(041-144) "that I can have no more children. And I'm glad of that. But at least I

(041-145) have one," she added, "and he has already made me feel like a different

(041-146) woman than before. I feel sometimes as though I'd come a million miles

(041-147) along in life. And yet again it feels so close, all that I left back there

(041-148) in school. Because I'm so much closer now--to every mother and every child.

(041-149) At last I'm one of the family."
