---
description: "After John had gone away the house was very quiet. Only from the room"
id: ch43
label: "Chapter XLIII: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(043-001) After John had gone away [[the-gale-home|the house]] was very quiet. Only from the room

(043-002) upstairs there could be heard occasionally the faint clear cry of [[deborah-gale|Deborah]]'s

(043-003) child. And once again to [[roger-gale|Roger]] came a season of repose. He was far from

(043-004) unhappy. His disease, although progressing fast, gave him barely any pain;

(043-005) it rather made its presence felt by the manner in which it affected his

(043-006) mind. His inner life grew uneven. At times his thoughts were as in a fog,

(043-007) again they were amazingly clear and vistas opened far ahead. He could not

(043-008) control his thinking.

(043-009) This bothered him at [[rogers-office|the office]], in the [[work-and-vocation|work]] he still had to do. For some

(043-010) months he had been considering an offer from one of his rivals, a modern

(043-011) concern which wished to buy out his business together with that of three

(043-012) other firms and consolidate them all into one corporation. And Roger was

(043-013) selling, and it was hard; for the whole idea of bargaining was more

(043-014) distasteful than ever now. He had to keep reminding himself of [[edith-sidney|Edith]] and

(043-015) her [[childhood|children]].

(043-016) At last it was over, his books were closed, and there was nothing left to

(043-017) be done. Nor did he care to linger. These rooms had meant but little to

(043-018) him; they had been but a place of transition from the old office far

(043-019) [[downtown-new-york|downtown]], so full of memories of his youth, to the big corporation looming

(043-020) ahead, the huge impersonal clipping mill into which his business was to

(043-021) merge. And it came to his mind that [[new-york-city|New York]] was like that--no settled calm

(043-022) abiding place cherishing its memories, but only a town of transition, a

(043-023) great turbulent city of change, restlessly shaking off its past, tearing

(043-024) down and building anew, building higher, higher, higher, rearing to the

(043-025) very stars, and shouting, "Can you see me now?" What was the goal of this

(043-026) mad career? What dazzling city would be here? For a time he stared out of

(043-027) his window as into a promised land. Slowly at last he rose from his desk.

(043-028) Clippings, clippings, clippings. He looked at those long rows of girls

(043-029) gleaning in items large and small the public reputations of all kinds of

(043-030) men and [[womens-roles|women]], new kinds in a new nation seething with activities, sweeping

(043-031) on like some wide river swollen at flood season to a new [[america|America]], a world

(043-032) which Roger would not know. And yet it would be his world still, for in it

(043-033) he would play a part.

(043-034) "In their lives, too, we shall be there--the dim strong figures of the

(043-035) past."

(043-036) From his desk he gathered a few belongings. Then he looked into John's

(043-037) small room, with the big gold motto over the desk: "This is no place for

(043-038) your troubles or mine." On the desk lay that small album, John's parting

(043-039) gift to Deborah's boy. Roger picked it up and walked out of the office. He

(043-040) had never liked good-byes.

(043-041) In the elevator he noticed that his shoes needed shining, and when he

(043-042) reached the street below he stopped at the stand on the corner. The stocky

(043-043) Greek with bushy black hair, who had run the stand for many years, gave him

(043-044) a cheery greeting; for Roger had stopped there frequently--not that he

(043-045) cared about his shoes, but he had always liked to watch the crowds of

(043-046) people passing.

(043-047) "No hurry, boss?"

(043-048) "None," said Roger.

(043-049) "Then I give a fine shine! Polish, too?"

(043-050) "Yes, polish, too." And Roger settled back to watch.

(043-051) "And put in new shoe strings," he added, with a whimsical smile.

(043-052) Men and women, girls and boys by thousands passed him, pushing, hurrying,

(043-053) shuffling by. Girls tittering and nudging and darting quick side glances.

(043-054) Bobbing heads and figures, vigorous steps and dancing eyes. Life bubbling

(043-055) over everywhere, in laughter, in sharp angry tones, in glad expectant

(043-056) chatter. Deborah's big family. Across the street was a movie between two

(043-057) lurid posters, and there was a dance hall overhead. The windows were all

(043-058) open, and faintly above the roar of the street he could hear the piano,

(043-059) drum, fiddle and horn. The thoroughfare each moment grew more tumultuous to

(043-060) his ears, with trolley cars and taxis, motor busses, trucks and drays. A

(043-061) small red motor dashed uptown with piles of evening papers; a great black

(043-062) motor hearse rushed by. In a taxi which had stopped in a jam, a man was

(043-063) kissing a girl in his arms, and both of them were laughing. The smart

(043-064) little toque of blue satin she wore was crushed to one side. How red were

(043-065) her lips as she threw back her head....

(043-066) "Silk or cotton, boss? Which you like?" Roger glanced at the shoe strings

(043-067) and pondered.

(043-068) "Silk," he grunted in reply. Idly for a moment he watched this busy little

(043-069) man. From whence had he come in far away Greece? What existence had he

(043-070) here, and what kind of life would he still have through those many years to

(043-071) come? A feeling half of sadness crept into Roger's heavy eyes as he looked

(043-072) at the man, at his smiling face and then at other faces in the multitudes

(043-073) sweeping past. The moment he tried to single them out, how doubly chaotic

(043-074) it became. What an ocean of warm desires, passions, vivid hopes and

(043-075) worries. Vaguely he could feel them pass. Often in the midst of his life,

(043-076) his active and self-centered life, Roger had looked at these crowds on the

(043-077) street and had thought these faces commonplace. But now at the end it was

(043-078) not so.

(043-079) A woman with a baby carriage stopped directly in front of him and stood

(043-080) there anxiously watching for a chance to cross the street. And Roger

(043-081) thought of Deborah. Heavily he climbed down from his seat, paid the man and

(043-082) bade him good-night, and went [[family|home]] to see Deborah's baby.

(043-083) For a long time he sat by the cradle. Presently Deborah joined him, and

(043-084) soon they were laughing heartily at the astonishing jerks and kicks and

(043-085) grimaces of the tiny boy. He was having his bath and he hated it. But safe

(043-086) at last on his mother's lap, wrapped to his ears in a big soft towel, he

(043-087) grew very gay and contented and looked waggishly about.

(043-088) There followed long lazy days of spring, as April drifted into May. Early

(043-089) in the morning Roger could hear through his window the cries of the vendors

(043-090) of flowers and fruits. And he listened drowsily. He rose late and spent

(043-091) most of the day in the [[home|house]]; but occasionally he went out for a stroll.

(043-092) And one balmy evening when groups of youths came trooping by, singing in

(043-093) close harmony, Roger called a taxi and went far down through the tenement

(043-094) streets to a favorite haunt of his, a little Syrian pawnshop, where after

(043-095) long delving he purchased a ring to put in the new collection that he had

(043-096) been making lately. He had nearly a dozen now.

(043-097) Days passed. The house was still so quiet, Deborah was still upstairs. At

(043-098) last, one night upon leaving his study, he stopped uncertainly in the hall.

(043-099) He took more time than was his wont in closing up the house for the night,

(043-100) in trying all the windows, in turning out the various lights. Room after

(043-101) room he left in the dark. Then he went slowly up the stairs, his hand

(043-102) gratefully feeling those guiding points grown so familiar to his touch

(043-103) through many thousand evenings. His hand lingered on the banister and he

(043-104) stopped again to listen there.

(043-105) He did not come downstairs again.

(043-106) He was able to sleep but little at night. Turning restlessly on his bed, he

(043-107) would glance out of the window up at the beetling wall close by, tier on

(043-108) tier of apartments from which faint voices dropped out of the dark.

(043-109) Gradually as the night wore on, these voices would all die away into long

(043-110) mysterious silences--for to him at least such silences had grown to be

(043-111) very mysterious. Alone in the hours that followed, even these modern

(043-112) neighbors and this strange new eager town pressing down upon his house

(043-113) seemed no longer strange to him nor so appallingly immense, seemed even

(043-114) familiar and small to him, as the eyes of his mind looked out ahead.

(043-115) From his bed he could see on the opposite wall the picture [[judith-gale|Judith]] had given

(043-116) him, always so fresh and cool and dim with its deep restful tones of blue,

(043-117) of the herdsmen and the cattle on the dark mountain rim at dawn. And

(043-118) vaguely he wondered whether it was because he saw more clearly, or whether

(043-119) his mind in this curious haze could no longer see so well, that as he

(043-120) looked before him he felt no fear nor any more uncertainty. All his doubts

(043-121) had lifted, he was so sure of Judith now. As though she were coming to meet

(043-122) him, her image grew more vivid, with memories emerging out of all the years

(043-123) gone by. What memories, what vivid scenes! What intimate conversations they

(043-124) had, her voice so natural, close in his ear, as together they planned for

(043-125) their children.... Wistfully he would search the years for what he should

(043-126) soon tell his wife--until the drowsiness returned, and then again came

(043-127) visions.

(043-128) But by day it was not so, for the life of the house would rouse him and at

(043-129) intervals hold his attention.

(043-130) One evening a slight rustle, a faint fragrance in the room, made Roger

(043-131) suddenly open his eyes. And he saw [[laura-sloane|Laura]] by his bed, her slender figure

(043-132) clad in blue silk, something white at her full bosom. He noticed her

(043-133) shapely shoulders, her glossy hair and moist red lips. She was smiling down

(043-134) at him.

(043-135) "See what I've brought you, dear," she said. And she turned to a chair

(043-136) where, one on the other, tray after tray, was piled his whole collection of

(043-137) rings. At sight of them his eyes grew fixed; he could feel his pulse beat

(043-138) faster.

(043-139) "How did you ever find them?" he asked his daughter huskily.

(043-140) "Oh, I had a long hunt all by myself. But I found them at last and I've

(043-141) brought them home. Shall we look them over a little while?"

(043-142) "Yes," he said. She turned up the light, and came and sat down at the

(043-143) bedside with a tray of rings in her lap. One by one she held them up to his

(043-144) gaze, still smiling and talking softly on in that rich melodious voice of

(043-145) hers, of which he heard but snatches. How good it felt to be so gay. No

(043-146) solemn thoughts nor questionings, just these dusky glittering beauties

(043-147) here, deep soft gleams of color, each with its suggestion of memories for

(043-148) Roger, a procession of adventures reaching back into his life. He smiled

(043-149) and lay in silence watching, until at last she bent over him, kissed him

(043-150) softly, breathed a good-night and went out of the room. Roger followed her

(043-151) with his glance. He knew he would never see her again. How graceful of her

(043-152) to go like that.

(043-153) He lay there thinking about her. In her large blue limousine he saw his gay

(043-154) young daughter speeding up the Avenue, the purple gleaming pavement

(043-155) reflecting studded lines of lights. And he thought he could see her smiling

(043-156) still. He recalled scattered fragments of her life--the first luxurious

(043-157) little ménage, and the second. How many more would there be? She was only

(043-158) in her twenties still. Uneasily he tried to see into the years ahead for

(043-159) her, and he thought he saw a lonely old age, childless, loveless, cynical,

(043-160) hard. But this fear soon fell from his mind. No, whatever happened, she

(043-161) would do it gracefully, an artist always, to the end. He sighed and gave up

(043-162) the effort. For he could not think of Laura as old, nor could he think of

(043-163) her any more as being a part of his family.

(043-164) Edith came to him several times, and there was something in her face which

(043-165) gave him sharp forebodings. Making a great effort he tried to talk to her

(043-166) clearly.

(043-167) "It's hard to keep up with your children," he said. "It means keeping up

(043-168) with everything new. And you stay in your rut and then it's too late.

(043-169) Before you know it you are old."

(043-170) But his words subsided in mutterings, and Roger wearily closed his eyes.

(043-171) For a glance up into Edith's face had shown him only pity there and no heed

(043-172) to his warning. He saw that she looked upon him as old and still upon

(043-173) herself as young, though he noticed the threads of gray in her hair....

(043-174) Then he realized she had gone and that his chamber had grown dark. He must

(043-175) have been dreaming. Of what, he asked. He tried to remember. And suddenly

(043-176) out of the darkness, so harsh and clear it startled him, a picture rose in

(043-177) Roger's mind of a stark lonely figure, a woman in a graveyard cutting the

(043-178) grass on family graves. Where had he seen it? He could not recall. What had

(043-179) it to do with Edith? Was she not living in New York?... What had so

(043-180) startled him just now? Some thought, some vivid picture, some nightmare he

(043-181) could not recall.

(043-182) His last talks were with Deborah. All through those days and the long

(043-183) nights, too, he kept fancying she was in the room, and it brought deep balm

(043-184) to his restless soul. He asked her to tell him about the [[education|schools]], and

(043-185) Deborah talked to him quietly. She was going back to her work in the fall.

(043-186) She felt very humble about it--she told him she felt older now and she saw

(043-187) that her work was barely begun. But she was even happier than before. Her

(043-188) hand lay in his, and it tightened there. He opened his eyes and looked up

(043-189) into hers.

(043-190) "All so strange," he muttered, "life." There was a sharp contracting of her

(043-191) wide and sensitive mouth.

(043-192) "Yes, dear, strange!" she whispered.

(043-193) "But I'm so glad you're going on." He frowned as he tried to be simple and

(043-194) clear, and make her feel he understood what she had set herself to do. "All

(043-195) people," he said slowly, "never counted so much as now. And never so

(043-196) hungry--all--as now--for all of life--like children--children who should go

(043-197) to school. Your work will grow--I can see ahead. Never a time when every

(043-198) man and woman and child could grow so much--and hand it on--and hand it

(043-199) on--as you will do to your small son."

(043-200) He felt her hand on his forehead, and for some moments nothing was said.

(043-201) Vaguely in glimpses Roger saw his small grandson growing up; and he

(043-202) pictured other children here, not her own but of her greater family, as the

(043-203) two merged into one. He felt that she would not grow old. Children, lives

(043-204) of children; work, [[dream|dreams]] and aspirations. How bright it seemed as he

(043-205) stared ahead. Then he heard the cry of her baby.

(043-206) "Shall I nurse him here?" he heard her ask. He pressed her hand in answer.

(043-207) And when again he opened his eyes she was by his side with the child at her

(043-208) breast. Its large round eyes, so pure and clear, gazed into his own for a

(043-209) long, long time.

(043-210) "Now he's so sleepy," she whispered. "Would you like him beside you a

(043-211) moment?"

(043-212) "Please."

(043-213) He felt the faint scent of the tiny boy, and still those eyes looked into

(043-214) his. He forgot his daughter standing there; and as he watched, a sweet

(043-215) fresh sense of the mystery of this life so new stole deep into his spirit.

(043-216) All at once the baby fell asleep.

(043-217) "Good-night, little brother," he whispered. "God grant the world be very

(043-218) kind." He could feel the mother lift it up, and he heard the door close

(043-219) softly.

(043-220) Smiling he, too, fell asleep. And after that there were only dreams.
