---
description: "And his dreams were of children. Their faces passed before him. Now they"
id: ch44
label: "Chapter XLIV: His Family"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

(044-001) And his [[dream|dreams]] were of [[childhood|children]]. Their faces passed before him. Now they

(044-002) were young again in [[the-gale-home|the house]]. They were eating their suppers, three small

(044-003) girls, chattering like magpies. From her end of the table their mother

(044-004) smiled quietly across at him. "Come children," she was saying, "that will

(044-005) do for a little while." But [[roger-gale|Roger]] said, "Oh, let them talk."... Then he saw

(044-006) new-comers. [[bruce|Bruce]] came in with [[edith-sidney|Edith]], and [[george-sidney|George]] and young [[elizabeth-sidney|Elizabeth]], and

(044-007) [[allan-baird|Allan]] came with [[deborah-gale|Deborah]] who had a baby in her arms, and [[laura-sloane|Laura]] stood beside

(044-008) them. Here were his three daughters, grown, but still in some uncanny way

(044-009) they looked to him like children still; and behind them he detected figures

(044-010) long forgotten, of boys and girls whom he had known far back in his own

(044-011) childhood. John, too, had come into the [[home|house]]. Strangely now the walls were

(044-012) gone, had lifted, and a clamorous throng, laughing, shouting, pummeling,

(044-013) hedged him in on every hand--Deborah's big family!

(044-014) Soon the uproar wearied him, and Roger tried to shut them out, to bring

(044-015) back again the walls to his house. And sometimes he succeeded, and he was

(044-016) left for a while in peace with [[judith-gale|Judith]] and his three small girls. But

(044-017) despite his efforts to keep them there, new faces kept intruding. Swiftly

(044-018) his small family grew, split into other families, and these were merged

(044-019) with other figures pressing in from every side. Again he felt the presence

(044-020) of countless families all around, dividing, reuniting, with ceaseless

(044-021) changes and fresh life--a never ending multitude. Here they were singing

(044-022) and dancing, and Laura gaily waved to him. At another place were only men,

(044-023) and they were struggling savagely to clutch things from each other's

(044-024) hands. A sea of scowling visages, angry shouts, fists clinched in air. And

(044-025) he thought he saw Bruce for an instant. Behind them lay wide valleys

(044-026) obscured by heavy clouds of smoke, and he could hear the roar of guns. But

(044-027) they vanished suddenly, and he saw [[womens-roles|women]] [[grief|mourning]] now, and Edith with her

(044-028) children turned to him her anxious eyes. He tried to reach and help her,

(044-029) but already she had gone. And behind her came huge bending forms, men

(044-030) heaving at great burdens, jaws set in scowls of fierce revolt. And John was

(044-031) there on his crutches, and near him was a figure bound into a chair of

(044-032) steel, with terror in the straining limbs, while in desperation Deborah

(044-033) tried to wrench him free. Abruptly Roger turned away.

(044-034) And in a twinkling all was gone, the tumult and the clamor, and he was in a

(044-035) silent place high up on a mountain side. It was dusk. A herd of cattle

(044-036) passed, and George came close behind them. And around him Roger saw,

(044-037) emerging from the semi-dark, faces turning like his own to the summits of

(044-038) [[new-hampshire-farm|the mountains]] and the billowy splendors there. It grew so dark he could see

(044-039) no more. There fell a deep silence, not a sound but the occasional chirp of

(044-040) a bird or the faint whirr of an insect. Even the glow on the peaks was

(044-041) gone. Darkness, only darkness.

(044-042) "Surely this is death," he thought. After that he was alone. And presently

(044-043) from far away he heard the booming of a bell, deep and slow, sepulchral, as

(044-044) it measured off his life. Another silence followed, and this time it was

(044-045) more profound; and with a breathless awe he knew that all the people who

(044-046) had ever lived on earth were before him in the void to which he himself was

(044-047) drifting: people of all nations, of countless [[generational-change|generations]] reaching back and

(044-048) back and back to the beginnings of mankind: the mightiest family of all,

(044-049) that had stumbled up through the ages, had slaved and starved and dreamed

(044-050) and died, had blindly hated, blindly killed, had raised up gods and idols

(044-051) and yearned for everlasting life, had laughed and played and danced along,

(044-052) had loved and mated, given birth, had endlessly renewed itself and handed

(044-053) on its [[tradition|heritage]], had striven hungrily to learn, had groped its way in

(044-054) darkness, and after all its struggles had come now barely to the dawn. And

(044-055) then a voice within him cried,

(044-056) "What is humanity but a child? In the name of the dead I salute the

(044-057) unborn!"

(044-058) Slowly a glow appeared in his dream, and once again the scene had changed.

(044-059) The light was coming from long rows of houses rising tall and steep out of

(044-060) a teeming city street. And from these lighted houses children now came

(044-061) pouring forth. They filled the street from wall to wall with a torrent of

(044-062) warm vivid hues, they joined in mad tempestuous games, they shouted and

(044-063) they danced with glee, they whirled each other 'round and 'round. The very

(044-064) air seemed quivering. Then was heard the crash of a band, and he saw them

(044-065) marching into school. In and in and in they pressed, till [[deborahs-school|the school]] seemed

(044-066) fairly bursting. Out they came by another way, and went off marching down

(044-067) the street with the big flag waving at their head. He followed and saw the

(044-068) street divide into narrower streets and bye-ways, into roads and country

(044-069) lanes. And all were filled with children. In endless multitudes they

(044-070) came--marching, marching, spreading, spreading, like wide bobbing fields of

(044-071) flowers rolling out across the land, toward a great round flashing sun

(044-072) above a distant rim of hills.

(044-073) The sun rose strangely dazzling. It filled the heavens with blinding light.

(044-074) He felt himself drawn up and up--while from somewhere far behind he heard

(044-075) the cry of Deborah's child. A clear sweet thrill of happiness came. And

(044-076) after that--we do not know.

(044-077) For he had left [[family|his family]].

(044-078) Printed in [[america|the United States]] of America

(044-079) *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS FAMILY ***

(044-080) Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will

(044-081) be renamed.

(044-082) Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright

(044-083) law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

(044-084) so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United

(044-085) States without permission and without paying copyright

(044-086) royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

(044-087) of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

(044-088) Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™

(044-089) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

(044-090) and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

(044-091) the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

(044-092) of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for

(044-093) copies of this eBook, co
