---
description: It was late afternoon when Lanyard wakened from sleep so deep and dreamless
id: ch-12
label: 'XII: Awakening'
tags: []
type: chapter
---

[012-001] It was late afternoon when [[michael-lanyard|Lanyard]] wakened from sleep so deep and dreamless that nothing could have induced it less potent than sheer systemic exhaustion, at once nervous, muscular and mental.

[012-002] A profound and stifling lethargy benumbed his senses. There was stupor in his brain, and all his limbs ached dully. He opened dazed eyes upon blank darkness. In his ears a vast silence pulsed.

[012-003] And in that strange moment of awakening he was conscious of no individuality: it was, for the time, as if he had passed in slumber from one existence to another, sloughing en passant all his threefold personality as Marcel Troyon, Michael Lanyard, and the [[the-lone-wolf|Lone Wolf]]. Had any one of these names been uttered in his hearing just then it would have meant nothing to him—or little more than nothing: he was for the time being merely *himself*, a shell of sensations enclosing dull embers of vitality.

[012-004] For several minutes he lay without moving, curiously intrigued by this riddle of identity: it was but slowly that his mind, like a blind hand groping round a dark chamber, picked up the filaments of memory.

[012-005] One by one the connections were renewed, the circuits closed. …

[012-006] But, singularly enough in his understanding, his first thought was of the girl upstairs in the studio, unconsciously his prisoner and hostage—rather than of himself, who lay there, heavy with loss of sleep, languidly trying to realize himself.

[012-007] For he was no more as he had been. Wherein the difference lay he couldn’t say, but that a difference existed he was persuaded—that he had changed, that some strange reaction in the chemistry of his nature had taken place during slumber. It was as if sleep had not only repaired the ravages of fatigue upon the tissues of his brain and body, but had mended the tissues of his soul as well. His thoughts were fluent in fresh channels, his interests no longer the interests of the Michael Lanyard he had known, no longer self-centred, the interests of the absolute ego. He was concerned less for himself, even now when he should be most gravely so, than for another, for the girl Lucia [[bannon|Bannon]], who was nothing to him, whom he had yet to know for twenty-four hours, but of whom he could not cease to think if he would.

[012-008] It was her plight that perturbed him, from which he sought an outlet—never his own.

[012-009] Yet his own was desperate enough. …

[012-010] Baffled and uneasy, he at length bethought him of his watch. But its testimony seemed incredible: surely the hour could not be five in the afternoon!—surely he could not have slept so close upon a full round of the clock!

[012-011] And if it were so, what of the girl? Had she, too, so sorely needed sleep that the brief November day had dawned and waned without her knowledge?

[012-012] That question was one to rouse him: in an instant he was up and groping his way through the gloom that enshrouded bedchamber and dining-room to the staircase door in the hall. He found this fast enough, its key still safe in his pocket, and unlocking it quietly, shot the beam of his flash-lamp up that dark well to the door at the top; which was tight shut.

[012-013] For several moments he attended to a taciturn silence broken by never a sound to indicate that he wasn’t a lonely tenant of the little dwelling, then irresolutely lifted a foot to the first step—and withdrew it. If she continued to sleep, why disturb her? He had much to do in the way of thinking things out; and that was a process more easily performed in solitude.

[012-014] Leaving the door ajar, then, he turned to one of the front windows, parted its draperies, and peered out, over the little garden and through the iron ribs of the gate, to the street, where a single gas-lamp, glimmering within a dull golden halo of mist, made visible the scant length of the [[impasse-stanislas|impasse Stanislas]], empty, rain-swept, desolate.

[012-015] The rain persisted with no hint of failing purpose. …

[012-016] Something in the dreary emptiness of that brief vista deepened the shadow in his mood and knitted a careworn frown into his brows.

[012-017] Abstractedly he sought the kitchen and, making a light, washed up at the tap, then foraged for breakfast. Persistence turned up a spirit-stove, a half-bottle of methylated, a packet of tea, a tin or two of biscuit, as many more of potted meats: leftovers from the artist’s stock, dismally scant and uninviting in array. With these he made the discovery that he was half-famished, and found no reason to believe that the girl would be in any better case. An expedition to the nearest charcuterie was indicated; but after he had searched for and found an old raincoat of Solon’s, Lanyard decided against leaving the girl alone. Pending her appearance, he filled the spirit-stove, put the kettle on to boil, and lighting a cigarette, sat himself down to watch the pot and excogitate his several problems.

[012-018] In a fashion uncommonly clearheaded, even for him, he assembled all the facts bearing upon their predicament, his and Lucia Bannon’s, jointly and individually, and dispassionately pondered them. …

[012-019] But insensibly his thoughts reverted to their exotic phase of his awakening, drifting into such introspection as he seldom indulged, and led him far from the immediate riddle, by strange ways to a revelation altogether unpresaged and a resolve still more revolutionary.

[012-020] A look of wonder flickered in his brooding eyes; and clipped between two fingers, his cigarette grew a long ash, let it fall, and burned down to a stump so short that the coal almost scorched his flesh. He dropped it and crushed out the fire with his heel, all unwittingly.

[012-021] Slowly but irresistibly his world was turning over beneath his feet. …

[012-022] The sound of a footfall recalled him as from an immeasurable remove; he looked up to see Lucia at pause upon the threshold, and rose slowly, with effort recollecting himself and marshalling his wits against the emergency foreshadowed by her attitude.

[012-023] Tense with indignation, quick with disdain, she demanded, without any preface whatever: “Why did you lock me in?”

[012-024] He stammered unhappily: “I beg your pardon—”

[012-025] “*Why* did you lock me in?”

[012-026] “I’m sorry—”

[012-027] “Why did you—”

[012-028] But she interrupted herself to stamp her foot emphatically; and he caught her up on the echo of that:

[012-029] “If you must know, because I wasn’t trusting you.”

[012-030] Her eyes darkened ominously: “Yet you insisted I should trust you!”

[012-031] “The circumstances aren’t parallel: you’re not a notorious malefactor, wanted by the police of every capital in Europe, hounded by rivals to boot—fighting for life, liberty and”—he laughed shortly—“the pursuit of happiness!”

[012-032] She caught her breath sharply—whether with dismay or mere surprise at his frankness he couldn’t tell.

[012-033] “Are you?” she demanded quickly.

[012-034] “Am I what?”

[012-035] “What you’ve just said—”

[012-036] “A crook—and all that? Miss Bannon, you *know* it!”

[012-037] “The Lone Wolf?”

[012-038] “You’ve known it all along. De Morbihan told you—or else your father. Or, it may be, you were shrewd enough to guess it from De Morbihan’s bragging in the restaurant. At all events, it’s plain enough, nothing but desire to find proof to identify me with the Lone Wolf took you to my room last night—whether for your personal satisfaction or at the instigation of Bannon—just as nothing less than disgust with what was going on made you run away from such intolerable associations. … Though, at that, I don’t believe you even guessed how unspeakably vicious those were!”

[012-039] He paused and waited, anticipating furious denial or refutation; such would, indeed, have been the logical development of the temper in which she had come down to confront him.

[012-040] Rather than this, she seemed calmed and sobered by his charge; far from resenting it, disposed to concede its justice; anger deserted her expression, leaving it intent and grave. She came quietly into the room and faced him squarely across the table.

[012-041] “You thought all that of me—that I was capable of spying on you—yet were generous enough to believe I despised myself for doing it?”

[012-042] “Not at first. … At first, when we met back there in the corridor, I was sure you were bent on further spying. Only since waking up here, half an hour ago, did I begin to understand how impossible it would be for you to lend yourself to such villainy as last night’s.”

[012-043] “But if you thought that of me then, why did you—?”

[012-044] “It occurred to me that it would be just as well to prevent your reporting back to headquarters.”

[012-045] “But now you’ve changed your mind about me?”

[012-046] He nodded: “Quite.”

[012-047] “But why?” she demanded in a voice of amazement. “Why?”

[012-048] “I can’t tell you,” he said slowly—“I don’t know why. I can only presume it must be because—I can’t help believing in you.”

[012-049] Her glance wavered: her colour deepened. “I don’t understand …” she murmured.

[012-050] “Nor I,” he confessed in a tone as low. …

[012-051] A sudden grumble from the teakettle provided welcome distraction. Lanyard lifted it off the flames and slowly poured boiling water on a measure of tea in an earthenware pot.

[012-052] “A cup of this and something to eat’ll do us no harm,” he ventured, smiling uneasily—“especially if we’re to pursue this psychological enquiry into the whereforeness of the human tendency to change one’s mind!”
