---
description: Though it had been nearly eight when they entered the restaurant, it
id: ch-15
label: 'XV: Sheer Impudence'
tags: []
type: chapter
---

[015-001] Though it had been nearly eight when they entered the restaurant, it was something after eleven before [[michael-lanyard|Lanyard]] called for his bill.

[015-002] “We’ve plenty of time,” he had explained; “it’ll be midnight before we can move. The gentle art of housebreaking has its technique, you know, its [[criminal-code|professional ethics]]: we can’t well violate the privacy of [[madame-omber|Madame Omber]]’s strongbox before the caretakers on the premises are sound asleep. It isn’t *done*, you know, it isn’t [[social-class|class]], to go burglarizing when decent, law-abiding folk are wide-awake. … Meantime we’re better off here than trapezing the streets. …”

[015-003] It’s a silent web of side ways and a gloomy one by night that backs up north of Les Halles: old [[paris|Paris]], taciturn and sombre, steeped in its memories of grim romance. But for infrequent, flickering, corner lamps, the street that welcomed them from the doors of the warm and cosy restaurant was as dismal as an alley in some city of the dead. Its houses with their mansard roofs and boarded windows bent their heads together like mutes at a wake, black-cloaked and hooded; seldom one showed a light; never one betrayed by any sound the life that lurked behind its jealous blinds.

[015-004] Now again the rain had ceased and, though the sky remained overcast, the atmosphere was clear and brisk with a touch of frost, in grateful contrast to the dull and muggy airs that had obtained for the last twenty-four hours.

[015-005] “We’ll walk,” Lanyard suggested—“if you don’t mind—part of the way at least; it’ll eat up time, and a bit of exercise will do us both good.”

[015-006] The girl assented quietly. …

[015-007] The drum of their heels on fast-drying sidewalks struck sharp echoes from the silence of that drowsy quarter, a lonely clamour that rendered it impossible to ignore their apparent solitude—as impossible as it was for Lanyard to ignore the fact that they were followed.

[015-008] The shadow dogging them on the far side of the street, some fifty yards behind, was as noiseless as any cat; but for this circumstance—had it moved boldly with unmuffled footsteps—Lanyard would have been slow to believe it concerned with him, so confident had he felt, till that moment, of having given [[the-underworld|the Pack]] the slip.

[015-009] And from this he diagnosed still another symptom of [[the-pack|the Pack]]’s incurable stupidity!

[015-010] Supremely on the alert, he had discovered the pursuit before they left the block of the restaurant. Dissembling, partly to avoid alarming the girl, partly to trick the spy, he turned this way and that round several corners, until quite convinced that the shadow was dedicated to himself exclusively, then promptly revised his first purpose and, instead of sticking to darker back ways, struck out directly for the broad, well-lighted and lively boulevard de Sébastopol.

[015-011] Crossing this without a backward glance, he turned north, seeking some café whose arrangements suited his designs; and, presently, though not before their tramp had brought them almost to the Grand Boulevards, found one to his taste, a cheerful and well-lighted establishment occupying a corner, with entrances from both streets. A hedge of forlorn fir-trees knee-deep in wooden tubs guarded its terrasse of round metal tables and spindle-shanked chairs; of which few were occupied. Inside, visible through the wide plate-glass windows, perhaps a dozen patrons sat round half as many tables—no more—idling over dominoes and gossip: steady-paced burghers with their wives, men in small ways of business of the neighbourhood.

[015-012] Entering to this company, Lanyard selected a square marble-topped table against the back wall, entrenched himself with the girl upon the seat behind it, ordered coffee and writing materials, and proceeded to light a cigarette with the nonchalance of one to whom time is of no consequence.

[015-013] “What is it?” the girl asked guardedly as the waiter scurried off to execute his commands. “You’ve not stopped in here for nothing!”

[015-014] “True—but lower, please!” he begged. “If we speak English loud enough to be heard it will attract attention. … The trouble is, we’re followed. But as yet our faithful shadow doesn’t know we know it—unless he’s more intelligent than he seems. Consequently, if I don’t misjudge him, he’ll take a table outside, the better to keep an eye on us, as soon as he sees we’re apparently settled for some time. More than that, I’ve got a note to write—and not merely as a subterfuge. This fellow must be shaken off, and as long as we stick together, that can’t well be done.”

[015-015] He interrupted himself while the waiter served them, then added sugar to his coffee, arranged the ink bottle and paper to his satisfaction, and bent over his pen.

[015-016] “Come closer,” he requested—“as if you were interested in what I’m writing—and amused; if you can laugh a bit at nothing, so much the better. But keep a sharp eye on the windows. You can do that more readily than I, more naturally from under the brim of your hat. … And tell me what you see. …”

[015-017] He had no more than settled into the swing of composition, than the girl—apparently following his pen with closest attention—giggled coquettishly and nudged his elbow.

[015-018] “The window to the right of the door we came in,” she said, smiling delightedly; “he’s standing behind the fir-trees, staring in.”

[015-019] “Can you make out who he is?” Lanyard asked without moving his lips.

[015-020] “Nothing more than that he’s tall,” she said with every indication of enjoying a tremendous joke. “His face is all in shadow. …”

[015-021] “Patience!” counselled the adventurer. “He’ll take heart of courage when convinced of our innocence.”

[015-022] He poised his pen, examined the ceiling for inspiration, and permitted a slow smile to lighten his countenance.

[015-023] “You’ll take this note, if you please,” he said cheerfully, “to the address on the envelope, by taxi: it’s some distance, near the Étoile. … A long chance, but one we must risk; give me half an hour alone and I’ll guarantee to discourage this animal one way or another. You understand?”

[015-024] “Perfectly,” she laughed archly.

[015-025] He bent and for a few moments wrote busily.

[015-026] “Now he’s walking slowly round the corner, never taking his eyes from you,” the girl reported, shoulder to his shoulder and head distractingly near his head.

[015-027] “Good. Can you see him any better?”

[015-028] “Not yet. …”

[015-029] “This note,” he said, without stopping his pen or appearing to say anything “is for the concierge of a building where I rent stabling for a little motorcar. I’m supposed there to be a chauffeur in the employ of a crazy Englishman, who keeps me constantly travelling with him back and forth between Paris and [[london|London]]. That’s to account for the irregularity with which I use the car. They know me, monsieur and madame of the conciergerie, as Pierre Lamier; and I *think* they’re safe—not only trustworthy and of friendly disposition, but quite simple-minded; I don’t believe they gossip much. So the chances are De Morbihan and his gang know nothing of the arrangement. But that’s all speculation—a forlorn hope!”

[015-030] “I understand,” the girl observed. “He’s still prowling up and down outside the hedge.”

[015-031] “We’re not going to need that car tonight; but the hotel of [[madame-troyon|Madame]] Omber is close by; and I’ll follow and join you there within an hour at most. Meantime, this note will introduce you to the concierge and his wife—I hope you won’t mind—as my fiancée. I’m telling them we became engaged in England, and I’ve brought you to Paris to visit my mother in Montrouge; but am detained by my employer’s business; and will they please give you shelter for an hour.”

[015-032] “He’s coming in,” the girl announced quietly.

[015-033] “In here?”

[015-034] “No—merely inside the row of little trees.”

[015-035] “Which entrance?”

[015-036] “The boulevard side. He’s taken the corner table. Now a waiter’s going out to him.”

[015-037] “You can see his face now?” Lanyard asked, sealing the note.

[015-038] “Not well. …”

[015-039] “Nothing you recognize about him, eh?”

[015-040] “Nothing. …”

[015-041] “You know [[popinot|Popinot]] and [[wertheimer|Wertheimer]] by sight?”

[015-042] “No; they’re only names to me; De Morbihan and Mr. [[bannon|Bannon]] mentioned them last night.”

[015-043] “It won’t be Popinot,” Lanyard reflected, addressing the envelope; “he’s tubby.”

[015-044] “This man is tall and slender.”

[015-045] “Wertheimer, possibly. Does he suggest an Englishman, anyway?”

[015-046] “Not in the least. He wears a moustache—blond—twisted up like the Kaiser’s.”

[015-047] Lanyard made no reply; but his heart sank, and he shivered imperceptibly with foreboding. He entertained no doubt but that the worst had happened, that to the number of his enemies in Paris was added [[ekstrom|Ekstrom]].

[015-048] One furtive glance confirmed this inference. He swore bitterly, if privately and with a countenance of childlike blandness, as he sipped the coffee and finished his cigarette.

[015-049] “Who is it, then?” she asked. “Do you know him?”

[015-050] He reckoned swiftly against distressing her, recalling his mention of the fact that Ekstrom was credited with the Huysman murder.

[015-051] “Merely a hanger-on of De Morbihan’s,” he told her lightly; “a spineless animal—no trouble about scaring him off. … Now take this note, please, and we’ll go. But as we reach the door, turn back—and go out the other. You’ll find a taxi without trouble. And stop for nothing!”

[015-052] He had shown foresight in paying when served, and was consequently able to leave abruptly, without giving Ekstrom time to shy. Rising smartly, he pushed the table aside. The girl was no less quick, and little less sensitive to the strain of the moment; but as she passed him her lashes lifted and her eyes were all his for the instant.

[015-053] “Good night,” she breathed—“good night … my dear!”

[015-054] She could have guessed no more shrewdly what he needed to nerve him against the impending clash. He hadn’t hesitated as to his only course, but till then he’d been horribly afraid, knowing too well the desperate cast of the outlawed German’s nature. But now he couldn’t fail.

[015-055] He strode briskly toward the door to the boulevard, out of the corner of his eye aware that Ekstrom, taken by surprise, half-started from his chair, then sank back.

[015-056] Two paces from the entrance the girl checked, murmured in French, “Oh, my handkerchief!” and turned briskly back.

[015-057] Without pause, as though he hadn’t heard, Lanyard threw the door wide and swung out, turning directly to the spy. At the same time he dropped a hand into the pocket where nestled his automatic.

[015-058] Fortunately Ekstrom had chosen a table in a corner well removed from any in use. Lanyard could speak without fear of being overheard.

[015-059] But for a moment he refrained. Nor did Ekstrom speak or stir; sitting sideways at his table, negligently, with knees crossed, the German likewise kept a hand buried in the pocket of his heavy, dark ulster. Thus neither doubted the other’s ill-will or preparedness. And through thirty seconds of silence they remained at pause, each striving with all his might to read the other’s purpose in his eyes. But there was this distinction to be drawn between their attitudes, that whereas Lanyard’s gaze challenged, the German’s was sullenly defiant. And presently Lanyard felt his heart stir with relief: the spy’s glance had winced.

[015-060] “Ekstrom,” the adventurer said quietly, “if you fire, I’ll get you before I fall. That’s a simple statement of fact.”

[015-061] The German hesitated, moistened the corners of his lips with a nervous tongue, but contented himself with a nod of acknowledgement.

[015-062] “Take your hand off that gun,” Lanyard ordered. “Remember—I’ve only to cry your name aloud to have you torn to pieces by these people. Your life’s not worth a moment’s purchase in Paris—as you should know.”

[015-063] The German hesitated, but in his heart knew that Lanyard didn’t exaggerate. The murder of the inventor had exasperated all France; and though tonight’s weather kept a third of Paris within doors, there was still a tide of pedestrians fluent on the sidewalk, beyond the flimsy barrier of firs, that would thicken to a ravening mob upon the least excuse.

[015-064] He had mistaken his man; he had thought that Lanyard, even if aware of his pursuit, would seek to shake it off in flight rather than turn and fight—and fight here, of all places!

[015-065] “Do you hear me?” Lanyard continued in the same level and unyielding tone. “Bring both hands in sight—upon the table!”

[015-066] There was no more hesitation: Ekstrom obeyed, if with the sullen grace of a wild beast that would and could slay its trainer with one sweep of its paw—if only it dared.

[015-067] For the first time since leaving the girl Lanyard relaxed his vigilant watch over the man long enough for one swift glance through the window at his side. But she was already vanished from the café.

[015-068] He breathed more freely now.

[015-069] “Come!” he said peremptorily. “Get up. We’ve got to talk, I presume—thrash this matter out—and we’ll come to no decision here.”

[015-070] “Where do we go, then?” the German demanded suspiciously.

[015-071] “We can walk.”

[015-072] Irresolutely the spy uncrossed his knees, but didn’t rise.

[015-073] “Walk?” he repeated, “walk where?”

[015-074] “Up the boulevard, if you like—where the lights are brightest.”

[015-075] “Ah!”—with a malignant flash of teeth—“but I don’t trust you.”

[015-076] Lanyard laughed: “You wear only one shoe of that pair, my dear captain! We’re a distrustful flock, we birds of prey. Come along! Why sit there sulking, like a spoiled child? You’ve made an ass of yourself, following me to Paris; sadly though you bungled that job in London, I gave you credit for more wit than to poke your head into the lion’s mouth here. But—admitting that—why not be graceful about it? Here am I, amiably treating you like an equal: you might at least show gratitude enough to accept my invitation to flâner yourself!”

[015-077] With a grunt the spy got upon his feet, while Lanyard stood back, against the window, and made him free of the narrow path between the tree-tubs and the tables.

[015-078] “After you, my dear Adolph … !”

[015-079] The German paused, half turned towards him, choking with rage, his suffused face darkly relieving its white scars won at Heidelberg. At this, with a nod of unmistakable meaning, Lanyard advanced the muzzle of his pocketed weapon; and with an ugly growl the German moved on and out to the sidewalk, Lanyard respectfully an inch or two behind his elbow.

[015-080] “To your right,” he requested pleasantly—“if it’s all the same to you: I’ve business on the Boulevards …”

[015-081] Ekstrom said nothing for the moment, but sullenly yielded to the suggestion.

[015-082] “By the way,” the adventurer presently pursued, “you might be good enough to inform me how you knew where we were dining—eh?”

[015-083] “If it interests you—”

[015-084] “I own it does—tremendously!”

[015-085] “Pure accident: I happened to be sitting in the café, and caught a glimpse of you through the door as you went upstairs. Therefore I waited till the waiter asked for your bill at the caisse, then stationed myself outside.”

[015-086] “But why? Can you tell me what you thought to accomplish?”

[015-087] “You know well,” Ekstrom muttered. “After what happened in London … it’s your life or mine!”

[015-088] “Spoken like a true villain! But it seems to me you overlooked a conspicuous chance to accomplish your hellish design, back there in the side streets.”

[015-089] “Would I be such a fool as to shoot you down before finding out what you’ve done with those plans?”

[015-090] “You might as well have,” Lanyard informed him lightly … “For you won’t know otherwise.”

[015-091] With an infuriated oath the German stopped short: but he dared not ignore the readiness with which his tormentor imitated the manoeuvre and kept the pistol trained through the fabric of his raincoat.

[015-092] “Yes—?” the adventurer enquired with an exasperating accent of surprise.

[015-093] “Understand me,” Ekstrom muttered vindictively: “next time I’ll show you no mercy—”

[015-094] “But if there *is* no next time? We’re not apt to meet again, you know.”

[015-095] “That’s something beyond your knowledge—”

[015-096] “You think so? … But shan’t we resume our stroll? People might notice us standing here—you with your teeth bared like an ill-tempered dog. … Oh, thank you!” And as they moved on, Lanyard continued: “Shall I explain why we’re not apt to meet again?”

[015-097] “If it amuses you.”

[015-098] “Thanks once more! … For the simple reason that Paris satisfies me; so here I stop.”

[015-099] “Well?” the spy asked with a blank sidelong look.

[015-100] “Whereas you are leaving Paris tonight.”

[015-101] “What makes you think that?”

[015-102] “Because you value your thick hide too highly to remain, my dear captain.” Having gained the corner of the boulevard St. Denis, Lanyard pulled up. “One moment, by your leave. You see yonder the entrance to the Métro—don’t you? And here, a dozen feet away, a perfectly able-bodied *sergent de ville*? Let this fateful conjunction impress you properly: for five minutes after you have descended to the Métro—or as soon as the noise of a train advises me you’ve had one chance to get away—I shall mention casually to the sergo—that I have seen Captain Ek—”

[015-103] “Hush!” the German protested in a hiss of fright.

[015-104] “But certainly: I’ve no desire to embarrass you: publicity must be terribly distasteful to one of your sensitive and retiring disposition. … But I trust you understand me? On the one hand, there’s the Métro; on the other, there’s the flic; while here, you must admit, am I, as large as life and very much on the job! … And inasmuch as I shall certainly mention my suspicions to the minion of the law—as aforesaid—I’d advise you to be well out of Paris before dawn!”

[015-105] There was murder in the eyes of the spy as he lingered, truculently glowering at the smiling adventurer; and for an instant Lanyard was well-persuaded he had gone too far, that even there, even on that busy junction of two crowded thoroughfares, Ekstrom would let his temper get the better of his judgment and risk everything in an attempt upon the life of his despoiler.

[015-106] But he was mistaken.

[015-107] With a surly shrug the spy swung about and marched straight to the kiosk of the underground railway, into which, without one backward glance, he disappeared.

[015-108] Two minutes later the earth beneath Lanyard’s feet quaked with the crash and rumble of a northbound train.

[015-109] He waited three minutes longer; but Ekstrom didn’t reappear; and at length convinced that his warning had proved effectual, Lanyard turned and made off.
