---
description: "Chapter XLIX — The Painted Veil by W. Somerset Maugham"
id: Chapter-XLIX
label: "Chapter XLIX"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter XLIX

[049-001][[kitty-fane|Kitty]] found the work a refreshment to her [[the-soul|spirit]]. She went to the convent every morning soon after sunrise and did not return to [[fanes-bungalow|the bungalow]] till the westering sun flooded the narrow river and its crowded junks with gold. The [[mother-superior|Mother Superior]] gave into her care the smaller children. Kitty’s mother had brought to [[london|London]] from her native Liverpool a practical sense of housewifery and Kitty, notwithstanding her air of frivolity, had always had certain gifts to which she referred only in bantering tones. Thus she could cook quite well and she sewed beautifully. When she disclosed this talent she was set to supervise the stitching and hemming of the younger girls. They knew a little French and every day she picked up a few words of Chinese so that it was not difficult for her to manage. At other times she had to see that the smallest children did not get into mischief; she had to dress and undress them and take care that they rested when rest was needed. There were a good many babies and these were in charge of amahs, but she was bidden to keep an eye on them. None of the work was very important and she would have liked to do something which was more arduous; but the [[mother|Mother]] Superior paid no attention to her entreaties and Kitty stood sufficiently in awe of her not to be importunate.

[049-002]For the first few days she had to make something of an effort to overcome the faint distaste she felt for these little girls, in their ugly uniforms, with their stiff black hair, their round yellow faces, and their staring, sloe-black eyes. But she remembered the soft look which had transfigured so beautifully the countenance of the Mother Superior when on Kitty’s first visit to the convent she had stood surrounded by those ugly little things, and she would not allow herself to surrender to her instinct. And presently, taking in her arms one or other of the tiny creatures, crying because of a fall or a cutting tooth, when Kitty found that a few soft words, though in a language the child could not understand, the pressure of her arms and the [[tenderness|softness]] of her cheek against the [[grief|weeping]] yellow face, could comfort and console, she began to lose all her feeling of strangeness. The small children, without any fear of her, came to her in their childish troubles and it gave her a peculiar happiness to discern their confidence. It was the same with the older girls, those to whom she taught sewing; their bright, clever smiles and the [[pleasure]] she could give them by a word of praise, touched her. She felt that they liked her and, flattered and proud, she liked them in return.

[049-003]But there was one child that she could not grow used to. It was a little girl of six, an idiot with a huge hydrocephalic head that swayed top-heavily on a small, squat body, large vacant eyes and a drooling mouth; the creature spoke hoarsely a few mumbled words; it was revolting and horrible; and for some reason it conceived an idiot [[affection|attachment]] for Kitty so that it followed her about as she changed her place from one part of the large room to another. It clung to her skirt and rubbed its face against her knees. It sought to fondle her hands. She shivered with disgust. She knew it yearned for caresses and she could not bring herself to touch it.

[049-004]Once, speaking of it to Sister St. Joseph, she said that it was a [[compassion|pity]] it lived. Sister St. Joseph smiled and stretched out her hand to the misformed thing. It came and rubbed its bulging forehead against it.

[049-005]“Poor little mite,” said the nun. “She was brought here positively dying. By the [[compassion|mercy]] of Providence I was at the door just as she came. I thought there was not a moment to lose, so I baptized her at once. You would not believe what trouble we have had to keep her with us. Three or four times we thought that her little soul would escape to Heaven.”

[049-006]Kitty was silent. Sister St. Joseph in her loquacious way began to gossip of other things. And next day when the idiot child came to her and touched her hand Kitty nerved herself to place it in a caress on the great bare skull. She forced her lips into a smile. But suddenly the child, with an idiot perversity, left her; it seemed to lose interest in her, and that day and the following days paid her no attention. Kitty did not know what she had done and tried to lure it to her with smiles and gestures, but it turned away and pretended not to see her.
