---
description: "Chapter LXX — The Painted Veil by W. Somerset Maugham"
id: Chapter-LXX
label: "Chapter LXX"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter LXX

[070-001]At first because she had not wept when [[walter-fane|Walter]] died she was ashamed. It seemed dreadfully callous. Why, the eyes of the Chinese officer, [[colonel-yu|Colonel Yü]], had been wet with tears. She was dazed by her husband’s death. It was difficult to understand that he would not come into [[fanes-bungalow|the bungalow]] again and that when he got up in the morning she would not hear him take his bath, in the Suchow tub. He was alive and now he was dead. The sisters wondered at her Christian resignation and admired the courage with which she bore her loss. But [[waddington|Waddington]] was shrewd; for all his grave [[compassion|sympathy]] she had a feeling that—how should she put it?—that he had his tongue in his cheek. Of course, Walter’s death had been a shock to her. She didn’t want him to die. But after all she didn’t love him, she had never loved him; it was decent to bear herself with becoming [[grief|sorrow]]; it would be ugly and vulgar even to let anyone see into her heart; but she had gone through too much to make pretences to herself. It seemed to her that this at least the last few weeks had taught her, that if it is necessary sometimes to lie to others it is always despicable to lie to oneself. She was sorry that Walter had died in that tragic manner, but she was sorry with a purely human [[regret|sorrow]] such as she might have felt if it had been an acquaintance. She would acknowledge that Walter had admirable qualities; it just happened that she did not like him; he had always bored her. She would not admit that his death was a relief to her, she could say honestly that if by a word of hers she could bring him back to life she would say it, but she could not resist the feeling that his death made her way to some extent a trifle easier. They would never have been happy together and yet to part would have been terribly difficult. She was startled at herself for feeling as she did; she supposed that people would think her heartless and cruel if they knew. Well, they shouldn’t know. She wondered if all her fellows had in their hearts shameful secrets which they spent their time guarding from curious glances.

[070-002]She looked very little into the future and she made no plans. The only thing she knew was that she wanted to stay in [[hong-kong|Hong Kong]] as short a while as might be. She looked forward to arriving there with horror. It seemed to her that she would like to wander forever through that smiling and friendly country in her rattan chair, and, an indifferent spectator forever of the phantasmagoria of life, pass each night under a different roof. But of course the immediate future must be faced: she would go to the hotel when she reached Hong Kong, she would arrange about getting rid of the house and selling the furniture; there would be no need to see [[charles-townsend|Townsend]]. He would have the grace to keep out of her way. She would like, all the same, to see him once more in order to tell him what a despicable creature she thought him.

[070-003]But what did Charles Townsend matter?

[070-004]Like a rich melody on a harp that rang in exultant arpeggios through the complicated harmonies of a symphony, one thought beat in her heart insistently. It was this thought which gave their exotic beauty to the rice fields, which made a little smile break on her pale lips as a smooth-faced lad swung past her on his way to the market town with exultation in his carriage and audacity in his eyes, and which gave the magic of a tumultuous life to the cities she passed through. The city of the [[cholera|pestilence]] was a prison from which she was escaped, and she had never known before how exquisite was the blueness of the sky and what a joy there was in the bamboo copses that leaned with such an adorable grace across the causeway. [[freedom|Freedom]]! That was the thought that sung in her heart so that even though the future was so dim, it was iridescent like the mist over the river where the morning sun fell upon it. Freedom! Not only freedom from a bond that irked, and a companionship which depressed her; freedom, not only from the death which had threatened, but freedom from the love that had degraded her; freedom from all [[the-soul|spiritual]] ties, the freedom of a disembodied spirit; and with freedom, courage and a valiant unconcern for whatever was to come.
