---
description: "Chapter XLIV — The Painted Veil by W. Somerset Maugham"
id: Chapter-XLIV
label: "Chapter XLIV"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter XLIV

[044-001]Alone once more in the sordid parlour of the dead missionary, lying on the long chair that faced the window, her abstracted eyes on the temple across the river (now again at the approach of evening aerial and lovely), [[kitty-fane|Kitty]] tried to set in order the feelings in her heart. She would never have believed that this visit to the convent could so have moved her. She had gone from curiosity. She had nothing else to do and after looking for so many days at the walled city across the water she was not unwilling to have at least a glimpse of its mysterious [[the-street|streets]].

[044-002]But once within the convent it had seemed to her that she was transported into another world situated strangely neither in space nor time. Those bare rooms and the white corridors, austere and simple, seemed to possess the [[the-soul|spirit]] of something remote and mystical. The little chapel, so ugly and vulgar, in its very crudeness was pathetic; it had something which was [[desire|wanting]] in the greatness of a cathedral, with its stained glass and its pictures it was very humble; and the faith which had adorned it, the [[love|affection]] which cherished it, had endued it with a delicate beauty of the soul. The methodical way in which the convent’s work was carried on in the midst of the [[cholera|pestilence]] showed a coolness in the face of danger and a practical sense, almost ironical it was so matter of fact, which were deeply impressive. In Kitty’s ears rang still the ghastly sounds she heard when for a moment Sister St. Joseph opened [[the-hospital|the infirmary]] door.

[044-003]It was unexpected the way they had spoken of [[walter-fane|Walter]]. First the Sister and then [[mother-superior|the Mother Superior]] herself, and the tone of her voice had been very gentle when she praised him. Oddly enough it gave her a little thrill of [[vanity|pride]] to know that they thought so well of him. [[waddington|Waddington]] also had told something of what Walter was doing; but it was not only his competence that the nuns praised (in [[hong-kong|Hong Kong]] she had known that he was thought clever), they spoke of his thoughtfulness and his [[affection|tenderness]]. Of course he could be very tender. He was at his best when you were ill; he was too intelligent to exasperate, and his touch was pleasant, cool and soothing. By some magic he seemed able by his mere presence to relieve your suffering. She knew that she would never see again in his eyes the look of affection which she had once been so used to that she found it merely exasperating. She knew now how immense was his capacity for loving; in some odd way he was pouring it out on these wretched sick who had only him to look to. She did not feel jealousy, but a sense of emptiness; it was as though a support that she had grown so accustomed to as not to realise its presence were suddenly withdrawn from her so that she swayed this way and that like a thing that was top-heavy.

[044-004]She had only contempt for herself because once she had felt contempt for Walter. He must have known how she regarded him and he had accepted her estimate without bitterness. She was a fool and he knew it and because he loved her it had made no difference to him. She did not hate him now, nor feel [[bitterness|resentment]] of him, but fear rather and perplexity. She could not but admit that he had remarkable qualities, sometimes she thought that there was even in him a strange and unattractive greatness; it was curious then that she could not love him, but loved still a man whose worthlessness was now so clear to her. After thinking, thinking, all through those long days she rated accurately [[charles-townsend|Charles Townsend]]’s value; he was a common fellow and his qualities were second-rate. If she could only tear from her heart the love that still lingered there! She tried not to think of him.

[044-005]Waddington too thought highly of Walter. She alone had been blind to his merit. Why? Because he loved her and she did not love him. What was it in the human heart that made you despise a man because he loved you? But Waddington had confessed that he did not like Walter. Men didn’t. It was easy to see that those two nuns had for him a feeling which was very like affection. He was different with women; notwithstanding his shyness you felt in him an exquisite kindliness.
