---
description: "Chapter XLV — The Painted Veil by W. Somerset Maugham"
id: Chapter-XLV
label: "Chapter XLV"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter XLV

[045-001]But after all it was the nuns that had most deeply touched her. Sister St. Joseph, with her merry face and apple red cheeks; she had been one of the little band that came out to China with [[mother-superior|the Mother Superior]] ten years before and she had seen one after another of her companions die of [[cholera|disease]], privation and homesickness; and yet she remained cheerful and happy. What was it that gave her that naive and charming humour? And the [[mother|Mother]] Superior. [[kitty-fane|Kitty]] in fancy stood again in her presence and once more she felt humble and ashamed. Though she was so simple and unaffected she had a native [[dignity]] which inspired awe, and you could not imagine that anyone could treat her without respect. Sister St. Joseph by the way she stood, by every small gesture and the intonation of her answers, had shown the deep submission in which she held herself; and [[waddington|Waddington]], frivolous and impertinent, had shown by his tone that he was not quite at his ease. Kitty thought it unnecessary to have told her that the Mother Superior belonged to one of the great families of France; there was that in her bearing which suggested ancient race; and she had the authority of one who has never known that it is possible to be disobeyed. She had the condescension of a great lady and the humility of a saint. There was in her strong, handsome and ravaged face an austerity that was passionate; and at the same time she had a solicitude and a [[kindness|gentleness]] which permitted those little children to cluster, noisy and unafraid, in the assurance of her deep [[love|affection]]. When she had looked at the four newborn babies she had worn a smile that was sweet and yet profound: it was like a ray of sunshine on a wild and desolate heath. What Sister St. Joseph had said so carelessly of [[walter-fane|Walter]] moved Kitty strangely; she knew that he had desperately wanted her to bear a child, but she had never suspected from his reticence that he was capable with a baby of showing without embarrassment a charming and playful [[affection|tenderness]]. Most men were silly and awkward with babies. How strange he was!

[045-002]But to all that moving experience there had been a shadow (a dark lining to the silver cloud), insistent and plain, which disconcerted her. In the sober gaiety of Sister St. Joseph, and much more in the beautiful courtesy of the Mother Superior, she had felt an aloofness which oppressed her. They were friendly and even cordial, but at the same time they held something back, she knew not what, so that she was conscious that she was nothing but a casual stranger. There was a barrier between her and them. They spoke a different language not only of the tongue but of the heart. And when the door was closed upon her she felt that they had put her out of their minds so completely, going about their neglected work again without delay, that for them she might never have existed. She felt shut out not only from that poor little convent, but from some mysterious garden of the [[the-soul|spirit]] after which with all her soul she hankered. She felt on a sudden alone as she had never felt alone before. That was why she had wept.

[045-003]And now, throwing back her head wearily, she sighed: “Oh, I’m so worthless.”
