---
description: "The Cresswells, father and son, were at breakfast."
id: ch08
label: "VIII. Mr.Harry Cresswell"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# VIII. Mr.Harry Cresswell

[008-001]The Cresswells, father and son, were at breakfast. The daughter was taking her coffee and rolls upstairs in bed.

[008-002]“P’sh! I don’t like it!” declared [[harry-cresswell|Harry Cresswell]], tossing the letter back to his father. “I tell you, it is a damned Yankee trick.”

[008-003]He was a man of thirty-five, smooth and white, slight, well-bred and masterful. His father, St. [[john-taylor|John]] [[colonel-cresswell|Cresswell]], was sixty, white-haired, mustached and goateed; a stately, kindly old man with a temper and much [[pride|family pride]].

[008-004]“Well, well,” he said, his air half preoccupied, half unconcerned, “I suppose so﻿—and yet”﻿—he read the letter again, aloud: “ ‘Approaching you as one of the most influential landowners of [[alabama|Alabama]], on a confidential matter’﻿—h’m﻿—h’m﻿—‘a combination of [[wealth|capital]] and power, such as this nation has never seen’﻿—‘cotton manufacturers and cotton growers.’﻿ ﻿… Well, well! Of course, I suppose there’s nothing in it. And yet, Harry, my boy, this cotton-growing business is getting in a pretty tight pinch. Unless relief comes somehow﻿—well, we’ll just have to quit. We simply can’t keep the cost of cotton down to a remunerative figure with niggers getting scarcer and dearer. Every year I have to pinch ’em closer and closer. I had to pay Maxwell two hundred and fifty to get that old darky and his boys turned over to me, and one of the young ones has run away already.”

[008-005]Harry lighted a cigarette.

[008-006]“We must drive them more. You’re too easy, father; they understand that. By the way, what did that letter say about a ‘sister’?”

[008-007]“Says he’s got a sister over at the nigger [[the-school|school]] whom perhaps we know. I suppose he thinks we dine there occasionally.” The old man chuckled. “That reminds me, [[elspeth|Elspeth]] is sending her girl there.”

[008-008]“What’s that?” An angry gleam shot into the younger man’s eye.

[008-009]“Yes. She announced this morning, pert as you please, that she couldn’t tote clothes any more﻿—she had to study.”

[008-010]“Damn it! This thing is going too far. We can’t keep a [[servant|maid]] or a ploughboy on the place because of this devilish school. It’s going to ruin the whole labor system. We’ve been too mild and decent. I’m going to put my foot down right here. I’ll make Elspeth take that girl out of school if I have to horsewhip her, and I’ll warn the school against further interference with our tenants. Here, in less than a week, go two plough-hands﻿—and now this girl.”

[008-011]The old man smiled.

[008-012]“You’ll hardly miss any [[labor|work]] [[zora|Zora]] does,” he said.

[008-013]“I’ll make her work. She’s giving herself too many damned airs. I know who’s back of this﻿—it’s that nigger we saw talking to the white woman in the field the other day.”

[008-014]“Well, don’t work yourself up. The wench don’t amount to much anyhow. By the way, though, if you do go to the school it won’t hurt to see this Taylor’s sister and size the family up.”

[008-015]“Pshaw! I’m going to give the Smith woman such a scare that she’ll keep her hands off our niggers.” And Harry Cresswell rode away.

[008-016][[mary-taylor|Mary Taylor]] had charge of the office that morning, while [[miss-smith|Miss Smith]], shut up in her bedroom, went laboriously over her accounts. Miss Mary suddenly sat up, threw a hasty glance into the glass and felt the back of her belt. It was﻿—it couldn’t be﻿—surely, it was Mr. Harry Cresswell riding through the gateway on his beautiful white mare. He kicked the gate open rather viciously, did not stop to close it, and rode straight across the lawn. [[teacher|Miss Taylor]] noticed his riding breeches and leggings, his white linen and white, clean-cut, high-bred face. Such apparitions were few about the country lands. She felt inclined to flutter, but gripped herself.

[008-017]“Good morning,” she said, a little stiffly.

[008-018]Mr. Cresswell halted and stared; then lifting the hat which he had neglected to remove in crossing the hall, he bowed in stately grace. Miss Taylor was no ordinary picture. Her brown hair was almost golden; her dark eyes shone blue; her skin was clear and healthy, and her white dress﻿—happy coincidence!﻿—had been laundered that very morning. Her half-suppressed excitement at the sudden duty of welcoming the great aristocrat of the county, gave a piquancy to her prettiness.

[008-019]“The﻿—devil!” commented Mr. Harry Cresswell to himself. But to Miss Taylor:

[008-020]“I beg [[forgiveness|pardon]]﻿—er﻿—Miss Smith?”

[008-021]“No﻿—I’m sorry. Miss Smith is engaged this morning. I am Miss Taylor.”

[008-022]“I cannot share Miss Taylor’s sorrow,” returned Mr. Cresswell gravely, “for I believe I have the honor of some correspondence with Miss Taylor’s brother.” Mr. Cresswell searched for the letter, but did not find it.

[008-023]“Oh! Has John written you?” She beamed suddenly. “I’m so glad. It’s more than he’s done for me this three-month. I beg your pardon﻿—do sit down﻿—I think you’ll find this one easier. Our stock of chairs is limited.”

[008-024]It was delightful to have a casual meeting receive this social stamp; the girl was all at once transfigured﻿—animated, glowing, lovely; all of which did not escape the caller’s appraising inspection.

[008-025]“There!” said Mr. Cresswell. “I’ve left your gate gaping.”

[008-026]“Oh, don’t mind﻿ ﻿… I hope John’s well?”

[008-027]“The truth is,” confessed Cresswell, “it was a business matter﻿—cotton, you know.”

[008-028]“John is nothing but cotton; I tell him his soul is fibrous.”

[008-029]“He mentioned your being here and I thought I’d drop over and welcome you to the South.”

[008-030]“Thank you,” returned Miss Taylor, reddening with pleasure despite herself. There was a real sincerity in the tone. All this confirmed so many convictions of hers.

[008-031]“Of course, you know how it is in the South,” Cresswell pursued, the opening having been so easily accomplished.

[008-032]“I understand perfectly.”

[008-033]“My sister would be delighted to meet you, but﻿—”

[008-034]“Oh I realize the﻿—difficulties.”

[008-035]“Perhaps you wouldn’t mind riding by some day﻿—it’s embarrassing to suggest this, but, you know﻿—”

[008-036]Miss Taylor was perfectly self-possessed.

[008-037]“Mr. Cresswell,” she said seriously, “I know very well that it wouldn’t do for your sister to call here, and I shan’t mind a bit coming by to see her first. I don’t believe in standing on stupid ceremony.”

[008-038]Cresswell thanked her with quiet cordiality, and suggested that when he was driving by he might pick her up in his gig some morning. Miss Taylor expressed her pleasure at the prospect. Then the talk wandered to general matters﻿—the rain, the trees, the people round about, and, inevitably﻿—the Negro.

[008-039]“Oh, by the by,” said Mr. Cresswell, frowning and hesitating over the recollection of his errand’s purpose, “there was one matter”﻿—he paused. Miss Taylor leant forward, all interest. “I hardly know that I ought to mention it, but your school﻿—”

[008-040]This charming young lady disarmed his truculent spirit, and the usually collected and determined young man was at a loss how to proceed. The girl, however, was obviously impressed and pleased by his evidence of interest, whatever its nature; so in a manner vastly different from the one he had intended to assume, he continued:

[008-041]“There is a way in which we may be of service to you, and that is by enlightening you upon points concerning which the nature of your position﻿—both as teacher and socially﻿—must keep you in the dark.

[008-042]“For instance, all these Negroes are, as you know, of wretchedly low morals; but there are a few so depraved that it would be suicidal to take them into this school. We recognize the good you are doing, but we do not want it more than offset by utter lack of discrimination in choosing your material.”

[008-043]“Certainly not﻿—have we﻿—” Miss Mary faltered. This beginning was a bit ominous, wholly unexpected.

[008-044]“There is a girl, Zora, who has just entered, who﻿—I must speak candidly﻿—who ought not to be here; I thought it but right to let you know.”

[008-045]“Thank you, so much. I’ll tell Miss Smith.” Mary Taylor suddenly felt herself a judge of character. “I suspected that she was﻿—not what she ought to be. Believe me, we appreciate your interest.”

[008-046]A few more words, and Mr. Cresswell, after bending courteously over her hand with a deference no New Englander had ever shown, was riding away on his white mare.

[008-047]For a while Mary Taylor sat very quietly. It was like a breath of air from the real world, this hour’s chat with a well-bred gentleman. She wondered how she had done her part﻿—had she been too eager and school-girlish? Had she met this stately ceremony with enough breeding to show that she too was somebody? She pounced upon Miss Smith the minute that lady entered the office.

[008-048]“Miss Smith, who do you think has been here?” she burst out enthusiastically.

[008-049]“I saw him on the lawn.” There was a suspicious lack of warmth in this brief affirmation.

[008-050]“He was so gracious and kindly, and he knows my brother. And oh, Miss Smith! we’ve got to send that Zora right away.”

[008-051]“Indeed”﻿—the observation was not even interrogatory. The preceptress of the struggling school for Negro children merely evinced patience for the younger woman’s fervency.

[008-052]“Yes; he says she’s utterly depraved.”

[008-053]“Said that, did he?” Miss Smith watched her with tranquil regard. Miss Taylor paused.

[008-054]“Of course, we cannot think of keeping her.”

[008-055]Miss Smith pursed her lips, offering her first expression of opinion.

[008-056]“I guess we’ll worry along with her a little while anyhow,” she said.

[008-057]The girl stared at Miss Smith in honest, if unpardonable, amazement.

[008-058]“Do you mean to say that you are going to keep in this school a girl who not only lies and steals but is positively﻿—*immoral*?”

[008-059]Miss Smith smiled, wholly unmoved.

[008-060]“No; but I mean that *I* am here to learn from those whose ideas of right do not agree with mine, to discover *why* they differ, and to let them learn of me﻿—so far as I am worthy.”

[008-061]Mary Taylor was not unappreciative of Miss Smith’s stern high-mindedness, but her heart hardened at this, to her, misdirected zeal. Echo of the spirit of an older day, Miss Smith seemed, to her, to be cramped and paralyzed in an armor of prejudice and sectionalisms. Plain-speaking was the only course, and Mary, if a little complacent perhaps in her frankness, was sincere in her purpose.

[008-062]“I think, Miss Smith, you are making a very grave mistake. I regard Zora as a very undesirable person from every point of view. I look upon Mr. Cresswell’s visit today as almost providential. He came offering an olive branch from the white [[class|aristocracy]] to this work; to bespeak his appreciation and safeguard the future. Moreover,” and Miss Taylor’s voice gathered firmness despite Miss Smith’s inscrutable eye, “moreover, I have reason to know that the disposition﻿—indeed, the plan﻿—in certain quarters to help this work materially depends very largely on your willingness to meet the advances of the Southern whites halfway.”

[008-063]She paused for a reply or a question. Receiving neither, she walked with dignity up the stairs. From her window she could see Cresswell’s straight shoulders, as he rode toward town, and beyond him a black speck in the road. But she could not see the smile on Mr. Cresswell’s lips, nor did she hear him remark twice, with seeming irrelevance, “The devil!”

[008-064]The rider, being closer to it, recognized in Mary Taylor’s “black speck” [[bles-alwyn|Bles Alwyn]] walking toward him rapidly with axe and hoe on shoulder, whistling merrily. They saw each other almost at the same moment and whistle and smile faded. Mr. Cresswell knew the Negro by sight and disliked him. He belonged in his mind to that younger class of half-educated blacks who were impudent and disrespectful toward their superiors, not even touching his hat when he met a white man. Moreover, he was sure that it was Miss Taylor with whom this boy had been talking so long and familiarly in the [[field|cotton-field]] last Spring﻿—an offence doubly heinous now that he had seen Miss Taylor.

[008-065]His first impulse was to halt the Negro then and there and tell him a few plain truths. But he did not feel quarrelsome at the moment, and there was, after all, nothing very tangible to justify a berating. The fellow’s impudence was sure to increase, and then! So he merely reined his horse to the better part of the footpath and rode on.

[008-066]Bles, too, was thinking. He knew the well-dressed man with his milk-white face and overbearing way. He would expect to be greeted with raised hat but Bles bit his lips and pulled down his cap firmly. The axe, too, in some indistinct way felt good in his hand. He saw the horse coming in his pathway and stepping aside in the dust continued on his way, neither looking nor speaking.

[008-067]So they passed each other by, Mr. Cresswell to town, Bles to [[the-swamp-land|the swamp]], apparently ignorant of each other’s very existence. Yet, as the space widened between them, each felt a more vindictive anger for the other.

[008-068]How dares the black puppy to ignore a Cresswell on the highway? If this went on, the day would surely come when Negroes felt no respect or fear whatever for whites? And then﻿—my God! Mr. Cresswell struck his mare a vicious blow and dashed toward town.

[008-069]The black boy, too, went his way in silent, burning rage. Why should he be elbowed into the roadside dust by an insolent bully? Why had he not stood his ground? Pshaw! All this fine frenzy was useless, and he knew it. The sweat oozed on his forehead. It wasn’t man against man, or he would have dragged the pale puppy from his horse and rubbed his face in the earth. It wasn’t even one against many, else how willingly, swinging his axe, would have stood his ground before a mob.

[008-070]No, it was one against a world, a world of power, opinion, [[economics|wealth]], opportunity; and he, the one, must cringe and bear in silence lest the world crash about the ears of his people. He slowly plodded on in bitter silence toward the [[the-swamp|swamp]]. But the day was balmy, the way was beautiful; contempt slowly succeeded anger, and hope soon triumphed over all. For yonder was Zora, poised, waiting. And behind her lay the Field of [[dream|Dreams]].
