---
description: "The Hon."
id: ch13
label: "XIII. Mrs.Grey Gives a Dinner"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# XIII. Mrs.Grey Gives a Dinner

[013-001]The Hon. Charles Smith, Miss Sarah’s brother, was walking swiftly uptown from [[easterly|Mr. Easterly]]’s Wall Street office and his face was pale. At last the [[cotton|Cotton]] Combine was to all appearances an assured fact and he was slated for the Senate. The price he had paid was high: he was to represent the interests of the new trust and sundry favorable measures were already drafted and reposing in the safe of the combine’s legal department. Among others was one relating to child labor, another that would effect certain changes in the tariff, and a proposed law providing for a cotton bale of a shape and dimensions different from the customary﻿—the last constituting a particularly clever artifice which, under the guise of convenience in handling, would necessitate the installation of entirely new gin and compress machinery, to be supplied, of course, by the trust.

[013-002]As Mr. Smith drew near [[mrs-grey|Mrs. Grey]]’s Murray Hill residence his face had melted to a cynical smile. After all why should he care? He had tried independence and philanthropy and failed. Why should he not be as other men? He had seen many others that very day swallow the golden bait and promise everything. They were gentlemen. Why should he pose as better than his fellows? There was young [[colonel-cresswell|Cresswell]]. Did his aristocratic air prevent his succumbing to the lure of millions and promising the [[power|influence]] of his father and the whole Farmer’s League to the new project? Mr. Smith snapped his fingers and rang the bell. The door opened softly. The dark woodwork of the old English wainscoting glowed with the crimson flaming of logs in the wide fireplace. There was just the touch of early autumn chill in the air without, that made both the fire and the table with its soft linen, gold and silver plate, and twinkling glasses a warming, satisfying sight.

[013-003]Mrs. Grey was a portly woman, inclined to think much of her dinner and her clothes, both of which were always rich and costly. She was not herself a notably intelligent woman; she greatly admired intelligence or whatever looked to her like intelligence in others. Her money, too, was to her an ever worrying mystery and surprise, which she found herself always scheming to husband shrewdly and spend philanthropically﻿—a difficult combination.

[013-004]As she awaited her guests she surveyed the table with both satisfaction and disquietude, for her social functions were few, tonight there were﻿—she checked them off on her fingers﻿—Sir James Creighton, the rich English manufacturer, and Lady Creighton, Mr. and [[mrs-vanderpool|Mrs. Vanderpool]], Mr. [[harry-cresswell|Harry Cresswell]] and his sister, [[john-taylor|John Taylor]] and his sister, and Mr. Charles Smith, whom the evening papers mentioned as likely to be United States Senator from New Jersey﻿—a selection of guests that had been determined, unknown to the hostess, by the meeting of cotton interests earlier in the day.

[013-005]Mrs. Grey’s chef was high-priced and efficient, and her butler was the [[jealousy|envy]] of many; consequently, she knew the dinner would be good. To her intense satisfaction, it was far more than this. It was a most agreeable couple of hours; all save perhaps Mr. Smith unbent, the Englishman especially, and the Vanderpools were most gracious; but if the general pleasure was owing to any one person particularly it was to Mr. Harry Cresswell. Mrs. Grey had met Southerners before, but not intimately, and she always had in mind vividly their cruelty to “poor Negroes,” a subject she made a point of introducing forthwith. She was therefore most agreeably surprised to hear Mr. Cresswell express himself so cordially as approving of Negro education.

[013-006]“Why, I thought,” said Mrs. Grey, “that you Southerners rather disapproved﻿—or at least﻿—”

[013-007]Mr. Cresswell inclined his head courteously.

[013-008]“We Southerners, my dear Mrs. Grey, are responsible for a variety of reputations.” And he told an anecdote that set the table laughing. “Seriously, though,” he continued, “we are not as black as the blacks paint us, although on the whole I *prefer* that Helen should marry﻿—a white man.”

[013-009]They all glanced at Miss Cresswell, who lay softly back in her chair like a white lily, gleaming and bejewelled, her pale face flushing under the scrutiny; Mrs. Grey was horrified.

[013-010]“Why﻿—why the idea!” she sputtered. “Why, Mr. Cresswell, how can you conceive of anything else﻿—no Northerner dreams﻿—”

[013-011]Mr. Cresswell sipped his wine slowly.

[013-012]“No﻿—no﻿—I do not think you do *mean* that﻿—” He paused and the Englishman bent forward.

[013-013]“Really, now, you do not mean to say that there is a danger of﻿—of amalgamation, do you?” he sang.

[013-014]Mr. Cresswell explained. No, of course there was no immediate danger; but when people were suddenly thrust beyond their natural station, filled with wild ideas and impossible ambitions, it meant terrible danger to Southern white women.

[013-015]“But you believe in some education?” asked [[mary-taylor|Mary Taylor]].

[013-016]“I believe in the training of people to their highest capacity.” The Englishman here heartily seconded him.

[013-017]“But,” Cresswell added significantly, “capacity differs enormously between races.”

[013-018]The Vanderpools were sure of this and the Englishman, instancing India, became quite eloquent. Mrs. Grey was mystified, but hardly dared admit it. The general trend of the conversation seemed to be that most individuals needed to be submitted to the sharpest scrutiny before being allowed much education, and as for the “lower races” it was simply criminal to open such useless opportunities to them.

[013-019]“Why, I had a colored servant-girl once,” laughed Mrs. Vanderpool by way of climax, “who spent half her wages in piano lessons.”

[013-020]Then Mary Taylor, whose conscience was uncomfortable, said:

[013-021]“But, Mr. Cresswell, you surely believe in schools like [[miss-smith|Miss Smith]]’s?”

[013-022]“Decidedly,” returned Mr. Cresswell, with enthusiasm, “it has done great good.”

[013-023]Mrs. Grey was gratified and murmured something of Miss Smith’s “sacrifice.”

[013-024]“Positively heroic,” added Cresswell, avoiding his sister’s eyes.

[013-025]“Of course,” Mary Taylor hastened to encourage this turn of the conversation, “there are many points on which Miss Smith and I disagree, but I think everybody admires her [[labor|work]].”

[013-026]Mrs. Grey wanted particulars. “What did you disagree about?” she asked bluntly.

[013-027]“I may be responsible for some of the disagreement,” interrupted Mr. Cresswell, hesitatingly; “I’m afraid Miss Smith does not approve of us white Southerners.”

[013-028]“But you mean to say you can’t even advise her?”

[013-029]“Oh, no; we can. But﻿—we’re not﻿—er﻿—exactly welcomed. In fact,” said Cresswell gravely, “the chief criticism I have against your Northerners’ schools for Negroes is, that they not only fail to enlist the sympathy and aid of the *best* Southerners, but even repel it.”

[013-030]“That is very wrong﻿—very wrong,” commented the Englishman warmly, a sentiment in which Mrs. Grey hastened to agree.

[013-031]“Of course,” continued Cresswell, “I am free to confess that I have no personal desire to dabble in philanthropy, or conduct schools of any kind; my hands are full of other matters.”

[013-032]“But it’s precisely the advice of such disinterested men that philanthropic work needs,” [[mr-vanderpool|Mr. Vanderpool]] urged.

[013-033]“Well, I volunteered advice once in this case and I shan’t repeat the experiment soon,” said Cresswell laughing. Mrs. Grey wanted to hear the incident, but the young man was politely reluctant. Mary Taylor, however, related the tale of [[zora|Zora]] to Mrs. Grey’s private ear later.

[013-034]“Fortunately,” said Mr. Vanderpool, “Northerners and Southerners are arriving at a better mutual understanding on most of these matters.”

[013-035]“Yes, indeed,” Cresswell agreed. “After all, they never were far apart, even in slavery days; both sides were honest and sincere.”

[013-036]All through the dinner Mr. Smith had been preoccupied and taciturn. Now he abruptly shot a glance at Cresswell.

[013-037]“I suppose that one was right and one was wrong.”

[013-038]“No,” said Cresswell, “both were right.”

[013-039]“I thought the only excuse for fighting was a great Right; if Right is on neither side or simultaneously on both, then War is not only Hell but Damnation.”

[013-040]Mrs. Grey looked shocked and Mrs. Vanderpool smiled.

[013-041]“How about fighting for exercise?” she suggested.

[013-042]“At any rate,” said Cresswell, “we can all agree on helping these poor victims of our quarrel as far as their limited capacity will allow﻿—and no farther, for that is impossible.”

[013-043]Very soon after dinner Charles Smith excused himself. He was not yet inured to the ways of high finance, and the programme of the cotton barons, as unfolded that day, lay heavy on his mind, despite all his philosophy.

[013-044]“I have had a﻿—full day,” he explained to Mrs. Grey.
