---
description: "All night Miss Smith lay holding the quivering form of Zora close to her breast, staring wide-eyed into the darkness﻿—thinking, thinking."
id: ch16
label: "XVI. The Great Refusal"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# XVI. The Great Refusal

[016-001]All night [[miss-smith|Miss Smith]] lay holding the quivering form of [[zora|Zora]] close to her breast, staring wide-eyed into the darkness﻿—thinking, thinking. In the morning the party would come. There would be [[mrs-grey|Mrs. Grey]] and [[mary-taylor|Mary Taylor]], [[mrs-vanderpool|Mrs. Vanderpool]], who had left her so coldly in the lurch before, and some of the Cresswells. They would come well fed and impressed with the charming hospitality of their hosts, and rather more than willing to see through those host’s eyes. They would be in a hurry to return to some social function, and would give her [[labor|work]] but casual attention.

[016-002]It seemed so dark an ending to so bright a dream. Never for her had a fall opened as gloriously. The love of this boy and girl, blossoming as it had beneath her tender care, had been a sacred, wonderful history that revived within her memories of long-forgotten days. But above lay the [[dream|vision]] of her [[the-school|school]], redeemed and enlarged, its future safe, its usefulness broadened﻿—small wonder that to Sarah Smith the future had seemed in November almost golden.

[016-003]Then things began to go wrong. The transfer of the Tolliver land had not yet been effected; the money was ready, but [[tolliver|Mr. Tolliver]] seemed busy or hesitating. Next came this news of Mrs. Grey’s probable conditions. So here it was Christmas time, and Sarah Smith’s castles lay almost in ruins about her.

[016-004]The girl moaned in her fitful sleep and Miss Smith soothed her. Poor child! here too was work﻿—a strange strong soul cruelly stricken in her youth. Could she be brought back to a useful life? How she needed such a strong, clear-eyed helper in this crisis of her work! Would Zora make one or would this blow send her to perdition? Not if Sarah Smith could save her, she resolved, and stared out the window where the pale red dawn was sending its first rays on the white-pillared mansion of the Cresswells.

[016-005]Mrs. Grey saw the light on the columns, too, as she lay lazily in her soft white bed. There was a certain delicious languor in the late lingering fall of [[alabama|Alabama]] that suited her perfectly. Then, too, she liked the house and its appointments; there was not, to be sure, all the luxury that she was used to in her [[new-york|New York]] mansion, but there was a certain finish about it, an elegance and staid old-fashioned hospitality that appealed to her tremendously. Mrs. Grey’s heart warmed to the sight of Helen in her moments of spasmodic caring for the sick and afflicted on the estate. No better guardian of her philanthropies could be found than these same Cresswells. She must, of course, go over and see dear Sarah Smith; but really there was not much to say or to look at.

[016-006]The prospects seemed most alluring. Later, [[easterly|Mr. Easterly]] talked a while on routine business, saying, as he turned away:

[016-007]“I am more and more impressed, Mrs. Grey, with your wisdom in placing large investments in the South. With peaceful social conditions the returns will be large.”

[016-008]Mrs. Grey heard this delicate flattery complacently. She had her streak of thrift, and wanted her business capacity recognized. She listened attentively.

[016-009]“For this reason, I trust you will handle your Negro philanthropies judicially, as I know you will. There’s dynamite in this race problem for amateur reformers, but fortunately you have at hand wise and sympathetic advisers in the Cresswells.”

[016-010]Mrs. Grey agreed entirely.

[016-011]Mary [[john-taylor|Taylor]], alone of the committee, took her commission so seriously as to be anxious to begin work.

[016-012]“We are to visit the school this morning, you know,” she reminded the others, looking at her watch; “I’m afraid we’re late already.”

[016-013]The remark created mild consternation. It seemed that [[mr-vanderpool|Mr. Vanderpool]] had gone hunting and his wife had not yet arisen. Dr. Boldish was very hoarse, Mr. Easterly was going to look over some plantations with [[colonel-cresswell|Colonel Cresswell]], and Mr. Bocombe was engrossed in a novel.

[016-014]“Clever, but not true to life,” he said.

[016-015]Finally the [[preacher|clergyman]] and Mr. Bocombe, Mrs. Grey and Mrs. Vanderpool and [[teacher|Miss Taylor]] started for the school, with [[harry-cresswell|Harry Cresswell]], about an hour after lunch. The delay and suppressed excitement among the little folks had upset things considerably there, but at the sight of the visitors at the gate Miss Smith rang the bell.

[016-016]The party came in, laughing and chatting. They greeted Miss Smith cordially. Dr. Boldish was beginning to tell a good story when a silence fell.

[016-017]The children had gathered, quietly, almost timidly, and before the distinguished company realized it, they turned to meet that battery of four hundred eyes. A human eye is a wonderful thing when it simply waits and watches. Not one of these little things alone would have been worth more than a glance, but together, they became mighty, portentous. Mr. Bocombe got out his notebook and wrote furiously therein. Dr. Boldish, naturally the appointed spokesman, looked helplessly about and whispered to Mrs. Vanderpool:

[016-018]“What on earth shall I talk about?”

[016-019]“The brotherhood of man?” suggested the lady.

[016-020]“Hardly advisable,” returned Dr. Boldish, seriously, “in our friend’s presence,”﻿—with a glance toward Cresswell. Then he arose.

[016-021]“My friends,” he said, touching his fingertips and using blank verse in A minor. “This is an auspicious day. You should be thankful for the gifts of the Lord. His bounty surrounds you﻿—the trees, the [[field|fields]], the glorious sun. He gives cotton to clothe you, corn to eat, devoted friends to teach you. Be joyful. Be good. Above all, be thrifty and save your money, and do not complain and whine at your apparent disadvantages. Remember that God did not create men equal but unequal, and set metes and bounds. It is not for us to question the wisdom of the Almighty, but to bow humbly to His will.

[016-022]“Remember that the slavery of your people was not necessarily a crime. It was a school of work and love. It gave you noble friends, like Mr. Cresswell here.” A restless stirring, and the battery of eyes was turned upon that imperturbable gentleman, as if he were some strange animal. “[[love|Love]] and serve them. Remember that we get, after all, little education from books; rather in the fields, at the plough and in the kitchen. Let your ambition be to serve rather than rule, to be humble followers of the lowly Jesus.”

[016-023]With an upward glance the Rev. Dr. Boldish sat down amid a silence a shade more intense than that which had greeted him. Then slowly from the far corner rose a thin voice, tremulously. It wavered on the air and almost broke, then swelled in sweet, low music. Other and stronger voices gathered themselves to it, until two hundred were [[music|singing]] a soft minor wail that gripped the hearts and tingled in the ears of the hearers. Mr. Bocombe groped with a puzzled expression to find the pocket for his notebook; Harry Cresswell dropped his eyes, and on Mrs. Vanderpool’s lips the smile died. Mary Taylor flushed, and Mrs. Grey cried frankly:

[016-024]“Poor things!” she whispered.

[016-025]“Now,” said Mrs. Grey, turning about, “we haven’t but just a moment and we want to take a little look at your work.” She smiled graciously upon Miss Smith.

[016-026]Mrs. Grey thought the cooking-school very nice.

[016-027]“I suppose,” she said, “that you furnish cooks for the county.”

[016-028]“Largely,” said Miss Smith. Mrs. Vanderpool looked surprised, but Miss Smith added: “This county, you know, is mostly black.” Mrs. Grey did not catch the point.

[016-029]The dormitories were neat and the ladies expressed great pleasure in them.

[016-030]“It is certainly nice for them to know what a clean place is,” commented Mrs. Grey. Mr. Cresswell, however, looked at a bathroom and smiled.

[016-031]“How practical!” he said.

[016-032]“Can you not stop and see some of the classes?” Sarah Smith knew in her heart that the visit was a failure, still she would do her part to the end.

[016-033]“I doubt if we shall have time,” Mrs. Grey returned, as they walked on. “Mr. Cresswell expects friends to dinner.”

[016-034]“What a magnificent intelligence office,” remarked Mr. Bocombe, “for furnishing servants to the nation. I saw splendid material for cooks and maids.”

[016-035]“And ploughboys,” added Cresswell.

[016-036]“And singers,” said Mary Taylor.

[016-037]“Well, now that’s just my idea,” said Mrs. Grey, “that these schools should furnish trained servants and laborers for the South. Isn’t that your idea, Miss Smith?”

[016-038]“Not exactly,” the lady replied, “or at least I shouldn’t put it just that way. My idea is that this school should furnish men and women who can work and earn an honest living, train up families aright, and perform their duties as fathers, mothers, and citizens.”

[016-039]“Yes﻿—yes, precisely,” said Mrs. Grey, “that’s what I meant.”

[016-040]“I think the whites can attend to the duties of citizenship without help,” observed Mr. Cresswell.

[016-041]“Don’t let the blacks meddle in politics,” said Dr. Boldish.

[016-042]“I want to make these children full-fledged men and women, strong, self-reliant, honest, without any ‘ifs’ and ‘ands’ to their development,” insisted Miss Smith.

[016-043]“Of course, and that is just what Mr. Cresswell wants. Isn’t it, Mr. Cresswell?” asked Mrs. Grey.

[016-044]“I think I may say yes,” Mr. Cresswell agreed. “I certainly want these people to develop as far as they can, although Miss Smith and I would differ as to their possibilities. But it is not so much in the general theory of Negro education as in its particular applications where our chief differences would lie. I may agree that a boy should learn higher arithmetic, yet object to his loafing in plough-time. I might want to educate some girls but not girls like Zora.”

[016-045]Mrs. Vanderpool glanced at Mr. Cresswell, smiling to herself.

[016-046]Mrs. Grey broke in, beaming:

[016-047]“That’s just it, dear Miss Smith﻿—just it. Your heart is good, but you need strong practical advice. You know we weak women are so impractical, as my poor Job so often said. Now, I’m going to arrange to endow this school with at least﻿—at least a hundred and fifty thousand dollars. One condition is that my friend, Mr. Cresswell here, and these other gentlemen, including sound Northern business men like Mr. Easterly, shall hold this money in trust, and expend it for your school as they think best.”

[016-048]“Mr. Cresswell would be their local representative?” asked Miss Smith slowly with white face.

[016-049]“Why yes﻿—yes, of course.”

[016-050]There was a long, tense silence. Then the firm reply,

[016-051]“Mrs. Grey, I thank you, but I cannot accept your offer.”

[016-052]Sarah Smith’s voice was strong, the tremor had left her hands. She had expected something like this, of course; yet when it came﻿—somehow it failed to stun. She would not turn over the direction of the school, or the direction of the education of these people, to those who were most opposed to their education. Therefore, there was no need to hesitate; there was no need to think the thing over﻿—she had thought it over﻿—and she looked into Mrs. Grey’s eyes and with gathering tears in her own said:

[016-053]“Again, I thank you very much, Mrs. Grey.”

[016-054]Mrs. Grey was a picture of the most emphatic surprise, and Mr. Cresswell moved to the window. Mrs. Grey looked helplessly at her companions.

[016-055]“But﻿—I don’t understand, Miss Smith﻿—why can’t you accept my offer?”

[016-056]“Because you ask me to put my school in [[power|control]] of those who do not wish for the best interests of black folk, and in particular I object to Mr. Cresswell,” said Miss Smith, slowly but very distinctly, “because his relation to the forces of evil in this community has been such that he can direct no school of mine.” Mrs. Vanderpool moved toward the door and Mr. Cresswell bowing slightly followed. Dr. Boldish looked indignant and Mr. Bocombe dove after his notebook. Mary Taylor, her head in a whirl, came forward. She felt that in some way she was responsible for this dreadful situation and she wanted desperately to save matters from final disaster.

[016-057]“Come,” she said, “Mrs. Grey, we’ll talk this matter over again later. I am sure Miss Smith does not mean quite all she says﻿—she is tired and nervous. You join the others and don’t wait for me and I will be along directly.”

[016-058]Mrs. Grey was only too glad to escape and Mr. Bocombe got a chance to talk. He drew out his notebook.

[016-059]“Awfully interesting,” he said, “awfully. Now﻿—er﻿—let’s see﻿—oh, yes. Did you notice how unhealthy the children looked? [[race|Race]] is undoubtedly [[death|dying]] out; fact. No hope. Weak. No spontaneity either﻿—rather languid, did you notice? Yes, and their heads﻿—small and narrow﻿—no brain capacity. They can’t concentrate; notice how some slept when Dr. Boldish was speaking? Mr. Cresswell says they own almost no land here; think of it? This land was worth only ten dollars an acre a decade ago, he says. Negroes might have bought all and been rich. Very shiftless﻿—and that singing. Now, I wonder where they got the music? Imitation, of course.” And so he rattled on, noting not the silence of the others.

[016-060]As the carriage drove off Mary turned to Miss Smith.

[016-061]“Now, Miss Smith,” she began﻿—but Miss Smith looked at her, and said sternly, “Sit down.”

[016-062]Mary Taylor sat down. She had been so used to lecturing the older woman that the sudden summoning of her well known sternness against herself took her breath, and she sat awkwardly like the school girl that she was waiting for Miss Smith to speak. She felt suddenly very young and very helpless﻿—she who had so jauntily set out to solve this mighty problem by a waving of her wand. She saw with a swelling of pity the drawn and stricken face of her old friend and she started up.

[016-063]“Sit down,” repeated Miss Smith harshly. “Mary Taylor, you are a fool. You are not foolish, for the foolish learn; you are simply a fool. You will never learn; you have blundered into this life work of mine and well nigh ruined it. Whether I can yet save it God alone knows. You have blundered into the lives of two loving children, and sent one wandering aimless on the face of the earth and the other moaning in yonder chamber with death in her heart. You are going to marry the man that sought Zora’s ruin when she was yet a child because you think of his aristocratic pose and pretensions built on the poverty, crime, and [[greed|exploitation]] of six generations of serfs. You’ll marry him and﻿—”

[016-064]But Miss Taylor leapt to her feet with blazing cheeks.

[016-065]“How dare you?” she screamed, beside herself.

[016-066]“But God in heaven help you if you do,” finished Miss Smith, calmly.
