---
description: "Rich!"
id: ch19
label: "XIX. The Dying of Elspeth"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# XIX. The Dying of Elspeth

[019-001]Rich! This was the thought that awakened [[harry-cresswell|Harry Cresswell]] to a sense of endless well-being. Rich! No longer the mirage and semblance of [[economics|wealth]], the memory of opulence, the shadow of homage without the substance of power﻿—no; now the wealth was real, cold hard dollars, and in piles. How much? He laughed aloud as he turned on his pillow. What did he care? Enough﻿—enough. Not less than half a million; perhaps three-quarters of a million; perhaps﻿—was not cotton still rising?﻿—a whole round million! That would mean from twenty-five to fifty thousand a year. Great heavens! and he’d been starving on a bare couple of thousand and trying to keep up appearances! today the Cresswells were almost millionaires; aye, and he might be married to more millions.

[019-002]He sat up with a start. Today [[mary-taylor|Mary]] was going North. He had quite forgotten it in the wild excitement of the cotton corner. He had neglected her. Of course, there was always the hovering doubt as to whether he really wanted her or not. She had the form and carriage; her beauty, while not startling, was young and fresh and firm. On the other hand there was about her a certain independence that he did not like to associate with women. She had thoughts and notions of the world which were, to his Southern training, hardly feminine. And yet even they piqued him and spurred him like the sight of an untrained colt. He had not seen her falter yet beneath his glances or tremble at his touch. All this he desired﻿—ardently desired. But did he desire her as a wife? He rather thought that he did. And if so he must speak today.

[019-003]There was his father, too, to reckon with. [[colonel-cresswell|Colonel Cresswell]], with the perversity of the simple-minded, had taken the sudden bettering of their fortunes as his own doing. He had foreseen; he had stuck it out; his [[debt|credit]] had pulled the thing through; and the trust had learned a thing or two about Southern gentlemen.

[019-004]Toward [[john-taylor|John Taylor]] he perceptibly warmed. His business methods were such as a Cresswell could never stoop to; but he was a man of his word, and Colonel Cresswell’s correspondence with [[easterly|Mr. Easterly]] opened his eyes to the beneficent ideals of Northern [[wealth|capital]]. At the same time he could not consider the Easterlys and the Taylors and such folk as the social equals of the Cresswells, and his prejudice on this score must still be reckoned with.

[019-005]Below, Mary Taylor lingered on the porch in strange uncertainty. Harry Cresswell would soon be coming downstairs. Did she want him to find her? She liked him frankly, undisguisedly; but from the love she knew to be so near her heart she recoiled in perturbation. He wooed her﻿—whether consciously or not, she was always uncertain﻿—with every quiet attention and subtle deference, with a devotion seemingly quite too delicate for words; he not only fetched her flowers, but flowers that chimed with day and gown and season﻿—almost with mood. He had a woman’s premonitions in fulfilling her wishes. His hands, if they touched her, were soft and tender, and yet he gave a curious impression of strength and poise and will.

[019-006]Indeed, in all things he was in her eyes a gentleman in the fine old-fashioned [[class|aristocracy]] of the term; her own heart voiced all he did not say, and pleaded for him to her own confusion.

[019-007]And yet, in her heart, lay the awful doubt﻿—and the words kept ringing in her ears! “You will marry this man﻿—but heaven help you if you do!”

[019-008]So it was that on this day when she somehow felt he would speak, his footsteps on the stairs filled her with sudden panic. Without a word she slipped behind the pillars and ran down among the oaks and sauntered out upon the big road. He caught the white flutter of her dress, and smiled indulgently as he watched and waited and lightly puffed his cigarette.

[019-009]The morning was splendid with that first delicious languor of the spring which breathes over the Southland in February. Mary Taylor filled her lungs, lifted her arms aloft, and turning, stepped into the deep shadow of [[the-swamp-land|the swamp]].

[019-010]Abruptly the air, the day, the scene about her subtly changed. She felt a closeness and a tremor, a certain brooding terror in the languid sombre winds. The gold of the sunlight faded to a sickly green, and the earth was black and burned. A moment she paused and looked back; she caught the man’s silhouette against the tall white pillars of the mansion and she fled deeper into the [[the-swamp|forest]] with the hush of death about her, and the silence which is one great Voice. Slowly, and mysteriously it loomed before her﻿—that squat and darksome cabin which seemed to fitly set in the centre of the wilderness, beside its crawling slime.

[019-011]She paused in sudden certainty that there lay the answer to her doubts and mistrust. She felt impelled to go forward and ask﻿—what? She did not know, but something to still this war in her bosom. She had seldom seen [[elspeth|Elspeth]]; she had never been in her cabin. She had felt an inconquerable aversion for the evil hag; she felt it now, and shivered in the warm breeze.

[019-012]As she came in full view of the door, she paused. On the step of the cabin, framed in the black doorway, stood [[zora|Zora]]. Measured by the squat cabin she seemed in height colossal; slim, straight as a pine, motionless, with one long outstretched arm pointing to where the path swept onward toward the town.

[019-013]It was too far for words but the scene lay strangely clear and sharp-cut in the green mystery of the sunlight. Before that motionless, fateful figure crouched a slighter, smaller woman, dishevelled, clutching her breast; she bent and rose﻿—hesitated﻿—seemed to plead; then turning, clasped in passionate embrace the child whose head was hid in Zora’s gown. Next instant she was staggering along the path whither Zora pointed.

[019-014]Slowly the sun was darkened, and plaintive murmurings pulsed through the wood. The oppression and fear of the swamp redoubled in Mary Taylor.

[019-015]Zora gave no sign of having seen her. She stood tall and still, and the little golden-haired girl still sobbed in her gown. Mary Taylor looked up into Zora’s face, then paused in awe. It was a face she did not know; it was neither the beautifully mischievous face of the girl, nor the pain-stricken face of the woman. It was a face cold and mask-like, regular and comely; clothed in a mighty calm, yet subtly, masterfully veiling behind itself depths of unfathomed misery and wild revolt. All this lay in its darkness.

[019-016]“Good morning, [[teacher|Miss Taylor]].”

[019-017]Mary, who was wont to teach this woman﻿—so lately a child﻿—searched in vain for words to address her now. She stood bare-haired and hesitating in the pale green light of the darkened morning. It seemed fit that a deep groan of pain should gather itself from the mysterious depths of the swamp, and drop like a pall on the black portal of the cabin. But it brought Mary Taylor back to a sense of things, and under a sudden impulse she spoke.

[019-018]“Is﻿—is anything the matter?” she asked nervously.

[019-019]“Elspeth is sick,” replied Zora.

[019-020]“Is she very sick?”

[019-021]“Yes﻿—she has been called,” solemnly returned the dark young woman.

[019-022]Mary was puzzled. “Called?” she repeated vaguely.

[019-023]“We heard the great cry in the night, and Elspeth says it is the End.”

[019-024]It did not occur to Mary Taylor to question this mysticism; she all at once understood﻿—perhaps read the riddle in the dark, melancholy eyes that so steadily regarded her.

[019-025]“Then you can leave the place, Zora?” she exclaimed gladly.

[019-026]“Yes, I could leave.”

[019-027]“And you will.”

[019-028]“I don’t know.”

[019-029]“But the place looks﻿—evil.”

[019-030]“It is evil.”

[019-031]“And yet you will stay?”

[019-032]Zora’s eyes were now fixed far above the woman’s head, and she saw a human face forming itself in the vast rafters of the forest. Its eyes were wet with pain and anger.

[019-033]“Perhaps,” she answered.

[019-034]The child furtively uncovered her face and looked at the stranger. She was blue-eyed and golden-haired.

[019-035]“Whose child is this?” queried Mary, curiously.

[019-036]Zora looked coldly down upon the child.

[019-037]“It is Bertie’s. Her mother is bad. She is gone. I sent her. She and the others like her.”

[019-038]“But where have you sent them?”

[019-039]“To Hell!”

[019-040]Mary Taylor started under the shock. Impulsively she moved forward with hands that wanted to stretch themselves in appeal.

[019-041]“Zora! Zora! *You* mustn’t go, too!”

[019-042]But the black girl drew proudly back.

[019-043]“I *am* there,” she returned, with unmistakable simplicity of absolute conviction.

[019-044]The white woman shrank back. Her heart was wrung; she wanted to say more﻿—to explain, to ask to help; there came welling to her lips a flood of things that she would know. But Zora’s face again was masked.

[019-045]“I must go,” she said, before Mary could speak. “Goodbye.” And the dark groaning depths of the cabin swallowed her.

[019-046]With a satisfied smile, Harry Cresswell had seen the Northern girl disappear toward the swamp; for it is significant when maidens run from lovers. But maidens should also come back, and when, after the lapse of many minutes, Mary did not reappear, he followed her footsteps to the swamp.

[019-047]He frowned as he noted the footprints pointing to Elspeth’s﻿—what did Mary Taylor want there? A fear started within him, and something else. He was suddenly aware that he wanted this woman, intensely; at the moment he would have turned Heaven and earth to get her. He strode forward and the wood rose darkly green above him. A long, low, distant moan seemed to sound upon the breeze, and after it came Mary Taylor.

[019-048]He met her with tender solicitude, and she was glad to feel his arm beneath hers.

[019-049]“I’ve been searching for you,” he said after a silence. “You should not wander here alone﻿—it is dangerous.”

[019-050]“Why, dangerous?” she asked.

[019-051]“Wandering Negroes, and even wild beasts, in the forest depths﻿—and malaria﻿—see, you tremble now.”

[019-052]“But not from malaria,” she slowly returned.

[019-053]He caught an unfamiliar note in his voice, and a wild desire to justify himself before this woman clamored in his heart. With it, too, came a cooler calculating intuition that frankness alone would win her now. At all hazards he must win, and he cast the die.

[019-054]“Miss Taylor,” he said, “I want to talk to you﻿—I have wanted to for﻿—a year.” He glanced at her: she was white and silent, but she did not tremble. He went on:

[019-055]“I have hesitated because I do not know that I have a right to speak or explain to﻿—to﻿—a good woman.”

[019-056]He felt her arm tighten on his and he continued:

[019-057]“You have been to Elspeth’s cabin; it is an evil place, and has meant evil for this community, and for me. Elspeth was my mother’s favorite servant and my own mammy. My mother died when I was ten and left me to her tender mercies. She let me have my way and encouraged the bad in me. It’s a wonder I escaped total ruin. Her cabin became a rendezvous for drinking and carousing. I told my father, but he, in lazy indifference, declared the place no worse than all Negro cabins, and did nothing. I ceased my visits. Still she tried every lure and set false stories going among the Negroes, even when I sought to rescue Zora. I tell you this because I know you have heard evil rumors. I have not been a good man﻿—Mary; but I love you, and you can make me good.”

[019-058]Perhaps no other appeal would have stirred Mary Taylor. She was in many respects an inexperienced girl. But she thought she knew the world; she knew that Harry Cresswell was not all he should be, and she knew too that many other men were not. Moreover, she argued he had not had a fair chance. All the [[the-school|school]]-ma’am in her leaped to his teaching. What he needed was a superior person like herself. She loved him, and she deliberately put her arms about his neck and lifted her face to be kissed.

[019-059]Back by the place of the Silver Fleece they wandered, across the Big Road, up to the mansion. On the steps stood John Taylor and [[helen-cresswell|Helen Cresswell]] hand in hand and they all smiled at each other. The Colonel came out, smiling too, with the paper in his hands.

[019-060]“Easterly’s right,” he beamed, “the stock of the [[cotton|Cotton]] Combine﻿—” he paused at the silence and looked up. The smile faded slowly and the red blood mounted to his forehead. Anger struggled back of surprise, but before it burst forth silently the Colonel turned, and muttering some unintelligible word, went slowly into the house and slammed the door.

[019-061]So for Harry Cresswell the day burst, flamed, and waned, and then suddenly went out, leaving him dull and gray; for Mary and her brother had gone North, Helen had gone to bed, and the Colonel was in town. Outside the weather was gusty and lowering with a chill in the air. He paced the room fitfully.

[019-062]Well, he was happy. Or, was he happy?

[019-063]He gnawed his mustache, for already his quick, changeable nature was feeling the rebound from glory to misery. He was a little ashamed of his exaltation; a bit doubtful and uncertain. He had stooped low to this Yankee school-ma’am, lower than he had ever stooped to a woman. Usually, while he played at loving, women grovelled; for was he not a Cresswell? Would this woman recognize that fact and respect him accordingly?

[019-064]Then there was Zora; what had she said and hinted to Mary? The wench was always eluding and mocking him, the black devil! But, pshaw!﻿—he poured himself a glass of brandy﻿—was he not rich and young? The world was his.

[019-065]His valet knocked.

[019-066]“Gentleman is asking if you forgits it’s Saturday night, sir?” said Sam.

[019-067]Cresswell walked thoughtfully to the window, swept back the curtain, and looked toward the darkness and the swamp. It lowered threateningly; behind it the night sky was tinged with blood.

[019-068]“No,” he said; “I’m not going.” And he shut out the glow.

[019-069]Yet he grew more and more restless. The devil danced in his veins and burned in his forehead. His hands shook. He heard a rustle of departing feet beneath his window, then a pause and a faint halloo.

[019-070]“All right,” he called, and in a moment went downstairs and out into the night. As he closed the front door there seemed to come faintly up from the swamp a low ululation, like the prolonged cry of some wild bird, or the wail of one’s mourning for his dead.

[019-071]Within the cabin, Elspeth heard. Tremblingly, she swayed to her feet, a haggard, awful sight. She motioned Zora away, and stretching her hands palms upward to the sky, cried with dry and fear-struck gasp:

[019-072]“I’se called! I’se called!”

[019-073]On the bed the child smiled in its [[dream|dreaming]]; the red flame of the firelight set the gold to dancing in her hair. Zora shrank back into the shadows and listened. Then it came. She heard the heavy footsteps crashing through the underbrush﻿—coming, coming, as from the end of the world. She shrank still farther back, and a shadow swept the door.

[019-074]He was a mighty man, black and white-haired, and his eyes were the eyes of death. He bent to enter the door, and then uplifting himself and stretching his great arms, his palms touched the blackened rafters.

[019-075]Zora started forward. Thick memories of some forgotten past came piling in upon her. Where had she known him? What was he to her?

[019-076]Slowly Elspeth, with quivering hands, unwound the black and snakelike object that always guarded her breast. Without a word, he took it, and again his hands flew heavenward. With a low and fearful moan the old woman lurched sideways, then crashed, like a fallen pine, upon the hearthstone. She lay still﻿—dead.

[019-077]Three times the man passed his hands, wavelike, above the dead. Three times he murmured, and his eyes burned into the shadows, where the girl trembled. Then he turned and went as he had come, his heavy feet crashing through the underbrush, on and on, fainter and fainter, as to the end of the world.

[019-078]Zora shook herself from the trance-like horror and passed her hands across her eyes to drive out the nightmare. But, no! there lay the dead upon the hearth with the firelight flashing over her, a bloated, hideous, twisted thing, distorted in the rigor of death. A moment Zora looked down upon her mother. She felt the cold body whence the wandering, wrecked soul had passed. She sat down and stared death in the face for the first time. A mighty questioning arose within, a questioning and a yearning.

[019-079]Was Elspeth now at peace? Was [[death|Death]] the Way﻿—the wide, dark Way? She had never thought of it before, and as she thought she crept forward and looked into the fearful face pityingly.

[019-080]“Mammy!” she whispered﻿—with bated breath﻿—“Mammy Elspeth!” Out of the night came a whispered answer: “*Elspeth! Elspeth!*”

[019-081]Zora sprang to her feet, alert, fearful. With a swing of her arm, she pulled the great oaken door to and dropped the bar into its place. Over the dead she spread a clean white sheet. Into the fire she thrust pine-knots. They glared in vague red, and shadowy brilliance, waving and quivering and throwing up thin swirling columns of black smoke. Then standing beside the fireplace with the white, still corpse between her and the door, she took up her awful vigil.

[019-082]There came a low knocking at the door; then silence and footsteps wandering furtively about. The night seemed all footsteps and whispers. There came a louder knocking, and a voice:

[019-083]“*Elspeth! Elspeth! Open the door; it’s me.*”

[019-084]Then muttering and wandering noises, and silence again.

[019-085]The child on the bed turned itself, murmuring uneasily in its dreams. And then *they* came. Zora froze, watching the door, wide-eyed, while the fire flamed redder. A loud quick knock at the door﻿—a pause﻿—an oath and a cry.

[019-086]“*Elspeth! Open this door, damn you!*”

[019-087]A moment of waiting and then the knocking came again, furious and long continued. Outside there was much trampling and swearing. Zora did not move; the child slept on. A tugging and dragging, a dull blow that set the cabin quivering; then﻿—

[019-088]*Bang! Crack! Crash!*﻿—the door wavered, splintered, and dropped upon the floor.

[019-089]With a snarl, a crowd of some half-dozen white faces rushed forward, wavered and stopped. The awakened child sat up and stared with wide blue eyes. Slowly, with no word, the intruders turned and went silently away, leaving but one late comer who pressed forward.

[019-090]“What damned mummery is this?” he cried, and snatching at the sheet, dragged it from the black distorted countenance of the corpse. He shuddered but for a moment he could not stir. He felt the midnight eyes of the girl﻿—he saw the twisted, oozing mouth of the hag, blue-black and hideous.

[019-091]Suddenly back behind there in the darkness a shriek split the night like a sudden flash of flame﻿—a great ringing scream that cracked and swelled and stopped. With one wild effort the man hurled himself out the door and plunged through the darkness. Panting and cursing, he flashed his huge revolver﻿—*bang! bang! bang!* it cracked into the night. The sweat poured from his forehead; the terror of the swamp was upon him. With a struggling and tearing in his throat, he tripped and fell fainting under the silent oaks.
