---
description: "The new President had been inaugurated."
id: ch28
label: "XXVIII. The Annunciation"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# XXVIII. The Annunciation

[028-001]The new President had been inaugurated. Beneath the creamy pile of the old Capitol, and facing the new library, he had stood aloft and looked down on a waving sea of faces﻿—black-coated, jostling, eager-eyed fellow creatures. They had watched his lips move, had scanned eagerly his dress and the gowned and decorated dignitaries beside him; and then, with blare of band and prancing of horses, he had been whirled down the dip and curve of that long avenue, with its medley of meanness and thrift and hurry and [[economics|wealth]], until, swinging sharply, the dim walls of the White House rose before him. He entered with a sigh.

[028-002]Then the vast welter of humanity dissolved and streamed hither and thither, gaping and laughing until night, when thousands poured into the red barn of the census shack and entered the artificial fairyland within. The President walked through, smiling; the senators protected their friends in the crush; and [[harry-cresswell|Harry Cresswell]] led his wife to a little oasis of Southern ladies and gentlemen.

[028-003]“This is democracy for you,” said he, wiping his brow.

[028-004]From a whirling eddy [[mrs-vanderpool|Mrs. Vanderpool]] waved at them, and they rescued her.

[028-005]“I think I am ready to go,” she gasped. “Did you ever!”

[028-006]“Come,” [[colonel-cresswell|Cresswell]] invited. But just then the crowd pushed them apart and shot them along, and [[mrs-cresswell|Mrs. Cresswell]] found herself clinging to her husband amid two great whirling variegated throngs of driving, white-faced people. The band crashed and blared; the people laughed and pushed; and with rhythmic sound and swing the mighty throng was dancing.

[028-007]It took much effort, but at last the Cresswell party escaped and rolled off in their carriages. They swept into the avenue and out again, then up 14th Street, where, turning for some street obstruction, they passed a throng of carriages on a cross street.

[028-008]“It’s the other ball,” cried Mrs. Vanderpool, and amid laughter she added, “Let’s go!”

[028-009]It was﻿—the other ball. For [[washington-dc|Washington]] is itself, and something else besides. Along beside it ever runs that dark and haunting echo; that shadowy world-in-world with its accusing silence, its emphatic self-sufficiency. Mrs. Cresswell at first demurred. She thought of [[elspeth|Elspeth]]’s cabin: the dirt, the smell, the squalor: of course, this would be different; but﻿—well, Mrs. Cresswell had little inclination for slumming. She was interested in the underworld, but intellectually, not by personal contact. She did not know that this was a side-world, not an underworld. Yet the imposing building did not look sordid.

[028-010]“Hired?” asked someone.

[028-011]“No, owned.”

[028-012]“Indeed!”

[028-013]Then there was a hitch.

[028-014]“Tickets?”

[028-015]“Where can we buy them?”

[028-016]“Not on sale,” was the curt reply.

[028-017]“Actually exclusive!” sneered Cresswell, for he could not imagine anyone unwelcome at a Negro ball. Then he bethought himself of [[sam-stillings|Sam Stillings]] and sent for him. In a few minutes he had a dozen complimentary tickets in his hand.

[028-018]They entered the balcony and sat down. [[mary-taylor|Mary]] Cresswell leaned forward. It was interesting. Beneath her was an ordinary pretty ball﻿—flowered, silked, and ribboned; with swaying whirling figures, music, and laughter, and all the human fun of gayety and converse.

[028-019]And then she was impressed with the fact that this was no ordinary scene; it was, on the contrary, most extraordinary.

[028-020]There was a black man waltzing with a white woman﻿—no, she was not white, for Mary caught the cream and curl of the girl as she swept past: but there was a white man (was he white?) and a black woman. The color of the scene was wonderful. The hard human white seemed to glow and live and run a mad gamut of the spectrum, from morn till night, from white to black; through red and sombre browns, pale and brilliant yellows, dead and living blacks. Through her opera-glasses Mary scanned their hair; she noted everything from the infinitely twisted, crackled, dead, and grayish-black to the piled mass of red golden sunlight. Her eyes went [[dream|dreaming]]; there below was the gathering of the worlds. She saw types of all nations and all lands swirling beneath her in human brotherhood, and a great wonder shook her. They seemed so happy. Surely, this was no nether world; it was upper earth, and﻿—her husband beckoned; he had been laughing incontinently. He saw nothing but a crowd of queer looking people doing things they were not made to do and appearing absurdly happy over it. It irritated him unreasonably.

[028-021]“See the washerwoman in red,” he whispered. “Look at the monkey. Come, let’s go.”

[028-022]They trooped noisily downstairs, and Cresswell walked unceremoniously between a black man and his partner. Mrs. Vanderpool recognized and greeted the girl as [[miss-wynn|Miss Wynn]]. Mrs. Cresswell did not notice her, but she paused with a start of recognition at the sight of the man.

[028-023]“Why, [[bles-alwyn|Bles]]!” she exclaimed impetuously, starting to hold out her hand. She was sincerely pleased at seeing him. Then she remembered. She bowed and smiled, looking at him with interest and surprise. He was correctly dressed, and the white shirt set off the comeliness of his black face in compelling contrast. He carried himself like a man, and bowed with gravity and [[pride|dignity]]. She passed on and heard her husband’s petulant voice in her ear.

[028-024]“Mary﻿—Mary! for Heaven’s sake, come on; don’t shake hands with niggers.”

[028-025]It was recurring flashes of temper like this, together with evidences of dubious company and a growing fondness for liquor, that drove Mary Cresswell more and more to find solace in the [[labor|work]] of Congressman Todd’s Civic Club. She collected statistics for several of the Committee, wrote letters, interviewed a few persons, and felt herself growing in usefulness and importance. She did not mention these things to her husband; she knew he would not object, but she shrank from his ridicule.

[028-026]The various causes advocated by the Civic Club felt the impetus of the aggressive work of the organization. This was especially the case with the National [[education|Education]] Bill and the amendment to the Child Labor Bill. The movement became strong enough to call [[easterly|Mr. Easterly]] down from [[new-york|New York]]. He and the inner circle went over matters carefully.

[028-027]“We need the political strength of the South,” said Easterly; “not only in framing national legislation in our own interests, but always in State laws. Particularly, we must get them into line to offset Todd’s foolishness. The Child Labor Bill must either go through unamended or be killed. The [[cotton|Cotton]] Inspection Bill﻿—our chief measure﻿—must be slipped through quietly by Southern votes, while in the Tariff mix-up we must take good care of cotton.

[028-028]“Now, on the other hand, we are offending the Southerners in three ways: Todd’s revived Blair Bill is too good a thing for niggers; the South is clamoring for a first classy embassy appointment; and the President’s nomination of Alwyn as Treasurer will raise a howl from Virginia to Texas.”

[028-029]“There is some strong [[power|influence]] back of Alwyn,” said [[senator-smith|Senator Smith]]; “not only are the Negroes enthused, but the President has daily letters from prominent whites.”

[028-030]“The strong influence is named Vanderpool,” Easterly drily remarked. “She’s playing a bigger political game than I laid out for her. That’s the devil with women: they can’t concentrate: they get too damned many side issues. Now, I offered her husband the French ambassadorship provided she’d keep the Southerners feeling good toward us. She’s hand in glove with the Southerners, all right; but she wants not only her husband’s appointment but this darkey’s too.”

[028-031]“But that’s been decided, hasn’t it?” put in Smith.

[028-032]“Yes,” grumbled Easterly; “but it makes it hard already. At any rate, the Educational Bill must be killed right off. No more talk; no more consideration﻿—kill it, and kill it now. Now about this Child Labor Bill: Todd’s Civic Club is raising the mischief. Who’s responsible?”

[028-033]The silent Jackson spoke up. “Congressman Cresswell’s wife has been very active, and Todd thinks they’ve got the South with them.”

[028-034]“Congressman Cresswell’s wife!” Easterly’s face was one great exclamation point. “Now what the devil does this mean?”

[028-035]“I’m afraid,” said Senator Smith, “that it may mean an attempt on the part of Cresswell’s friends to boost him for the French ambassadorship. He’s the only Southerner with money enough to support the position, and there’s been a good deal of quiet talk, I understand, in Southern circles.”

[028-036]“But it’s treason!” Easterly shouted. “It will ruin the plans of the Combine to put this amended Child Labor Bill through. [[john-taylor|John Taylor]] has just written me that he’s starting mills at [[toomsville|Toomsville]], and that he depends on unrestricted labor conditions, as we must throughout the South. Doesn’t Cresswell know this?”

[028-037]“Of course. I think it’s just a bluff. If he gets the appointment he’ll let the bill drop.”

[028-038]“I see﻿—everybody is raising his price, is he? Pretty soon the darky will be holding us up. Well, see Cresswell, and put it to him strong. I must go. Wire me.”

[028-039]Senator Smith presented the matter bluntly to Cresswell as soon as he saw him. “Which would the South prefer﻿—Todd’s Education Bill, or Alwyn’s appointment?”

[028-040]It was characteristic of Cresswell that the smaller matter of Stillings’ intrigue should interest him more than Todd’s measure, of which he knew nothing.

[028-041]“What is Todd’s bill?” asked Harry Cresswell, darkening.

[028-042]Smith, surprised, got out a copy and explained. Cresswell interrupted before he was half through.

[028-043]“Don’t you see,” he said angrily, “that that will ruin our plans for the Cotton Combine?”

[028-044]“Yes, I do,” replied Smith; “but it will not do the immediate harm that the amended Child Labor Bill will do.”

[028-045]“What’s that?” demanded Cresswell, frowning again.

[028-046]Senator Smith regarded him again: was Cresswell playing a shrewd game?

[028-047]“Why,” he said at length, “aren’t you promoting it?”

[028-048]“No,” was the reply. “Never heard of it.”

[028-049]“But,” Senator Smith began, and paused. He turned and took up a circular issued by the Civic Club, giving a careful account of their endeavors to amend and pass the Child Labor Bill. Cresswell read it, then threw it aside.

[028-050]“Nonsense!” he indignantly repudiated the measure. “That will never do; it’s as bad as the Education Bill.”

[028-051]“But your wife is encouraging it and we thought you were back of it.”

[028-052]Cresswell stared in blank amazement.

[028-053]“My wife!” he gasped. Then he bethought himself. “It’s a mistake,” he supplemented; “Mrs. Cresswell gave them no authority to sign her name.”

[028-054]“She’s been very active,” Smith persisted, “and naturally we were all anxious.”

[028-055]Cresswell bit his lip. “I shall speak to her; she does not realize what use they are making of her passing interest.”

[028-056]He hurried away, and Senator Smith felt a bit sorry for Mrs. Cresswell when he recalled the expression on her husband’s face.

[028-057]Mary Cresswell did not get home until nearly dinner time; then she came in glowing with enthusiasm. Her work had received special commendation that afternoon, and she had been asked to take the chairmanship of the committee on publicity. Finding that her husband was at home, she determined to tell him﻿—it was so good to be doing something worth while. Perhaps, too, he might be made to show some interest. She thought of Mr. and Mrs. Todd and the old dream glowed faintly again.

[028-058]Cresswell looked at her as she entered the library where he was waiting and smoking. She was rumpled and muddy, with flying hair and thick walking shoes and the air of bustle and vigor which had crept into her blood this last month. Truly, her cheeks were glowing and her eyes bright, but he disapproved. Softness and daintiness, silk and lace and glimmering flesh, belonged to women in his mind, and he despised Amazons and “business” women. He received her kiss coldly, and Mary’s heart sank. She essayed some gay greeting, but he interrupted her.

[028-059]“What’s this stuff about the Civic Club?” he began sharply.

[028-060]“Stuff?” she queried, blankly.

[028-061]“That’s what I said.”

[028-062]“I’m sure I don’t know,” she answered stiffly. “I belong to the Civic Club, and have been working with it.”

[028-063]“Why didn’t you tell me?” His resentment grew as he proceeded.

[028-064]“I did not think you were interested.”

[028-065]“Didn’t you know that this Child Labor business was opposed to my interests?”

[028-066]“Dear, I did not dream it. It’s a Republican bill, to be sure; but you seemed very friendly with Senator Smith, who introduced it. We were simply trying to improve it.”

[028-067]“Suppose we didn’t want it improved.”

[028-068]“That’s what some said; but I did not believe such﻿—deception.”

[028-069]The blood rushed to Cresswell’s face.

[028-070]“Well, you will drop this bill and the Civic Club from now on.”

[028-071]“Why?”

[028-072]“Because I say so,” he retorted explosively, too angry to explain further.

[028-073]She looked at him﻿—a long, fixed, penetrating look which revealed more than she had ever seen before, then turned away and went slowly upstairs. She did not come down to dinner, and in the evening the doctor was called.

[028-074]Cresswell drooped a bit after eating, hesitated, and reflected. He had acted too cavalierly in this Civic Club mess, he concluded, and yet he would not back down. He’d go see her and pet her a bit, but be firm.

[028-075]He opened her boudoir door gently, and she stood before him radiant, clothed in silk and lace, her hair loosened. He paused, astonished. But she threw herself upon his neck, with a joyful, half hysterical cry.

[028-076]“I will give it all up﻿—everything! Willingly, willingly!” Her voice dropped abruptly to a tremulous whisper. “Oh, Harry! I﻿—I am to be the mother of a child!”
