---
description: "“It’s a shame,” asserted John Taylor with something like real feeling."
id: ch33
label: "XXXIII. The Buying of the Swamp"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# XXXIII. The Buying of the Swamp

[033-001]“It’s a shame,” asserted [[john-taylor|John Taylor]] with something like real feeling. He was spending Sunday with his father-in-law, and both, over their after-dinner cigars, were gazing thoughtfully at [[the-swamp-land|the swamp]].

[033-002]“What’s a shame?” asked [[colonel-cresswell|Colonel Cresswell]].

[033-003]“To see all that timber and prime cotton-land going to waste. Don’t you remember those fine bales of cotton that came out of there several seasons ago?”

[033-004]The Colonel smoked placidly. “You can’t get it cleared,” he said.

[033-005]“But couldn’t you hire some good [[labor|workers]]?”

[033-006]“Niggers won’t work. Now if we had Italians we might do it.”

[033-007]“Yes, and in a few years they’d own the country.”

[033-008]“That’s right; so there we are. There’s only one way to get that [[the-swamp|swamp]] cleared.”

[033-009]“How?”

[033-010]“Sell it to some fool darkey.”

[033-011]“Sell it? It’s too valuable to sell.”

[033-012]“That’s just it. You don’t understand. The only way to get decent work out of some niggers is to let them believe they’re buying land. In nine cases out of ten he works hard a while and then throws up the job. We get back our land and he makes good wages for his work.”

[033-013]“But in the tenth case﻿—suppose he should stick to it?”

[033-014]“Oh,”﻿—easily, “we could get rid of him when we want to. White people rule here.”

[033-015]John Taylor frowned and looked a little puzzled. He was no moralist, but he had his code and he did not understand Colonel Cresswell. As a matter of fact, Colonel Cresswell was an honest man. In most matters of [[economics|commerce]] between men he was punctilious to a degree almost annoying to Taylor. But there was one part of the world which his [[honor|code of honor]] did not cover, and he saw no incongruity in the omission. The uninitiated cannot easily picture to himself the mental attitude of a former slaveholder toward property in the hands of a Negro. Such property belonged of right to the master, if the master needed it; and since ridiculous laws safeguarded the property, it was perfectly permissible to circumvent such laws. No Negro starved on the Cresswell place, neither did any accumulate property. Colonel Cresswell saw to both matters.

[033-016]As the Colonel and John Taylor were thus conferring, [[zora|Zora]] appeared, coming up the walk.

[033-017]“Who’s that?” asked the Colonel shading his eyes.

[033-018]“It’s Zora﻿—the girl who went North with [[mrs-vanderpool|Mrs. Vanderpool]],” Taylor enlightened him.

[033-019]“Back, is she? Too trifling to stick to a job, and full of Northern nonsense,” growled the Colonel. “Even got a Northern walk﻿—I thought for a moment she was a lady.”

[033-020]Neither of the gentlemen ever dreamed how long, how hard, how heart-wringing was that walk from the gate up the winding way beneath their careless gaze. It was not the coming of the thoughtless, careless girl of five years ago who had marched a dozen times unthinking before the faces of white men. It was the approach of a woman who knew how the world treated women whom it respected; who knew that no such treatment would be thought of in her case: neither the bow, the lifted hat, nor even the conventional title of decency. Yet she must go on naturally and easily, boldly but circumspectly, and play a daring game with two powerful men.

[033-021]“Can I speak with you a moment, Colonel?” she asked.

[033-022]The Colonel did not stir or remove his cigar; he even injected a little gruffness into his tone.

[033-023]“Well, what is it?”

[033-024]Of course, she was not asked to sit, but she stood with her hands clasped loosely before her and her eyes half veiled.

[033-025]“Colonel, I’ve got a thousand dollars.” She did not mention the other nine.

[033-026]The Colonel sat up.

[033-027]“Where did you get it?” he asked.

[033-028]“Mrs. Vanderpool gave it to me to use in helping the colored people.”

[033-029]“What are you going to do with it?”

[033-030]“Well, that’s just what I came to see you about. You see, I might give it to the [[the-school|school]], but I’ve been thinking that I’d like to buy some land for some of [[the-tenant-farmers|the tenants]].”

[033-031]“I’ve got no land to sell,” said the Colonel.

[033-032]“I was thinking you might sell a bit of the swamp.”

[033-033]Cresswell and Taylor glanced at each other and the Colonel re-lit his cigar.

[033-034]“How much of it?” he asked finally.

[033-035]“I don’t know; I thought perhaps two hundred acres.”

[033-036]“Two hundred acres? Do you expect to buy that land for five dollars an acre?”

[033-037]“Oh, no, sir. I thought it might cost as much as twenty-five dollars.”

[033-038]“But you’ve only got a thousand dollars.”

[033-039]“Yes, sir; I thought I might pay that down and then pay the rest from the crops.”

[033-040]“Who’s going to work on the place?”

[033-041]Zora named a number of the steadiest tenants to whom she had spoken.

[033-042]“They owe me a lot of money,” said the Colonel.

[033-043]“We’d try to pay that, too.”

[033-044]Colonel Cresswell considered. There was absolutely no risk. The cost of the land, the back debts of the tenants﻿—no possible crops could pay for them. Then there was the chance of getting the swamp cleared for almost nothing.

[033-045]“How’s the school getting on?” he asked suddenly.

[033-046]“Very poorly,” answered Zora sadly. “You know it’s mortgaged, and [[miss-smith|Miss Smith]] has had to use the mortgage money for yearly expenses.”

[033-047]The Colonel smiled grimly.

[033-048]“It will cost you fifty dollars an acre,” he said finally. Zora looked disappointed and figured out the matter slowly.

[033-049]“That would be one thousand down and nine thousand to pay﻿—”

[033-050]“With interest,” said Cresswell.

[033-051]Zora shook her head doubtfully.

[033-052]“What would the interest be?” she asked.

[033-053]“Ten percent.”

[033-054]She stood silent a moment and Colonel Cresswell spoke up:

[033-055]“It’s the best land about here and about the only land you can buy﻿—I wouldn’t sell it to anybody else.”

[033-056]She still hesitated.

[033-057]“The trouble is, you see, Colonel Cresswell, the price is high and the interest heavy. And after all I may not be able to get as many tenants as I’d need. I think though, I’d try it if﻿—if I could be sure you’d treat me fairly, and that I’d get the land if I paid for it.”

[033-058]Colonel Cresswell reddened a little, and John Taylor looked away.

[033-059]“Well, if you don’t want to undertake it, all right.”

[033-060]Zora looked thoughtfully across the field﻿—

[033-061]“Mr. Maxwell has a bit of land,” she began meditatively.

[033-062]“Worked out, and not worth five dollars an acre!” snapped the Colonel. But he did not propose to hand Maxwell a thousand dollars. “Now, see here, I’ll treat you as well as anybody, and you know it.”

[033-063]“I believe so, sir,” acknowledged Zora in a tone that brought a sudden keen glance from Taylor; but her face was a mask. “I reckon I’ll make the bargain.”

[033-064]“All right. Bring the money and we’ll fix the thing up.”

[033-065]“The money is here,” said Zora, taking an envelope out of her bosom.

[033-066]“Well, leave it here, and I’ll see to it.”

[033-067]“But you see, sir, Miss Smith is so methodical; she expects some papers or receipts.”

[033-068]“Well, it’s too late tonight.”

[033-069]“Possibly you could sign a sort of receipt and later﻿—”

[033-070]Cresswell laughed. “Well, write one,” he indulgently assented. And Zora wrote.

[033-071]When Zora left Colonel Cresswell’s about noon that Sunday she knew her work had just begun, and she walked swiftly along the country roads, calling here and there. Would Uncle Isaac help her build a log home? Would the boys help her some time to clear some swamp land? Would Rob become a tenant when she asked? For this was the idle time of the year. Crops were laid by and planting had not yet begun.

[033-072]This too was the time of big [[the-church|church]] meetings. She knew that in her part of the country on that day the black population, man, woman, and child, were gathered in great groups; all day they had been gathering, streaming in snakelike lines along the country roads, in well-brushed, brilliant attire, half fantastic, half crude. Down where the [[toomsville|Toomsville]]-Montgomery highway dipped to the stream that fed the Cresswell swamp squatted a square barn that slept through day and weeks in dull indifference. But on the First Sunday it woke to sudden mighty life. The voices of men and children mingled with the snorting of animals and the cracking of whips. Then came the long drone and singsong of the preacher with its sharp wilder climaxes and the answering “amens” and screams of the worshippers. This was the shrine of the Baptists﻿—shrine and oracle, centre and source of inspiration﻿—and hither Zora hurried.

[033-073]The preacher was Jones, a big man, fat, black, and greasy, with little eyes, unctuous voice, and three manners: his white folks manner, soft, humble, wheedling; his black folks manner, voluble, important, condescending; and above all, his pulpit manner, loud, wild, and strong. He was about to don this latter cloak when Zora approached with a request briefly to address [[the-black-church-org|the congregation]]. Remembering some former snubs, his manner was lordly.

[033-074]“I doesn’t see,” he returned reflectively, wiping his brows, “as how I can rightly spare you any time; the brethren is a-gettin’ mighty onpatient to hear me.” He pulled down his cuffs, regarding her doubtfully.

[033-075]“I might speak after you’re through,” she suggested. But he objected that there was the regular collection and two or three other collections, a baptism, a meeting of the trustees; there was no time, in short; but﻿—he eyed her again.

[033-076]“Does you want﻿—a collection?” he questioned suspiciously, for he could imagine few other reasons for talking. Then, too, he did not want to be too inflexible, for all of his people knew Zora and liked her.

[033-077]“Oh, no, I want no collection at all. I only want a little voluntary work on their part.” He looked relieved, frowned through the door at the audience, and looked at his bright gold watch. The whole crowd was not there yet﻿—perhaps﻿—

[033-078]“You kin say just a word before the sermont,” he finally yielded; “but not long﻿—not long. They’se just a-[[death|dying]] to hear me.”

[033-079]So Zora spoke simply but clearly: of neglect and suffering, of the sins of others that bowed young shoulders, of the great hope of the children’s future. Then she told something of what she had seen and read of the world’s newer ways of helping men and women. She talked of cooperation and refuges and other efforts; she praised their way of adopting children into their own homes; and then finally she told them of the land she was buying for new tenants and the helping hands she needed. The preacher fidgeted and coughed but dared not actually interrupt, for the people were listening breathless to a kind of straightforward talk which they seldom heard and for which they were hungering.

[033-080]And Zora forgot time and occasion. The moments flew; the crowd increased until the wonderful spell of those dark and upturned faces pulsed in her blood. She felt the wild yearning to help them beating in her ears and blinding her eyes.

[033-081]“Oh, my people!” she almost sobbed. “My own people, I am not asking you to help others; I am pleading with you to help yourselves. Rescue your own flesh and blood﻿—free yourselves﻿—free yourselves!” And from the swaying sobbing hundreds burst a great “Amen!” The [[preacher|minister]]’s dusky face grew more and more sombre, and the angry sweat started on his brow. He felt himself hoaxed and cheated, and he meant to have his revenge. Two hundred men and women rose and pledged themselves to help Zora; and when she turned with overflowing heart to thank the preacher he had left the platform, and she found him in the yard whispering darkly with two deacons. She realized her mistake, and promised to retrieve it during the week; but the week was full of planning and journeying and talking.

[033-082]Saturday dawned cool and clear. She had dinner prepared for cooking in the yard: sweet potatoes, hoecake, and buttermilk, and a hog to be barbecued. Everything was ready by eight o’clock in the morning. [[emma|Emma]] and two other girl helpers were on the tiptoe of expectancy. Nine o’clock came and no one with it. Ten o’clock came, and eleven. High noon found Zora peering down the highway under her shading hand, but no soul in sight. She tried to think it out: what could have happened? Her people were slow, tardy, but they would not thus forget her and disappoint her without some great cause. She sent the girls home at dusk and then seated herself miserably under the great oak; then at last one half-grown boy hurried by.

[033-083]“I wanted to come, Miss Zora, but I was afeared. Preacher Jones has been talking everywhere against you. He says that your mother was a voodoo woman and that you don’t believe in God, and the deacons voted that the members mustn’t help you.”

[033-084]“And do the people believe that?” she asked in consternation.

[033-085]“They just don’t know what to say. They don’t ’zactly believe it, but they has to ’low that you didn’t say much ’bout religion when you talked. You ain’t been near Big Meetin’﻿—and﻿—and﻿—you ain’t saved.” He hurried on.

[033-086]Zora leaned her head back wearily, watching the laced black branches where the starlight flickered through﻿—as coldly still and immovable as she had watched them from those gnarled roots all her life﻿—and she murmured bitterly the world-old question of despair: “What’s the use?” It seemed to her that every breeze and branch was instinct with sympathy, and murmuring, “What’s the use?” She wondered vaguely why, and as she wondered, she knew.

[033-087]For yonder where the black earth of the swamp heaved in a formless mound she felt the black arms of [[elspeth|Elspeth]] rising from the sod﻿—gigantic, mighty. They stole toward her with stealthy hands and claw-like talons. They clutched at her skirts. She froze and could not move. Down, down she slipped toward the black slime of the swamp, and the air about was horror﻿—down, down, till the chilly [[flood|waters]] stung her knees; and then with one grip she seized the oak, while the great hand of Elspeth twisted and tore her soul. Faint, afar, nearer and nearer and ever mightier, rose a [[music|song]] of mystic melody. She heard its human voice and sought to cry aloud. She strove again and again with that gripping, twisting pain﻿—that awful hand﻿—until the shriek came and she awoke.

[033-088]She lay panting and sweating across the bent and broken roots of the oak. The hand of Elspeth was gone but the song was still there. She rose trembling and listened. It was the singing of the Big Meeting in [[religion|the church]] far away. She had forgotten this religious revival in her days of hurried preparation, and the preacher had used her absence and apparent indifference against her and her work. The hand of Elspeth was reaching from the grave to pull her back; but she was no longer [[dream|dreaming]] now. Drawing her shawl about her, she hurried down the highway.

[033-089]The meeting had overflowed the church and spread to the edge of the swamp. The tops of young trees had been bent down and interlaced to form a covering and benches twined to their trunks. Thus a low and wide cathedral, all green and silver in the starlight, lay packed with a living mass of black folk. Flaming pine torches burned above the devotees; the rhythm of their stamping, the shout of their voices, and the wild music of their singing shook the night. Four hundred people fell upon their knees when the huge black preacher, uncoated, red-eyed, frenzied, stretched his long arms to heaven. Zora saw the throng from afar, and hesitated. After all, she knew little of this strange faith of theirs﻿—had little [[faith|belief]] in its mummery. She herself had been brought up almost without religion save some few mystic remnants of a half-forgotten heathen cult. The little she had seen of religious observance had not moved her greatly, save once yonder in [[washington-dc|Washington]]. There she found God after a searching that had seared her soul; but He had simply pointed the Way, and the way was human.

[033-090]Humanity was near and real. She loved it. But if she talked again of mere men would these devotees listen? Already the minister had spied her tall form and feared her power. He set his powerful voice and the frenzy of his hearers to crush her.

[033-091]“Who is dis what talks of doing the Lord’s work for Him? What does de good Book say? Take no thought ’bout de morrow. Why is you trying to make dis ole world better? I spits on the world! Come out from it. Seek Jesus. Heaven is my home! Is it yo’s?” “Yes,” groaned the multitude. His arm shot out and he pointed straight at Zora.

[033-092]“Beware the ebil one!” he shouted, and the multitude moaned. “Beware of dem dat calls ebil good. Beware of dem dat worships debbils; the debbils dat crawl; de debbils what forgits God.”

[033-093]“Help him, Lord!” cried the multitude.

[033-094]Zora stepped into the circle of light. A hush fell on the throng; the preacher paused a moment, then started boldly forward with upraised hands. Then a curious thing happened. A sharp cry arose far off down toward the swamp and the sound of great footsteps coming, coming as from the end of the world; there swelled a rhythmical chanting, wilder and more primitive than song. On, on it came, until it swung into sight. An old man led the band﻿—tall, massive, with tufted gray hair and wrinkled leathery skin, and his eyes were the eyes of death. He reached the circle of light, and Zora started: once before she had seen that old man. The singing stopped but he came straight on till he reached Zora’s side and then he whirled and spoke.

[033-095]The words leaped and flew from his lips as he lashed the throng with bitter fury. He said what Zora wanted to say with two great differences: first, he spoke their religious language and spoke it with absolute confidence and [[power|authority]]; and secondly, he seemed to know each one there personally and intimately so that he spoke to no inchoate throng﻿—he spoke to them individually, and they listened awestruck and fearsome.

[033-096]“God is done sent me,” he declared in passionate tones, “to preach His acceptable time. Faith without works is dead; who is you that dares to set and wait for the Lord to do your work?” Then in sudden fury, “Ye generation of vipers﻿—who kin save you?” He bent forward and pointed his long finger. “Yes,” he cried, “pray, Sam Collins, you black devil; pray, for the corn you stole Thursday.” The black figure moved. “Moan, Sister Maxwell, for the backbiting you did today. Yell, Jack Tolliver, you sneaking scamp, t’wil the Lord tell Uncle Bill who ruined his daughter. Weep, May Haynes, for that baby﻿—”

[033-097]But the woman’s shriek drowned his words, and he whirled full on the preacher, stamping his feet and waving his hands. His anger choked him; the fat preacher cowered gray and trembling. The gaunt fanatic towered over him.

[033-098]“You﻿—you﻿—ornery hound of Hell! God never knowed you and the devil owns your soul!” There leapt from his lips a denunciation so livid, specific, and impassioned that the preacher squatted and bowed, then finally fell upon his face and moaned.

[033-099]The gaunt speaker turned again to the people. He talked of little children; he pictured their sin and neglect. “God is done sent me to offer you all salvation,” he cried, while the people wept and wailed; “not in praying, but in works. Follow me!” The hour was halfway between midnight and dawn, but nevertheless the people leapt frenziedly to their feet.

[033-100]“Follow me!” he shouted.

[033-101]And, singing and chanting, the throng poured out upon the black highway, waving their torches. Zora knew his intention. With a half-dozen of younger onlookers she unhitched teams and rode across the land, calling at the cabins. Before sunrise, tools were in the swamp, axes and saws and hammers. The noise of prayer and singing filled the Sabbath dawn. The news of the great revival spread, and men and women came pouring in. Then of a sudden the uproar stopped, and the ringing of axes and grating of saws and tugging of mules was heard. The forest trembled as by some mighty magic, swaying and falling with crash on crash. Huge bonfires blazed and crackled, until at last a wide black scar appeared in the thick south side of the swamp, which widened and widened to full twenty acres.

[033-102]The sun rose higher and higher till it blazed at high noon. The workers dropped their tools. The aroma of coffee and roasting meat rose in the dim cool shade. With ravenous appetites the dark, half-famished throng fell upon the food, and then in utter weariness stretched themselves and slept: lying along the earth like huge bronze earth-spirits, sitting against trees, curled in dense bushes.

[033-103]And Zora sat above them on a high rich-scented pile of logs. Her senses slept save her sleepless eyes. Amid a silence she saw in the little grove that still stood, the cabin of Elspeth tremble, sigh, and disappear, and with it flew some spirit of evil.

[033-104]Then she looked down to the new edge of the swamp, by the old lagoon, and saw [[bles-alwyn|Bles Alwyn]] standing there. It seemed very natural; and closing her eyes, she fell asleep.
