---
description: "Chapter: Decorated"
id: 0160-Jack-Keefe-Stories-e6c09a2d-ch024
label: "Decorated"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

## Decorated

[020-001] Somewheres in France, April 2.

[020-002] **Friend [[you-know-me-al|Al]]**: Well Al yesterday was April Fool and you ought to seen what I pulled on 1 of the boys Johnny Alcock and it was a screen and some of the boys is still laughing over it yet but he is I of the kind that he can’t see a joke at their own expenses and he swelled up like a poison pup and now he is talking about he will get even with me, but the bird that gets even with me will half to get up a long time before revelry eh Al.

[020-003] Well Al I will tell you what I pulled on him and I bet you will bust your sides. Well it seems like Johnny has got a girl in his home town Riverside, Ill. near Chi and that is he don’t know if he has got her or not because him and another bird was both makeing a play for her, but before he come away she told him to not worry, but the other bird got himself excused out of the draft with a cold sore or something and is still there in the old town yet where he can go and call on her every night and she is libel to figure that maybe she better marry him so as she can have some of her evenings to herself and any way she might as well of told Johnny to not scratch himself over here as to not worry because for some reason another the gal didn’t write to him last month at lease he didn’t get no letters and maybe they got lost or she had writers cramps or something but any way every time the mail come and nothing for him he looked like he had been caught off second base.

[020-004] Well the day before yesterday he was reading 1 of the letters he got from this baby 5 or 6 wks. ago on acct. of not haveing nothing better to read and he left the envelope lay on the floor and I was going to hand it back to him but I happened to think that yesterday would be April Fool so I kept a hold of the envelope and I got a piece of paper and wrote April Fool on it and stuck it in the envelope and fixed it up so as it would look like a new letter and I handed it to him yesterday like it was mail that had only just came for him and you ought to see him when he tore it open and didn’t find nothing only April Fool in it. At first he couldn’t say nothing but finely he says “That’s some comedy Keefe. You ought to be a end man in the stretcher bearers minstrels” and he didn’t crack a smile so I said “What’s the matter with you can’t you take a joke?” So he said “What I would like to take is a crack at your jaw.” So I said “Well it’s to bad your arms is both paralyzed.” Well Al they’s nothing the matter with his arms and I was just kidding him because as far as him hitting anybody is conserned I was just as safe as the gen. staff because he ain’t much bigger than a cutie and for him to reach my jaw he would half to join the aviation.

[020-005] Well of course he didn’t start nothing but just said he would get back at me if it took him till the duration of [[world-war-i|the war]] and I told some of the other boys about putting it over on him and they couldn’t hardly help from smileing but he acts like a baby and don’t speak to me and I suppose maybe he thinks that makes me feel bad but I got to be 25 yrs. old before I ever seen him and if his head was blowed off tomorrow a.m. I would try and show up for my 3 meals a day if you could call them that.

[020-006] But speaking about April Fool Al I just stopped writeing to try and light a cigarette with 1 of these here French matchs and every one of them is a April Fool and I guess the parents of the kids over here don’t never half to worry about them smokeing to young because even if they had a box of cigarettes hid in their cradle they would be of age before they would run across a match that lit and I wouldn’t be scared to give little Al a bunch and turn him loose in a bbl. of gasoline.

[020-007] Well Al I suppose you been reading in the papers about the Dutchmens starting a drive vs. the English up in the northren part of the section and at first it looked like the English was going to leave them walk into the Gulf Stream and scald themself to death, but now it seems like we have got them slowed up at lease that’s the dope we get here but for all the news we get a hold of we might as well of jumped to the codfish league on the way over and once in a wile some of the boys gets a U.S. paper a mo. old but they hog onto it and don’t leave nobody else see it but as far as I am conserned they can keep it because I haven’t no time to waist reading about the Frisco fair or the [[federal-league|Federal League]] has blowed up and etc. And of course they’s plenty of newspapers from Paris but all printed in la la la so as every time you come to a word you half to rumage through a dictionary and even when you run it down its libel to mean 20 different articles and by the time you figured out whether they are talking about a st. car or a hot bath or a raisin or what and the he‑ll they are talking about they wouldn’t be no more news to it then the bible and it looks to me Al like it would be a good idear if you was to drop me a post card when the war is over so as I can tell Capt. Seeley or he will still be running us ragged to get in shape a couple of yrs. after the last of the Dutchmens lays molting in the grave.

[020-008] Jokeing to 1 side Al you probably know what’s going on a long wile before we do and the only chance we would have to know how a battle come out would be if we was in it and they’s no chance of that unless they send us up to the northern part of the section to help out because Van Hindenburg must have something under his hat besides bristles and he ain’t a sucker enough to start driveing vs. the front that we are behind it unless he is so homesick that he can’t stand it no longer in France.

[020-009] Your pal,

[020-010] **[[jack-keefe|Jack]]**.

[020-011] Somewheres in France, April 6.

[020-012] **Friend Al**: Well Al 1 of the Chi newspapers is getting out a paper in Paris and printed in English and I just seen a copy of it where the Allys has finely got wise to themself and made 1 man gen. of all the Allys and it was a sucker play to not do that long ago only it looks to me like they pulled another boner by makeing a Frenchman the gen. and I suppose they done it for a complement to the Frenchmens on acct. of the war being here, but even suppose this here Foch is a smart gen. and use his brains and etc. it looks to me like it would of been a whole lot better to of picked out a man that can speak English because suppose we was all in a big battle or something and he wanted we should go over the top and if he said it in French why most of the boys hasn’t made no attempts to master the language and as far as they was conserned he might as well be telling them to wash their neck. Or else they would half to be interpeters to translate it out in English what he was getting at and by the time he give the orders to fire and the interpeter looked it up and seen what it meant in English and then tell us about it the Dutchmens would be putting peep holes through us with a bayonet and besides the French word for fire in English is *feu* in French and you say it like it was few and if Gen. Foch yelled few we might think he was complaining of the heat.

[020-013] But at that its better to have I man running it even a Frenchman then a lot of different gens. telling us to do this in that and the other thing every one of them different and suppose they done that in baseball Al and a club had 3 or 4 mgrs. and suppose for inst. it come up to the 9th inning and we needed some runs and it was [[joe-benz|Benz]]’s turn to [[base-hit|hit]] and 1 mgr. would tell him to go up and hit for himself and another mgr. would tell Murphy to go up and hit for him and another mgr. would send Risberg up and another would send Russell and the next thing you know they would be 2 of them swinging from 1 side of the plate and 2 from the other side and probably busting each other in the bean with their bats but you take most bird’s beans and what would break would be Mr. Bat. But its the same in war like in baseball and you got to have 1 man running it. With a lot of different gens. in command, 1 of them might tell the men to charge while another was telling them to [[salary|pay]] cash.

[020-014] Jokeing to 1 side Al some of our boys have overtook a section up along the Moose river and I wouldn’t dast write about it only its been printed in the papers all ready so I am not giveing away no secrets to the Dutchmens. At lease they don’t mind us writeing something that’s came out in the papers though as far as I can see how would the Dutchmens know it any more if it was in the papers or not, because they ain’t so choked with jack over in Germany that they are going to spend it on U.S. papers a mo. old and even when they got them they would half to find somebody that could read English and hadn’t been killed for it and it would be like as if I should spend part of my $15 a mo. subscribeing to the *Chop Suey Bladder* that you would half to lay on your stomach and hold it with your feet to get it right side up and even then it wouldn’t mean nothing. But any way the Dutchmens is going to know sooner or later that we are in the war and what’s the differents if they meet us at the Moose or the Elks? Jokeing a side Al I guess you won’t be supprised to hear how I have picked up in the riffle practice and I knew right along that I couldn’t hardly help from being a A No. 1 marksman because a man that had almost perfect control in pitching you might say would be bound to shoot straight when they got the hang of it and don’t be supprised if I write you 1 of these days that I been appointed a snipper that sets up in a tree somewheres and picks off the boshs whenever they stick their head up and they call them snippers so pretty soon my name is libel to be Jake Snipe instead of Jack Keefe, but seriously Al I can pick off them targets like they was cherrys or something and maybe I won’t half to go in the trenchs at all.

[020-015] I guess I all ready told you about that little trick I pulled on Johnny Alcock for a April Fool gag and at first he swelled up like a poison pup and wouldn’t talk to me and said he wouldn’t never rest till he got even. Well he finely got a real letter from the gal back home and she is still waiting for him yet so he feels OK again and I and him are on speaking turns again and I am glad to not be scraping with him because I don’t never feel right unless I am pals with everybody but they can’t nobody stay sore at me very long and even when some of the boys in baseball use to swell up when I pulled 1 of my gags on them it wouldn’t last long because I would just smile at them and they would half to smile back and be pals and I always say that if a man can’t take a joke he better take acid or something and make a corps out of himself instead of a monkey.

[020-016] Your pal,

[020-017] **Jack**.

[020-018] Somewheres in France, April 11.

[020-019] **Friend Al**: Well Al I don’t suppose you knew I was a detective but when it comes to being a dick it looks like I don’t half to salute Wm. Burns or Shylock or none of them.

[020-020] Seriously Al I come onto something today that may turn out to be something big and then again it may not but it looks like it was something big only of course it has got to be kept a secret till I get the goods on a certain bird and I won’t pull it till I have got him right and in that way he won’t suspect nothing until its to late. But I know you wouldn’t breath a word about it and besides it wouldn’t hurt nothing if you did because by the time you get this letter the whole thing will be over and this bird to who I refer will probably own a peace of land in France with a 2 ft. frontidge and 6 ft. deep. But you will wonder what am I trying to get at so maybe I better explain myself.

[020-021] Well Al they’s a big bird in our Co, name Geo. Shaffer and that’s a German name because look at Schaefer that use to play ball in our league and it was spelt different but they called him Germany and he thought he was funny and use to pull gags on the field but I guess he didn’t feel so funny the day Griffith sent him up to hit against me in the pinch 1 day at [[washington-senators|Washington]] and if the ball he hit had of went straight out instead of straight up it would of pretty near cleared the infield. But any way this bird Shaffer in our Co. is big enough to have a corporal to himself and they must of spent the first Liberty Loan on his uniform and he hasn’t hardly said a word since we been in France and for a wile we figured it was just because he was a crab and to grouchy to talk, but now I wouldn’t be supprised Al if the real reason was on acct. of him being a Dutchman and maybe can’t talk English very good. Well I would feel pretty mean to be spying on most of the boys that’s been good pals with me, but when a man is a pro German spy himself they’s no question of friendship and etc. and whatever I can do to show this bird up I won’t hesitate a minute.

[020-022] Well Al this bird was writeing a letter last night and he didn’t have no envelope and he asked me did I have I and I said no and he wouldn’t of never spoke only to say Gimme but when I told him I didn’t have no envelope he started off somewheres to get 1 and he dropped the last page out of the letter he had been writeing and it was laying right there along side of me and of course I wouldn’t of paid no tension to it only it was face up so as I couldn’t help from seeing it and what I seen wasn’t no words like a man would write in a letter but it was a bunch of marks like a x down at the bottom and they was a whole line of them like this

[020-023] > x x x x x x x x x x x

[020-024] Well that roused up my suspicions and I guess you know I am not the kind that reads other people’s letters even if I don’t get none of my own to read but this here letter I kind of felt like they was something funny about it like he was writeing in ciphers or something so I picked the page up and read it through and sure enough they was parts of it in ciphers and if a man didn’t have the key you couldn’t tell what and the he‑ll he was getting at.

[020-025] Well Al I was still studing the page yet when he come back in and they wasn’t nothing for me to do only set on it so as he wouldn’t see I had it and he come over and begin looking for it and I asked him had he lost something to throw him off the track and he said yes but he didn’t say what it was and that made it all the more suspicious so he finely give up looking and went out again.

[020-026] Well I have got it put away where he can’t get a hold of it because I showed it to Johnny Alcock this a.m. and asked him if it didn’t look like something off color and he said yes it did and if he was me he would turn it over to Capt. Seeley but on 2nd thoughts he said I better keep it a wile and at the same time keep a eye on Shaffer and get more evidents vs. him and then when I had him dead to rights I could turn the letter and the rest of the evidents over to Capt. Seeley and then I would be sure to get the credit for showing him up.

[020-027] Well Al I figure this 1 page of his letter is enough or more then enough only of course its best to play safe and keep my eyes pealed and see what comes off and I haven’t got time to copy down the whole page Al and besides they’s a few sentences that sounds OK and I suppose he put them in for a blind but you can’t get away from them x marks Al and I will write down a couple other sentences and I bet you will agree that they’s something fishy about them and here is the sentences to which I refer:

[020-028] “In regards to your question I guess I understand OK.” In reply will say yes I.L.Y. more than Y.L.M. Am I right.”

[020-029] “Have you saw D. Give him a ring and tell the old spinort I am W.C.T.U. outside of a little Vin Blank.”

[020-030] Can you make heads or tales out of that Al? I guess not and neither could anybody else except they had the key to it and the best part of it is his name is signed down at the bottom and if he can explain that line of talk he is a wonder but he can’t explain it Al and all as he can do is make a clean brest of the whole business and Alcock thinks the same way and Alcock says he wished he had of been the 1 that got a hold of this evidents because whoever turned it over to Capt. Sceley along with what other facts I can get a hold of will just about get a commission in the intelligents dept. and that’s the men that looks after the pro German spys Al and gets the dope on them and shows them up and I would probably have my head quarters in Paris and get good money besides my expenses and I would half to pass up the chance to get in the trenchs and fight but they’s more ways of fighting then 1 and in this game Al a man has got to go where they send you and where they figure they would do the most good and if my country needs me to track after spys I will sacrifice my own wishs though I would a whole lot rather stay with my pals and fight along side of them and not snoop round Paris fondleing door nobs like a night watchman. But Alcock says he would bet money that is where I will land and he says “You ought to feel right at home in the intelligents dept. like a camel in Lake Erie” and he says the first chance I get I better try and start up a conversation with Shaffer and try and lead him on and that is the way they trap them is to ask them a whole lot of questions and see what they have got to say and if you keep fireing questions at them they are bound to get balled up and then its good night.

[020-031] Well I don’t suppose it seems possible to you stay at homes that they could be such a thing like a pro German spy in the U.S. army and how did he get there and why did they leave him in and etc. Well Al you would be supprised to know how many of them has slipped in and Alcock says that at first it amounted to about 200% but the intelligents officers has been on their sent all the wile and most of them has been nailed and when they get them they shoot them down like a dog and that’s what Shaffer will get Al and he is out of luck to be so big because all as the fireing squad would half to do would be look at their compass and see if he was east or west of them and then face their riffle in that direction and let go.

[020-032] I will write and let you know how things comes along.

[020-033] Your pal,

[020-034] **Jack**.

[020-035] Somewheres in France, April 14.

[020-036] **Friend Al**: Well Al I am closeing the net of evidents around Shaffer and I guess I all ready got enough on him to make out a case that he couldn’t never wrinkle out of it but Capt. Seeley is away and I can’t do nothing till he gets back.

[020-037] I had my man on the grill today Al and I thought he would be a fox and not criminate himself but I guess I went at him so smooth he didn’t never suspect nothing till along towards the finish and then it was to late. I don’t remember all that was said but it run along these lines like as follows: In the first place I asked him where he lived and he said Milwaukee Ave. in Chi and I don’t know if you know it or not Al but that’s a st. where they have got traffic policemens at the corners to blow their whistles once for the Germans to go north and south and twice for them to go east and west. So then I said was he married and he says no. So then I asked him where he was born and he said “What and the he‑ll are you the personal officer?” So I laughed it off and said “No but I thought maybe we come from the same part of the country.” So he says something about everybody didn’t half to come from the country but he wouldn’t come out and say where he did come from so then I kind of led around to the war and I made the remark that the German drive up on the north side of France didn’t get very far and he says maybe they wasn’t through. How was that for a fine line of talk Al and he might as well have said he hoped the Germans wouldn’t never be stopped.

[020-038] Well for a minute I couldn’t hardly help from takeing a crack at him but in these kind of matters Al a man has got to keep a hold of themself or they will loose their quarry so I kind of forced a smile and said “Well I guess they would have kept going if they could of.” And then he says “Yes but they half to stop every once in a wile to bring up Van Hindenburg.” So I had him traped Al and quick is a flash I said “Who told you their plans?” And he says “Oh he‑ll my mother in law” and walked away from me.

[020-039] Well Al it was just like sometimes when they are trying a man for murder and he says he couldn’t of did it because he was over to the Elite jazing when it come off and a little wile later the lawyer asks him where did he say he was at when the party was croked and he forgets what he said the 1st time and says he was out to Lincoln Pk. kidding the bison or something and the lawyer points out to the jury where his storys don’t jib and the next thing you know he is dressed up in a hemp collar a couple sizes to small.

[020-040] And that’s the same way I triped Shaffer getting him to say he wasn’t married and finely when I have him cornered he busts out about his mother in law. Well Al I don’t know of no way to get a mother in law without marrying into one. So I told Alcock tonight what had came off and he says it looked to him like I had a strong case and if he was me he would spill it to Capt. Seeley the minute he gets back. And he said “You lucky stiff you won’t never see the inside of a front line trench.” So I asked him what he meant and he repeated over again what he said about them takeing me in the intelligents dept. So it looks like I was about through being a doughboy Al and pretty soon I will probably be writeing to you from Paris but I don’t suppose I will be able to tell you what I am doing because that’s the kind of a job where mum is the word.

[020-041] Your pal,

[020-042] **Jack**.

[020-043] Somewheres in France, April 16.

[020-044] **Friend Al**: Well old pal don’t be supprised if I write you the next time from Paris. I have got a date to see Capt. Seeley tomorrow and Lieut. Mather fixed it up for me to see him but I had to convince the lieut. that it wasn’t no monkey business because they’s always a whole lot of riffs and raffs asking Capt. Seeley can they have a word with him and what they want is to borry his knife to pair their finger nails.

[020-045] But I guess he won’t be sorry he seen me Al not when I show him the stuff I have got on this bird and he will probably shake me by the hand and say “Well Keefe [[us-army|Uncle Sam]] is proud of you but you are waisting your time here and I will be sorry to loose you but it looks like you belong in other fields.” And he will wire a telegram to the gen. staff reccomending me to go to Paris.

[020-046] I guess I all ready told you some of the stuff I have got on this bird but I have not told you all because the best one didn’t only happen last night. Well on acct. of I and Alcock being friends he has kind of been keeping a eye pealed on Shaffer to help me out and he found a letter last night that Shaffer had wrote and this time it was the whole letter with the address and everything and who do you suppose it was to? Well Al it was to Van Hindenburg himself and I have got it right here where I can keep a eye on it and believe me it’s worth watching and I wished I could send it to you so you could see for yourself what kind of a bird we are dealing with. But that’s impossible Al but they’s nothing to keep me from copping it off.

[020-047] Well the letter is wrote in German and to show you what a foxy bird he is he wrote it out in printing so as if it got found by somebody they couldn’t prove he wrote it because when words is wrote out in printing it looks just the same who ever wrote it and you can’t tell. But he wasn’t foxy enough to not sign G. S. down to the bottom of it and that stands for his name George Shaffer and he is the only G. S. in the Co. so it looks like we had him up in a tree. Here is what the letter says:

[020-048] > Field Marshall Van Hindenburg, c/o Die Vierten Dachshunds, Deutscher Armee, Flanders.

[020-049] > 500,000 U.S. *Soldaten schon in Frankreich doch. In Lauterbach habe Ich mein Strumpf verloren und ohne Strumpf gehe Ich nicht heim.* xxxxxxx G. S.

[020-050] Notice them x marks again Al like in the other letter and the other letter was probably to Van Hindenburg to and I only wished I knew what the x marks means but maybe some of the birds that’s all ready in the intelligents dept. can figure it out. But they’s no mystery about the rest of it Al because Alcock understands German and he translated it out what the German words means and here is what it means:

[020-051] 500,000 United States soldiers in France all ready yet. Will advise you when to attack on this front.

[020-052] How is that Al for a fine trader and spy to tell the gen. of the German army how many soldiers we got over here and to not attack till Shaffer says the word and he was probably going to say it wile we was all asleep or something. But thanks to me Al he will be the one that is asleep and it will be some sleep Al and it will make old Rip and Winkle look like they had the colic and when the boys finds out what I done for them I guess they won’t be nothing to good for me. But it will be to late for them to show their appreciations because I won’t be here no more and the boys probably won’t see me again till its all over and we are back in the old U.S. because Alcock was talking to a bird that’s in the int. dept. and he says 1 of their dutys was to keep away from everybody and not leave them know who you are. Because of course if word got out that you was a spy chaser the spys wouldn’t hardly run up and kiss you on the st. but they would duck when they seen you and you would have as much chance to catch them as though you was trolling for wales with a grass hopper.

[020-053] And from this bird’s dope that Alcock was talking to I will half to leave off my uniform and wear plain close and maybe wear false whiskers and etc. so as people who see me the 1st time I will look different to them the next time they see me and maybe I will half to let my mustache grow and grease it so as they will think maybe I am a Dutchman and if they are working for the Kaiser I could maybe pump them.

[020-054] But they’s 1 thing I don’t like about it Al because Alcock says Paris is full of women that isn’t exactly spys but they have been made a fool out of and they are some German’s duke but the Dutchmens tells them a whole lot of things that Uncle Sam would like to know and I would half to find them things out and the only way to do that would be to get them stuck on me and I guess that wouldn’t be no chore but when a gal gets stuck on you they will tell you everything they know and wile with most gals I ever seen they could do that without dropping another nickle still and all it would be different with these gals in Paris that’s been the tools of some Dutchmens because you take a German and he don’t never stop braging till he inhales a bayonet.

[020-055] But it don’t seem fair to make love to them and pertend like I was nuts over them and then when I had learned all they was to know I would half to get rid of them and cast them to 1 side and god knows how many wounds I will leave behind me but probably as many as though I was a regular soldier or snipper but then I wouldn’t feel so bad about it because it would be men and not girlies but everything goes in war fair as they say Al and if Uncle Sam and Gen. Pershing asks me to do it I will do whatever they ask me and they can’t nobody really hold it vs. me because of why I am doing it.

[020-056] But talking about snippers Al I noticed today that I wasn’t near as good as usual in the riffle practice and it was like as if I was haveing a slump like some of the boys does in baseball when they go along 5 or 6 days without finding out who is umpireing the bases and I am afraid that is how it would be with me in snipping I would be OK part of the time and the rest of the time I couldn’t hit Europe and maybe I would fall down when they was depending on me and then I would feel like a rummy so I guess I better not try and show up so good in practice even when I do feel OK because they might make a snipper out of me without knowing my weakness and I figure its something the matter with my eyes. Besides Al it don’t seem like its a fair game to be pecking away at somebody that they can’t see you and aren’t looking for no supprise and its a whole lot different then fighting with a bayonet where its man to man and may the best man win.

[020-057] Well Al I guess I have told you all the news and things is going along about as usual and they don’t seem to be no prospects of us overtakeing a section up to the front but its just train and train and train and if the ball clubs had a training trip like we been haveing they would be so tired by the 1 of May that they wouldn’t run out a base on balls. Yesterday we past by a flock of motor Lauras that was takeing wounded back to a base hospital somewheres and Alcock was talking to 1 of the drivers and he said that over 100% of the birds that’s getting wounded and killed these days is the snippers and the boshs don’t never rest till they find out where there nests is at and then they get all their best marksmens and aim at where they think the snipper has got his nest and then its good night snipper and he is either killed right out or looses a couple of legs or something. I certainly feel sorry for the boys that’s wounded Al and every time we see a bunch of them all us boys is crazy to get up there to the front and get even for what they done.

[020-058] Well old pal I will half to get busy now and overlook the dope I have got on Shaffer so as I will have everything in order for Capt. Seeley and I will write and let you know how things comes out.

[020-059] Your pal,

[020-060] **Jack**.

[020-061] Somewheres in France, April 18.

[020-062] **Friend Al**: Well Al they’s a whole lot of birds that thinks they are wise and always trying to pull off something on somebody but once in a wile they pick out the wrong bird to pull it on and then the laugh is on the smart Alex themself.

[020-063] Well Alcock and some of them thought they was putting up a game on me and was going to make me look like a monkey but before I get through with them Al they will be the suckers and I will be giveing them the horse laugh but what I ought to do is bust them in the jaw and if I was running this war every bird that tried to pull off some practical joke to put a man in bad, I would give a lead shower in their honor some a.m. before breakfast.

[020-064] Alcock was trying to make me believe that 1 of the boys in the Co. name Geo. Shaffer was a German spy or something and they framed up a letter like as if he wrote it to Van Hindenburg giveing away secrets in German about our army and etc. but they made the mistake of [[contract|signing]] his initials to the letter so when I come to think it over I seen it must be a fake because a bird that was a real spy wouldn’t never sign their own name to a letter but they would sign John Smith or something.

[020-065] But any way I had a hold of this letter and a peace of another letter that Shaffer really did write it and I thought I would show them to Capt. Seeley and play it safe because they might be something in them after all and any way it would give him a good laugh. So yesterday I went and seen him and he says “Well Keefe what can I do for you?” So I said “You can’t do nothing for me sir but this time I can do something for you. What would you think if I told you they was a trader and a German spy in your Co.” So he says “I would think you were crazy.” So I said “I am afraid you will half to think so then but maybe you won’t think I am so crazy when I show you the goods.”

[020-066] So then Al I pulled that 1st peace of a letter on him and showed it to him and he read it and when he got through he says “Well it looks suspicious all right. It looks like the man that wrote it was hacking up a big plot to spring a few dependents on his local board the next time they draft him.” So I said “The bird that wrote that letter is a Dutchman name Geo. Shaffer.” So Capt. Seeley says “Well I wish him all the luck in the world and a lot of little Shaffers.” So I said “Yes but what about them x marks and all them letters without no words to them?” So he said “Didn’t you never correspond with a girl and put some of them xs down to the bottom of your letter?” So I says “I have wrote letters to a whole lot of girls but I never had to write nothing in ciphers because I wasn’t never ashamed of anything I wrote.” So he said “Well your lady friends was all cheated then because this is ciphers all right but its the kind of messages they love to read because it means kisses.”

[020-067] Well Al of course I knew it meant something like that but I didn’t think a big truck horse like Shaffer would make such a mushmellow out of himself. But anyway I said to Capt. Seeley I says “All right but what about them other initials without no words to go with them?” And he says “Well that’s some more ciphers but they’s probably a little gal out in Chi that don’t half to look at no key to figure it out.”

[020-068] So then I pulled the other letter on him the 1 in German and he also smiled when he read this one and finely he says “Some of your pals has been playing a trick on you like when you come over on the ship and the best thing you can do is to tear the letters up and keep it quite and don’t leave nobody know you fell for it. And now I have got a whole lot to tend to so good by.”

[020-069] So that’s all that was said between us and I come away and come back to quarters and Alcock and 2 or 3 of the other boys was there and Alcock knew where I had been and I suppose he had told the other birds and they was all set to give me the Mary ha ha but I beat them to it.

[020-070] “Well Alcock” I says when I come in “you are some joke Smith but you wouldn’t think you was so funny if I punched your jaw.” So he turned kind of pail but he forced a smile and says “Well I guess the Vin Blank is on you this time.” So I said “You won’t get no Vin Blank off me but what you are libel to get is a wallop in the jaw.” So he says “You crabbed at me a wile ago for not takeing a joke but it looks like you was the one that couldn’t take them now.” So I said “What I would like to take is a poke at your nose.” So that shut him up and they didn’t none of them get their laugh because I had them scared and if they had of laughed I would of made them swallow it.

[020-071] So after all Al the laugh is on them because their gag fell dead and I guess the next time they try and pull some gag they will pick out some hick from some X roads to pull it on and not a bird that has traveled all over the big leagues and seen all they is to see.

[020-072] Well Al I am tickled to death I won’t half to give up my uniform and snoop around Paris like a white wings double crossing women and spying and etc. and even if the whole thing hadn’t of been just a joke I was going to ask Capt. Seeley to not reccomend me to no int. dept. but jest leave me be where I am at so as when the time comes I can fight fair like man to man and not behind no woman’s skirts like a cur.

[020-073] So you see Al everything is OK after all and the laugh is on Alcock and his friends because they was the ones that expected to do all the laughing but instead of that I made a monkey out of them.

[020-074] Your pal,

[020-075] **Jack**.

[020-076] Somewheres in France, April 23.

[020-077] **Friend Al**: Well Al if you would see my face you would think I had been attending a barrage or something or else I had been in a bar room fight only of course if it was a fair fight I wouldn’t be so kind of marred up like I am. But I had a accident Al and fell over a bunk and lit on the old bean and the result is Al that I have got a black eye and a bad nose and my jaw is swole a little and my ears feels kind of dull like so I guess the ladys wouldn’t call me Handsome Jack if they seen me but it will be all OK in a few days and I will be the same old Jack.

[020-078] But I will tell you how it come off. I was setting reading a letter from [[florrie-keefe|Florrie]] that all as she said in it was that she had boughten herself a new suit that everybody says was the cutest she ever had on her back just like I give a dam because by the time I see her in it she will of gave it to little Al’s Swede. But any way I was reading this letter when in come Shaffer the bird that was mixed up in that little gag about the fake spy and he come up to me and says “Well you big snake who’s male are you reading now?” Well Al him calling me big is like I would say hello Jumbo to a flee. But any way I says “My own male and who and the he‑ll male would I be reading?” So he said “Well its hard to tell because you stole some of mine and read it and not only that but you showed it to the whole A.E.F. so now stand up and take what’s comeing to you.”

[020-079] Well Al I thought he was just kidding so I says “I come over here to fight Germans and not 1 of my own pals.” So he says “Don’t call me no pal, but if you come to fight Germans now is your chance because you say I’m 1 of them.”

[020-080] Well he kind of made a funny motion like he wanted to spar or wrestle or something and I thought he meant it in a friendly way like we sometimes pull off a rough house once in a wile so I stood up but before I had a chance to take holds with him he cut loose at me with his fists doubled up and I kind of triped or something and fell over a bench and I must have hit something sharp on the way down and I kind of got scratched up but they are only scratchs and don’t amt. to nothing. Only I wished I knew he had of been serious and I would of made a punching bag out of him and you can bet that the next time he wants to start something I won’t wait to see if he is jokeing but I will tear into him and he will think he run into a Minnie Weffers.

[020-081] Well I suppose Alcock was sore at me for getting the best of him and not falling for his gag and he was afraid to tackle me himself and he told big Shaffer a peck of lies about some dam letter or something and said I stole it and it made Shaffer sore and no wonder because who wouldn’t be sore if they thought somebody was reading their male. But a man like Shaffer that if he stopped a shell the Dutchmens would half to move back a ways so as they would be room enough in France to bury him hasn’t got no right to pick on a smaller man especially when I wasn’t feeling good on acct. of something I eat but at that Al size don’t make no difference and its the bird that’s got the nerve and knows how that can knock them dead and if Shaffer had of gave me any warning he would of been the 1 that is scratched up instead of I though I guess he is to lucky to trip over a kit bag and fall down and cut himself.

[020-082] But my scratchs don’t really amt. to nothing Al and in a few days I will be like new.

[020-083] Your pal,

[020-084] **Jack**.

[020-085] Somewheres in France, April 25.

[020-086] **Friend Al**: Well old pal I have got some big news for you now. We been ordered up to the front and its good by to this Class D burg and now for some real actions and I am tickled to death and I only hope the Dutchmens will loose their minds and try and start something up on the section where we are going to and I can’t tell you where its at Al but you keep watching the papers and even if the boshs don’t start nothing maybe we will start something on our own acct. and the next thing you know you will read where we have got them on the Lincoln highway towards Russia and believe me Al we won’t half to stop every little wile to bring up no Van Hindenburg but we will run them ragged and they say the Germans is the best singers and when they all bust out with Comrades they will make the Great Lakes band sound like the Russia artillery.

[020-087] Well Al I am so excited I can’t write much and I have got a 100 things to tend to so I will half to cut this letter short.

[020-088] Well some of the other birds like Alcock and them is pertending like they was tickled to death to but believe me Al if the orders was changed all of a sudden and they told us we was going to stay here till the duration of the war we wouldn’t half to call on the Engrs. to dam their tear ducks. But they pertend like they are pleased and keep whistleing so as they won’t blubber and today they all laughed their heads off at something that come out in the Co. paper that some of the boys gets out but they laughed like they was nervous instead of enjoying it.

[020-089] Well what come out in the paper was supposed to be a joke on me and if they think its funny they are welcome and I would send the paper to you that its in only I haven’t got only the 1 copy so I will copy it down and you can see for yourself what a screen it is. Well they’s 1 peace that’s got up to look like it was the casuality list in some regular newspaper and it says:

[020-090] > Wounded In Action

[020-091] > Privates

[020-092] > Jack Keefe, [[chicago-illinois|Chicago]], Ill. (Very)

[020-093] And then they’s another peace that reads like this:

[020-094] > Decorated

[020-095] > The Company has won its first war honors and Private Jack Keefe is the lucky dog. Private Keefe has been decorated by Gen. George Shaffer of the 4th Dachshunds for extreme courage and cleverness in showing up a dangerous nest of spies. Keefe was hit four times by large caliber shells before he could say surrender. He was decorated with the Order of the Schwarz Auge, the Order of the Rot Nase and the Order of the Blumenkohl Ohren, besides which a Right Cross was hung on his jaw. Private Keefe takes his honors very modestly, no one having even heard him mention them except in stifled tones during the night.

[020-096] Well Al all right if they can find something to amuse themself and they need it I guess. But they better remember that they’s plenty of time for the laugh to be on the other foot before this war is over.

[020-097] Your pal,

[020-098] **Jack**.
