---
description: "Chapter: Stragety and Tragedy"
id: 0160-Jack-Keefe-Stories-e6c09a2d-ch023
label: "Stragety and Tragedy"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

## Stragety and Tragedy

[019-001] Somewheres in France, March 2.

[019-002] **Friend [[you-know-me-al|Al]]**: Well Al if it rains a couple more days like its been they will half to page the navy and at that its about time they give them something to do and I don’t mean the chasers and destroyers and etc. that acts like convoys for our troop ships and throws them death bombs at the U boats but I mean the big battle ships and I bet you haven’t heard of a supper dread 0 doing nothing since we been in [[world-war-i|the war]] and they say they can’t do nothing till the German navy comes out and that’s what they’re waiting for. Well Al that’s a good [[contract|deal]] like waiting for the 30nd of Feb. or for Jennings to send his self up to [[base-hit|hit]] for [[ty-cobb|Cobb]] and they can say all they want about the Germans being bullet proof from the neck up but they got some brains and you can bet their navy ain’t comeing out no more then my hair. So as far as I can see a man being on a supper dread 0 is just like you owned a private yatch without haveing to [[salary|pay]] for the keep up and when they talk about a man on a big U.S. battle ship in danger they mean he might maybe die because he eat to much and no exercise.

[019-003] So if I was them I would send the big ships here so as we could use them for motor Lauras and I guess they’s no place in our whole camp where you couldn’t float them and I don’t know how it is all over France but if they was a baseball league between the towns where they have got us billeted the fans would get blear eyed looking at the no game sign and if a mgr. worked their pitchers in turn say it was my turn tomorrow and the next time my turn come around some of little Al’s kids would half to help me out of the easy chair and say “Come on granpa you pitch this afternoon.”

[019-004] Jokeing a side Al if I was running the training camps like Camp Grant back home instead of starting the men off with the regular drills and hikes like they give them now I would stand them under a shower bath with their close on about ½ the time and when it come time for a hike I would send them back and fourth across Rock River and back where they wasn’t no bridge. And then maybe when they got over here France wouldn’t be such a big supprise.

[019-005] One of the boys has put a sign up on our billet and it says Noahs Ark on it and maybe you have heard that old gag Al about the big flood that everybody was drownded only Noah and his folks and a married couple of every kind of animals in the world and they wasn’t drownded because Noah had a Ark for them to get in out of the wet. Well Noahs Ark is a good name for our dump and believe me they haven’t none of the animals been overlooked and we are also going Noah one better and sheltering all the bugs and some of them is dressed in cocky.

[019-006] Well I am in this war to the finish and you couldn’t hire me to quit till we have ran them ragged but I wished they had of gave us steel helmets wide enough so as they would make a bumber shoot and I hope the next war they have they will pick out Arizona to have it there.

[019-007] Your pal,

[019-008] **[[jack-keefe|Jack]]**.

[019-009] Somewheres in France, March 6.

[019-010] **Friend Al**: Well Al I suppose you have read in the communicates that comes out in the paper where the Americans that’s all ready in the trenchs has pulled off some great stuff and a whole lot of them has been sighted and give meddles and etc. by the Frenchmens for what they have pulled off and the way they work it Al when one of the soldiers wrists his life or something and pulls off something big like takeing a mess of prisoners and bringing them back here where they can get something to eat the French pins a meddle on them and sometimes they do it if you don’t do nothing but die only then of course they send it to your family so as they will have something to show their friends besides snapshots of Mich. City.

[019-011] Well we was kidding back and fourth about it today and one of the smart alex in our Co. a bird named Johnny Alcock that is always trying to kid somebody all the time he said to me “Well I suppose they will half to build more tonnages to carry all the meddles you will win back to the states.” So I said “Well I guess I will win as many of them as you will win.” That shut him up for a wile but finely he says “You have got enough chest to wear a whole junk shop on it.” So I said “Well I am not the baby that can’t win them.” So he says “If you ever happen to be snooping around the bosh trenchs when Fritz climbs over the top you will come back so fast that the Kaiser will want to know who was that speed merchant that led the charge and decorate you with a iron cross.” So I said “I will decorate you right in the eye one of these days.” So he had to shut up and all the other boys give him the laugh.

[019-012] Well Al jokeing to one side if I half to go back home without a meddle it will be because they are playing favorites but I guess I wouldn’t be left out at that because I stand ace high with most of the Frenchmens around here because they like a man that’s always got a smile or a kind word for them and they would like me still better yet if they could understand more English and get my stuff better but it don’t seem like they even try to learn and I suppose its because they figure the war is in their country so everybody should ought to talk their language but when you get down to cases they’s a big job on both our hands and if one of us has got to talk the others language why and the he‑ll should they pick on the one that’s hard to learn it and besides its 2 to 1 you might say because the U.S. and the English uses the same language and they’s nobody only the French that talks like they do because they couldn’t nobody else talk that way so why wouldn’t it be the square thing for them to forget theirs and tackle ours and it would prolongate their lifes to do it because most of their words can’t be said without straining yourself and no matter what kind of a physic you got its bound to wear you down in time.

[019-013] But I suppose the French soldiers figure they have got enough of a job on their hands remembering their different uniforms and who to salute and etc. and they have got a fine system in the French army Al because you wear whatever you was before you got to be what you are that is sometimes. For inst. suppose you use to be in the artillery and now you are a aviator you still wear a artillery uniform part of the time and its like I use to pitch for the [[chicago-white-sox|White Sox]] and I guess I would be a pretty looking bird if I waddled around in the mire here a wile with my old baseball unie on me and soon people would begin to think I was drafted from the Toledo Mud Hens.

[019-014] Seriously Al sometimes you see 4 or 5 French officers comeing along and they haven’t one of them got the same color uniform on but they are all dressed up like a Roman candle you might say and if their uniforms run when they got wet a man could let them drip into a pail and drink it up for a pussy cafe.

[019-015] Well Al the boys in our regt. is going to get out a newspaper and get it out themself and it will be just the news about our regt. and a few gags and comical storys about the different boys and they are going to get it out once per wk.

[019-016] Corp. Pierson from our Co. that use to work on a newspaper somewheres is going to be the editor and he wants I should write them up something about baseball and how to pitch and etc. but I don’t believe in a man waisting their time on a childs play like writeing up articles for a newspaper but just to stall him I said I would try and think up something and give it to him when I had it wrote up. Well him waiting for my article will be like me waiting for mail because I don’t want nobody to take me for a newspaper man because I seen enough of them in baseball and one time we was playing in Phila. and I had them shut out up to the 8th inning and all of a sudden [[george-weaver|Weaver]] and Collins got a stroke of paralysis and tipped their caps to a couple ground balls that grazed their shoe laces and then Rube Oldring hit one on a line right at [[chick-gandil|Gandil]] and he tried to catch it on the bounce off his lap and Bill Dinneen’s right arm was lame and he begin calling everything a ball and first thing you know they beat us 9 to 2 or something and Robbins one of the Chi paper reporters that traveled with us wired a telegram home to his paper that Phila. was supposed to be a town where a man could get plenty of sleep but I looked like I had set up all the nights we was there and of course [[florrie-keefe|Florrie]] seen it in the paper and got delirious and I would of busted Robbins in the jaw only I wasn’t sure if he realy wrote it that way or the telegraph operator might of balled it up.

[019-017] So they won’t be no newspaper articles in mine Al but I will be anxious to see what Pierson’s paper looks like when it comes out and I bet it will be a fine paper if our bunch have the writeing of it because the most of them would drop in a swoon if you asked them how to spell their name.

[019-018] Your pal,

[019-019] **Jack**.

[019-020] Somewheres in France, March 9.

[019-021] **Friend Al**: Well Al I guess I all ready told you about them getting up a newspaper in our regt. and Joe Pierson asked me would I write them up something for it and I told him no I wouldn’t but it seems like he overheard me and thought I said I would so any way he was expecting something from me so last night I wrote them up something and I don’t know if the paper will ever get printed or not so I will coppy down a part of what I wrote to give you a idear of what I wrote. He wanted I should write them up something about the stragety of baseball and where it was like the stragety in the war because one night last month I give them a little talk at one of their entertainments about how the man that used their brains in baseball was the one that win just like in the army but I guess I all ready told you about me giveing them that little talk and afterwards I got a skinfull of the old grape and I thought sure they would have me up in front of the old court marshall but they never knowed the difference on acct. of the way I can handle it and you take the most of the boys and if they see a cork they want to kiss the Colonel. Well any way here is the article I wrote up and I called it War and Baseball 2 games where brains wins.

[019-022] > The gen. public that go out to the baseball park and set through the games probably think they see everything that is going on on the field but they’s a lot of stuff that goes on on the baseball field that the gen. public don’t see and don’t know nothing about and I refer to what we baseball boys calls inside baseball.

[019-023] > No one is in a better position to know all about inside baseball then a man like I who have been a pitcher in the big league because it is the pitchers that has to do most of the thinking and pull off the smart plays that is what wins ball games. For inst. I will write down about a little incidents that come off one time 2 yrs. ago when the [[boston-red-sox|Boston]] club was playing against the [[chicago-illinois|Chicago]] White Sox where I was one of the stars when the U.S. went into the war and then I dropped baseball and signed up a contract with [[us-army|Uncle Sam]] to play for my country in the big game against the Kaiser of Germany. This day I refer to I was in there giveing them the best I had but we was in a tight game because the boys was not hitting behind me though Carl Mays that was pitching for the Boston club didn’t have nothing on the ball only the cover and after the ball left his hand you could have ran in the club house and changed your undershirt and still be back in time to swing when the ball got up there.

[019-024] > Well it come along the 9th inning and we was tied up with the score 2 and 2 and I had Larry Gardner swinging like a hammock all day but this time he hit a fly ball that either Weaver or Jackson ought to of caught in a hollow tooth but they both layed down and died on it and Gardner got on second base. Well they was 2 men out and Hoblitzel was the next man up and the next man after he was Scott their shortstop that couldn’t take the ball in his hand and make a base hit off a man like I so instead of me giveing Hobby a ball to hit I walked him as we call it and then of course it was Scott’s turn to bat and Barry their mgr. hesitated if he should send [[babe-ruth|Ruth]] up to hit for Scott or not but finely he left Scott go up there and he was just dragging his bat off his shoulder to swing at the first strike when I whizzed the third one past him.

[019-025] > That is what we call inside baseball or stragety whether its in baseball or war is walking a man like Hoblitzel that might be lucky enough to hit one somewheres but if you don’t give him nothing to hit how can he hit it and then I made Scott look like he had been sent for but couldn’t come. Afterwards in the 11th inning Duffy Lewis hit a ball that he ought to of been traded for even swinging at it because it come near clipping his ear lob but any way he swang at it and hit it for three bases because Jackson layed down and died going after it and Lewis scored on a past ball and they beat us 3 to 2.

[019-026] > So that is what we call stragety on the baseball field and it wins there the same like in war and this war will be win by the side that has gens. with brains and use them and I figure where a man that has been in big league baseball where you can’t never make a success out of it unless you are a quick thinker and they have got a big advantage over men that’s been in other walks of life where its most all luck and I figure the army would be a whole lot better off if all the officers and gens. had of played baseball in the big leagues and learned to think quick, but of course they ain’t everybody that have got the ability to play baseball and stand the gaff but the man that has got the ability and been through the ropes is just that much ahead of the rest of them and its to bad that most of our gens. is so old that they couldn’t of knew much about baseball since it become a test of brains like it is now.

[019-027] > I am afraid I have eat up a lot of space with my little Article on War and Baseball so I will end this little article up with a little comical incidents that happened dureing our training trip down in Mineral Wells, Tex. a year ago this spring. The first day we was out for practice they was a young [[outfield|outfielder]] from a bush league and Mgr. Rowland told him to go out in right field and shag and this was his reply. “I haven’t never been in this park before so you will half to tell me which is right field.” Of course right field, is the same field in all parks and that is what made the incidents so comical and some of the boys is certainly green when they first break in and we have manys the laugh at their expense.

[019-028] That is what I wrote up for them Al and I wound it up with that little story and I was reading over what I wrote and Johnny Alcock seen me reading it and asked me to leave him see it so I showed it to him and he said it was great stuff and he hadn’t never dreamt they was that much stragety in baseball and he thought if some of the officers seen it they would pop their eyes out and they would want to talk to me and get my idears and see if maybe they couldn’t some of them be plied to war fair and maybe if I showed them where it could I would get promoted and stuck on to the gen. staff that’s all made up from gens. that lays out the attacks and etc.

[019-029] Well Al Alcock is a pretty wise bird and a fine boy to if you know how to take him and he seen right off what I was getting at in my article and its true Al that the 2 games is like the other and quick thinking is what wins in both of them. But I am not looking for no staff job that you don’t half to go up in the trenchs and fight but just lay around in some office somewheres and stick pins in a map while the rest of the boys is sticking bayonets in the Dutchmen’s maps so I hope they don’t none of the gens. see what I wrote because I come over here to fight and be a soldier and carry a riffle instead of a pin cushion.

[019-030] But it don’t hurt nothing for me to give them a few hints once in a wile about useing their brains if they have got them and if I can do any good with my articles in the papers why I would just as leaf wear my fingers to the bone writeing them up.

[019-031] Your pal,

[019-032] **Jack**.

[019-033] Somewheres in France, March 13.

[019-034] **Friend Al**: Well Al I bet you will pretty near fall over in a swoon when you read what I have got to tell you. Before you get this letter you will probably all ready of got a coppy of the paper I told you about because it come out the day before yesterday and I sent you a coppy with my article in it only they cut a part of it out on acct. of not haveing enough space for all of it but they left the best part of it in.

[019-035] Well Al somebody must of a sent a coppy to Gen. Pershing and marked up what I wrote up so as he would be sure and see it and probably one of the officers done it. Well that’s either here or there but this afternoon when we come in they was a letter for me and who do you think it was from Al. Well you can’t never even begin to guess so I will tell you. It was from Gen. Pershing Al and it come from Paris where he is at and I have got it here laying on the table and I would send it to you to look at only I wouldn’t take no chances of looseing it and I don’t mean you wouldn’t be carefull of it Al but of course the mail has got to go across the old pond and if the Dutchmens periscoped the boat the letter was on it it would be good night letter and a letter like this here is something to be proud of and hold onto it and keep it for little Al till he grows up big enough to appreciate it. But they’s nothing to prevent me from copping down the letter so as you can read what it says and here it is.

[019-036] > **Private Keefe**,

[019-037] > *Dear Sir*: My attention was called today to an article written by you in your regimental paper under the title War and Baseball: Two Games Where Brains Wins. In this article you state that our generals would be better able to accomplish their task if they had enjoyed the benefits of strategic training in baseball. I have always been a great admirer of the national game of baseball and I heartily agree with what you say. But unfortunately only a few of us ever possessed the ability to play your game and the few never were proficient enough to play it professionally. Therefore the general staff is obliged to blunder along without that capacity for quick thinking which is acquired only on the baseball field.

[019-038] > But I believe in making use of all the talent in my army, even among the rank and file. Therefore I respectfully ask whether you think some of your baseball secrets would be of strategic value to us in the prosecution of this war and if so whether you would be willing to provide us with the same.

[019-039] > If it is not too much trouble, I would be pleased to hear from you along these lines, and if you have any suggestion to make regarding a campaign against our enemy, either offensive or defensive, I would be pleased to have you outline it in a letter to me.

[019-040] > By the way I note with pleasure that our first names are the same. It makes a sort of bond between us which I trust will be further cemented if you can be of assistance to me in my task.

[019-041] > I shall eagerly await your reply.

[019-042] > Sincerely,

[019-043] > **Black Jack Pershing**,

[019-044] > Folies Bergere, Paris, France.

[019-045] That is the letter I got from him Al and I’ll say its some letter and I bet if some of these smart alex officers seen it it would reduce some of the swelling in their chest but I consider the letter confidential Al and I haven’t showed it to nobody only 3 or 4 of my buddys and I showed it to Johnny Alcock and he popped his eyes out so far you could of snipped them off with a shears. And he said it was a cinch that Pershing realy wrote it on acct. of him signing it Black Jack Pershing and they wouldn’t nobody else sign it that way because it was a private nickname between he and some of his friends and they wouldn’t nobody else know about it.

[019-046] So then he asked was I going to answer the letter and I said of course I was and he says well I better take a whole lot of pains with my answer and study up the situation before I wrote it and put some good idears in it and if my letters made a hit with Gen. Pershing the next thing you know he would probably summons me to Paris and maybe stick me on the war board so as all I would half to do would be figure up plans of attacks and etc. and not half to go up in the trenchs and wrist my life and probably get splattered all over France.

[019-047] So I said “Well I am not looking for no excuse to get out of the trenchs but its just the other way and I am nuts to get in them.” So he says “You must be.” But he showed me where it would be a great experience to set in at them meetings even if I didn’t have much to say and just set there and listen and hear their plans and what’s comeing off and besides I would get a chance to see something of Paris and it don’t look like none of us only the officers would be give leave to go there but of course I would go if Black Jack wanted me and after all Al I am here to give Uncle Sam the best I have got and if I can serve the stars and strips better by sticking pins in a map then getting in the trenchs why all right and it takes more than common soldiers to win a war and if I am more use to them as a kind of adviser instead of carrying a bayonet why I will sacrifice my own feelings for the good of the cause like I often done in baseball.

[019-048] But they’s another thing Alcock told me Al and that is that the war board they have got has got gens. on it from all the different countrys like the U.S. and England and France and Spain and of course they are more French gens. than anything else on acct. of the war being here in France so probably they do some of their talking in French and Alcock says if he was I he would get busy and try and learn enough French so as I could make myself understood when I had something to say and of course they probably won’t nothing come out of it all but still and all I always says its best to be ready for whatever comes off and if the U.S. had of been ready for this war I wouldn’t be setting here writeing this letter now but I would be takeing a plunge in one of them Berlin brewry vats.

[019-049] Any way I have all ready picked enough French so as I can talk it pretty good and I would be OK if I could understand it when they are talking it off but to hear them talk it off you would think they seen their dinner at the end of the sentence.

[019-050] Well Al I will tell you how things comes out and I hope Black Jack will forget all about it and lay off me so as I can get into the real fighting instead of standing in front of a map all the wile like a school teacher or something and I all most wished I hadn’t never wrote that article and then of course the idear wouldn’t of never came to Black Jack that I could help him but if he does take me on his staff it will be some pair of Jacks eh Al and enough to open the pot and if the Germans is sucker enough to stay in they will get their whiskers cinched.

[019-051] Your pal,

[019-052] **Jack**.

[019-053] Somewheres in France, March 14.

[019-054] **Friend Al**: Well this is the second letter I have wrote today and the other one is to Gen. Pershing and I have still got the letter here yet Al and I will coppy it down and tell you what I wrote to him.

[019-055] > **Gen. Jack Pershing**,

[019-056] > c/o Folies Bergere, Paris, France.

[019-057] > *Dear Gen*: You can bet I was supprised to get a letter from you and when I wrote that article I didn’t have no idear that they would something come out of it. Well Gen. I come into the army expecting to fight and lay down my life if nessary and I am not one of the kind that are looking for an out and trying to hide behind a desk or something because I am afraid to go into the trenchs but I guess if you know something about baseball you won’t accuse me from not having the old nerve because they can’t no man hold onto a job in the big leagues unless a man is fearless and does their best work under fire and especially a pitcher. But if you figure that I can serve old glory better some other way then in the rank and files I am willing to sacrifice myself like I often done in baseball. Anything to win Gen. is the way I look at it.

[019-058] > You asked me in your letter did I think some of my idears would help out well gen. a man don’t like to sound like they was bragging themself up but this isn’t no time for monking and I guess you want the truth. Well gen. I don’t know much about running a army and their plans but stragety is the same if its on the battle field or the baseball diamond you might say and it just means how can we beat them and I often say that the men that can use their brains will win any kind of a game except maybe some college Willy boy game like football or bridge whist.

[019-059] > Well gen. without no bragging myself up I learned a whole lot about stragety on the baseball field and I think I could help you in a good many ways but before I tried to tell you how to do something I would half to know what you was trying to do and of course I know you can’t tell me in a letter on acct. of the censors and of course they are Americans to but they’s a whole lot of the boys that don’t mean no harm but they are gabby and can’t keep their mouth shut and who knows who would get a hold of it and for the same reason I don’t feel like I should give you any of my idears by mail but if I could just see you and we could have a little talk and talk things over but I don’t suppose they’s any chance of that unless I could get leave off to run down to Paris for a wile and meet you somewheres but they won’t give us no leave to go to Paris but of course a letter from you that I could show it to Capt. Seeley would fix it up and no questions asked.

[019-060] > So I guess I better wait till I hear from you along these lines and in the mean wile I will be thinking the situation over and see what I can think up and I all ready got some idears that I feel like they would work out OK and I hope I will get a chance in the near future to have a little chat with you.

[019-061] > I note what you say about our name being both Jack and I was thinking to myself that lots of times in a poker game a pair of jacks is enough to win and maybe it will be the same way in the war game and any way I guess the 2 of us could put up a good bluff and bet them just as if we had them. Eh gen?

[019-062] > Respy,

[019-063] > **Jack Keefe**.

[019-064] That’s what I wrote to him Al and he will get it some time tomorrow or the next day and I should ought to hear from him back right away and I hope he will take my hint and leave me stay here with my regt. where I can see some real action. But if he summonses me I will go Al and not whine about getting a raw deal.

[019-065] Well I happened to drop into a estaminet here yesterday and that’s kind of a store where a man can buy stuff to take along with him or you can get a cup of coffee or pretty near anything and they was a girl on the job in there and she smiled when I come in and I smiled at her back and she seen I was American so she begin talking to me in English only she has got some brogue and its hard to make it out what she is trying to get at. Well we talked a wile and all of a sudden the idear come to me that I and her could hit it off and both do the other some good by her learning me French and I could learn her English and so I sprung it on her and she was tickled to death and we called it a bargain and tomorrow we are going to have our first lessons and how is that Al for a bargain when I can pick up French without it costing me a nickle and of course they won’t be only time for I or 2 lessons before I hear from Black Jack but I can learn a whole lot in 2 lessons if she will tend to business but the way she smiled at me when I come out and the looks she give me I am afraid if she seen much of me it would be good night so I will half to show her I won’t stand for no foolishness because I had enough flirtations Al and the next woman that looks X eyed at me will catch her death of cold.

[019-066] Your pal,

[019-067] **Jack**.

[019-068] Somewheres in France, March 16.

[019-069] **Friend Al**: Well old pal it looks like they wouldn’t be no front line trenchs for this baby and what I am getting at is that the word was past around today that Black Jack himself is comeing and they isn’t no faulse alarm about it because Capt. Seeley told us himself and said Gen. Pershing would be here in a day or 2 to overlook us and he wanted that everybody should look their best and keep themself looking neat and clean and clean up all the billets and etc. because that was what Gen. Pershing was comeing to see, how we look and how we are getting along and etc.

[019-070] Well Al that’s what Capt. Seeley said but between you and I they’s another reason why he is comeing and I guess he figures they will be a better chance to talk things over down here then if I was to go to Paris and I am not the only one that knows why he is comeing because after supper Alcock called me over to I side and congratulated me and said it looked like I was in soft.

[019-071] Well I will be ready for him when he comes and I will be ready to pack up and blow out of here at a minute’s notice and I can’t help from wondring what some of these smart alex officers will say when they see what’s comeing off. So this won’t be only a short letter Al because I have got a lot to do to get ready and what I am going to do is write down some of my idears so as I can read them off to him when he comes and if I didn’t have them wrote down I might maybe get nervous when I seen him and maybe forget what I got to say because the boys says he’s a tough bird for a man to see for the first time till you get to know him and he acts like he was going to eat you alive but he’s a whole lot like a dog when you get to know him and his bark is worse then a bite.

[019-072] Well Al how is that for news and I guess you will be prouder then ever of your old pal before this business gets over with and I would feel pretty good with everything breaking so good only I am getting worred about Ernestine that little French gal in the estaminet and I wished now I hadn’t never seen her or made no bargain with her and I didn’t do it so much for what I could learn off of her but these French gals Al has had a tough time of it and if a man can bring a little sunshine into their life he wouldn’t be a man unless he done it. So I was just trying to be a good fellow and here is what I get for it because I caught her today Al with that look in her eye that I seen in so many of them and I know what it means and I guess about the best thing for me to do is run away from Gen. Pershing and go over the top or something and leave the boshs shoot my nose off or mess me up some way and then maybe I won’t get pestered to death every time I try and be kind to some little gal.

[019-073] I guess the French lessons will half to be cut out because it wouldn’t be square to leave her see me again and it would be different if I could tell her I am married but I don’t know the French terms for it and besides it don’t seem to make no difference to some of them and the way they act you would think a wife was just something that come out on you like a sty and the best way to do was just to forget it.

[019-074] Well Al as I say I caught her looking at me like it was breaking her heart and I wouldn’t be supprised if she cried after I come away, but what can a man do about it Al and I have got a good notion to wear my gas mask everywhere I go and then maybe I will have a little peace once in a wile.

[019-075] I must close now for this time and get busy on some idears so as Black Jack won’t catch me flat footed but I guess they’s no danger of that eh Al?

[019-076] Your pal,

[019-077] **Jack**.

[019-078] Somewheres in France, March 18.

[019-079] **Friend Al**: Well old pal I am all set for Gen. Pershing when he comes and I have got some of my idears wrote down just the bear outlines of them and when he asks me if I have got any I can just read them off from my notes like I was a lecture and here is a few of the notes I have got wrote down so you can get some idear of what I am going to spring on him.

[019-080] > 1

[019-081] > In baseball many big league mgrs. before a game they talk it over in the club house with their men and disgust the weakness of the other club and how is the best way to beat them and etc. For inst. when I was pitching for the White Sox and suppose we was going to face a pitcher that maybe he was weak on fielding bunts so before the game Mgr. Rowland would say to us “Remember boys this baby so-and-so gets the rabbis if you lay down bunts on him.” So we would begin laying them down on him and the first thing you know he would be frothing at the mouth and triping all over himself and maybe if he did finely get a hold of the ball he would throw it into the Southren League or somewheres and before the other mgr. could get another bird warmed up they would half to hire a crossing policeman to straiten out the jam at the plate. And the same thing would be in war like in baseball and instead of a army going into it blind you might say, why the gens. ought to get together before the battle and fix it up to work on the other side’s weakness. For inst. suppose the Germans is weak on getting out of the way of riffle bullets why that’s the weapon to use on them and make a sucker out of them.

[019-082] > 2

[019-083] > Getting the jump on your oppts. is more then ½ the battle whether its in the war or on the baseball field and many a game has been win by getting the jump on your oppts. For inst. that reminds me of a little incidents that happened one day when we was playing the [[washington-senators|Washington]] club and I was pitching against the notorious [[walter-johnson|Walter Johnson]] and before they was a man out Geo. McBride booted one and Collins and Jackson got a couple hits and we was 2 runs to the good before they was a man out. Well Johnson come back pretty good and the rest of the game the boys acted like they was scared of him and kept one foot in the water bucket but we would of win the game at that only in the 9th inning [[ray-schalk|Schalk]] dropped a third strike on me and Judge and Milan hit a couple of fly balls that would of been easy outs only for the wind but the wind raised havioc with the ball and they both went for hits and they beat us 3 to 2 and that’s the kind of luck I genally always had against the Washington club.

[019-084] > 3

[019-085] > In baseball of course they’s only nine men on a side and that is where a gen. in the war has got the advantage on a mgr. in baseball because they’s no rules in war fair to keep a man from useing all the men he feels like so it looks to me like a gen. had all the best of it because suppose the other side only had say 50 thousand men in a certain section they’s nothing to prevent a gen. from going after them with a 100 thousand men and if he can’t run them ragged when you got to them 2 to I its time to enlist in the G.A.R. All though as I say a mgr. can’t only use nine men at a time in baseball, but at that I know of incidents where a mgr. has took advantage of the oppts. being shy of men and one time the St. Louis club came to Chi and Jones was all crippled up for pitchers but the game was on our home grounds so it was up to Mgr. Rowland to say if the game should be played or if he should call it off on acct. of cold weather because it was in the spring. But he knowed Jones was shy of pitchers so he made him play the game and Jones used big Laudermilk to pitch against us and they beat us 5 and 2.

[019-086] > 4

[019-087] > Another advantage where a gen. got it on a baseball mgr. because in baseball the game begins at 3 o’clock and the other club knows when its going to begin just the same as your club so they can’t neither club beat the other one to it and start the game wile the other club is looking out the window.

[019-088] > But a gen. don’t half to tell the other side when he is going to attack them but of course they have observers that can see when you are going to get ready to pull something. But it looks to me like the observers wouldn’t be worth a hoop and he‑ll if the other gen. made his preparations at night when it was dark like bringing up the troops and artilery and supplys and etc. and in that way you could take them by supprise and make them look like a fool, like in baseball I have often crossed the batter up and one day I had Cobb 3 and 2 and he was all set to murder a [[fast-ball|fast one]] and I dinked a slow one up there to him and the lucky stiff hit it on the end of his bat just inside third base and 2 men scored on it.

[019-089] That’s about the idears I am going to give him Al only of course I can talk it off better then I can write it because wile I am talking I can think up a lot more incidents to tell him and him being a baseball [[strikeout|fan]] he will set there pop eyed with his mouth open as long as I want to talk. But now I can’t hardly wait for him to get here Al and it seems funny to think that here I am a $30 dollar a mo. doughboy and maybe in a few days I will be on the staff and they don’t have nobody only officers and even a lieut. gets 5 or 6 times as much as a doughboy and how is that for a fine nickname Al for men that all the dough they are getting is a $1 per day and the pollutes only gets 2 Sues a day and that’s about 2 cents so I suppose we ought to call them the Wall St. crowd.

[019-090] Well Al you should ought to be thankfull you are there at home with your wife where you can watch her and keep your eyes on her and find out what she is doing with her spare time though I guess at that they wouldn’t be much danger of old Bertha running a muck and I don’t suppose she would half to wear bob wire entanglements to keep Jack the Kisser away but when a man has got a wife like Florrie and here I am over here and there she is over there well Al a man don’t get to sleep no quicker nights from thinking about it and I lay there night after night and wonder what and the he‑ll can she be doing and she might be doing most anything Al and they’s only the one thing that its a cinch she ain’t doing and that’s writeing a letter to me and a man would pretty near think she had forgot my first name but even at that she could set down and write to me and start it out Dear Husband.

[019-091] But the way she acts why even if they was any fun over here I wouldn’t be haveing it and suppose I do get on Gen. Pershing’s staff and get a lieut. or something and write and tell her about it, why she would probably wait till a legal holiday to answer me back and then she would write about 10 words and say she went to the Palace last week and when she come out after the show it was raining.

[019-092] Well Al you can’t blame a man for anything he pulls off when their wife acts like that and if I give that little Ernestine a smack the next time she bulges her lips out at me whose fault is it Al? Not mine.

[019-093] Your pal,

[019-094] **Jack**.

[019-095] Somewheres in France, March 20.

[019-096] **Friend Al**: Well Al the sooner the Germans starts their drive let them come and I only hope we are up there when they start it and believe me Al if they come at us with the gas I will dive into it with my mouth wide open and see how much of it I can get because they’s no use Al of a man trying to live with the kind of luck I have got and I’m sick in tired of it all.

[019-097] Wait till you hear what come off today Al. In the first place my feet’s been going back on me for a long wile and they walked us all over France yesterday and this a.m. I couldn’t hardly get my shoes on and they was going out for riffle practice and I don’t need no riffle practice Al and besides that I couldn’t of stood it so I got excused and I set around a wile after the rest of the bunch was gone and finely my feet got feeling a little better and I walked over to the estaminet where that little gal’s at to see if maybe I couldn’t brighten things up a little for her and sure enough she was all smiles when she seen me and we talked a wile about this in that and she tried to get personal and called me cherry which is like we say dearie and finely I made the remark that I didn’t think we would be here much longer and then I seen she was going to blubber so I kind of petted her hand and stroked her hair and she poked her lips out and I give her a smack Al but just like you would kiss a kid or something after they fell down and hurt themself. Well Al just as this was comeing off the door to the other part of the joint opened up and in come her old man and seen it and I thought all Frenchmens talked fast Al but this old bird made them sound like a impediment and he come at me and if he hadn’t been so old I would of crowned him but of course I couldn’t do nothing only let him rave and finely I felt kind of sorry for him and I had a 20 frank note on me so I shoved it at him and it struck him dumb Al and I got out of there and come back to the Ark and it seems like I had been away a whole lot longer then I meant to and any way I hadn’t hardly no more then got my shoes off and layed down when in come some of the boys.

[019-098] Well Al what do you think? Gen. Pershing was out there to the riffle practice to overlook them and I suppose he heard we was going to be out there and he went out there to be sure and catch me and he was makeing a visit around the camp and instead of him stopping here he went out there to see us and instead of me being out there Al, here I was mixed up in a riot with an old goof over nothing you might say and Black Jack wondring where and the he‑ll could I be at because Alcock told me he noticed him looking around like he mist somebody. And now he’s on his way back to Paris and probably sore as a boil and I can’t do nothing only wait to hear from him and probably he will just decide to pass me up.

[019-099] And the worst of it is Al that when they brought us the mail they was 2 letters for me from Florrie and I couldn’t of asked for nicer letters if I had wrote them myself only why and the he‑ll couldn’t she of wrote them a day sooner and I would of no more thought of getting excused today then fly because if I had knew how my Mrs. mist me and how much she cares I wouldn’t of been waisting no time on no Ernestine but its to late now and Black Jack’s gone and so is my 20 franks and believe me Al 20 frank notes is tray pew over here. I’ll say they are.

[019-100] Your pal,

[019-101] **Jack**.
