---
description: "Chapter: Corporal Punishment"
id: 0160-Jack-Keefe-Stories-e6c09a2d-ch019
label: "Corporal Punishment"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

## Corporal Punishment

[015-001] Camp Grant, Oct. 12.

[015-002] **Friend [[you-know-me-al|Al]]**: Well old pal I am writeing this in the Y.M.C.A. where a man has got some chance to hear yourself think as they say but if you try and write over in the barracks if they don’t joggle your arm or tip your seat over for a joke they are all the time jabbering back and forth in foreign languages till you get so balled up that instead of writeing a letter a man is libel to make out his will in Eskimo or something.

[015-003] Speaking about foreign languages Al the next time I see you I will be talking French like a regular Frenchman and you will have to ask me to translate what I am talking about. Of course I am just jokeing about that because I wouldn’t spring a lot of stuff on you that you wouldn’t understand and I might just as well go up to a statue and ask them how their father stood his operation or something. But what I am getting at is that I am going to join the French lesson class here and its something that you don’t have to belong to it unless you want to but I figure a man is a sucker if they don’t take advantage of a chance like this because in the first place it don’t cost you nothing and in the second place the men that knows how to talk French will have all the best of it when we get over there because suppose you was in Paris and felt like you wanted a glass of pilsner and if you said it in French they would fetch it to you but if you just said pilsner they wouldn’t know if you was asking for something to drink or a nasal dooch or whatnot.

[015-004] But besides that Al after we get to France the French officers will want to tip us off on this and that about the Germans and of course they won’t talk to the privates but they will only talk to the officers and if I am a officer by that time which it looks like a cinch I will be one by that time at the outside why suppose I was standing by 1 of our genls. and a French genl. wanted to tell him what was what and etc. but couldn’t talk nothing but French and our genl. couldn’t make head or tales of it then I could act like an interpeter between the both of them and the first thing you know all the high monkey monks when they want to talk back and forth will be pageing Capt. Keefe or Major Keefe or whatever officer I am by that time.

[015-005] Some of the boys laughed at me tonight when I told them about going to attend the lessons but I will be the one that does the laughing when we get across that old pond and Shorty Lahey the smart alex that I told you about says to me “We won’t do all our training with the French army but we will do some of it with the English army so while you are at it you better learn to talk English to.” So I said “You better learn to talk English yourself” and he shut his mouth.

[015-006] Well Al [[florrie-keefe|Florrie]] and little Al will be here to see me Sunday and I can’t hardly wait for them to get here and I suppose Florrie will bring along some daintys of some kind that she cooked up herself or maybe got the swede girl to do it but of course I am not worring about whether she brings anything or don’t bring anything as long as she brings herself and the kid only most of the wifes that comes out here Sundays brings something along to show they been thinking of you though if I was most of these birds wifes the only time I would think about them would be when I said my prayers at night and then I would thank God they had joined the army.

[015-007] Your pal,

[015-008] **[[jack-keefe|Jack]]**.

[015-009] Camp Grant, Oct. 14.

[015-010] **Friend Al**: Well Al its Sunday night and I been entertaining company. Florrie and little Al got out here just after noon and I was in the barracks reading about the [[world-series|world serious]] game in Chi yesterday and Florrie says she asked 1 of the boys where I was at and he told her I was polishing the general’s shoes and wouldn’t he do just as well. How is that for a fresh bum Al and of course I don’t have to polish the general’s shoes or any shoes and if I could find out who it was that Florrie was talking to I would polish their jaw for them.

[015-011] Well of course Florrie didn’t beleive him and the next man she asked was Nick Sebastian and he come and got me and you ought to seen Florrie stair when she got a look at me in my uniform and little Al didn’t know me at first and when Florrie says to him who is it he says it was the capt. Well Al it is to soon to be calling me a capt. but if they are running this game on the square it won’t be long and they will be calling me more then that.

[015-012] Well Florrie handed me a box and she says I was to not open it till she was gone and then I showed them over the camp and the way the boys staired at Florrie I couldn’t help from being proud of her but of course if some of them had of got to fresh I would of fixed them so they wouldn’t do no stairing for a couple of wks. Sebastian’s wife and 2 kids was here to visit him and we run into them and we all went a round together and I made the remark that it would be nice for Mrs. Sebastian and her kids and Florrie and little Al to all go back to Chi on the same train together and it was OK with Mrs. Sebastian but when I and Florrie was alone together for a few minutes she started to ball me out for makeing the suggestion and I asked her what was the matter with it and she says she wasn’t going to set in the same seat on the train with a woman that looked like she had left home before she got up and little Al would probably catch something from the 2 Sebastian kids so I said that Mrs. Sebastian done real work for a liveing and you couldn’t expect her to look like Sarah Bernhart but Florrie is the kind that if she takes a dislike towards somebody its good night to them and it don’t do no good to tell her that a person can’t help their looks and that is all the more reason you should try and not hurt their feelings. So Mrs. Sebastian had a round trip ticket on the C.B. and Q. and so did Florrie but she pretended like hers was on the I.C. and thats the way her and little Al went back so they wouldn’t have to set with the Sebastians and take a chance of little Al catching something though from what I seen of the Sebastian kids they looked as strong as a horse and they wasn’t no danger of catching nothing from them unless maybe it was the banana habit.

[015-013] I suppose I would of been a grass widower long ago if I was ugly and how will it be if I get shot up in [[world-war-i|the war]] and Florrie would sew me for a bill of divorce on the grounds that I didn’t have no nose to smell the cooking.

[015-014] Well Al after they had gone Sebastian made the remark that I had a beautiful wife and I couldn’t help from feeling kind of sorry for him so I says “Never mind old boy” I said to him “as long as your Mrs. is a good mother and willing to work you should not worry if she is no Eva Tanguay.” But I didn’t feel so sorry for him when we opened up the boxs they had broughten us and Sebastian’s wife had give him doughnuts and a pie and part of a cake and goodys of all kinds and when I opened up my box it was a lb. of candy like you get in a union station for 60 cts and if it wasn’t for the picture of a girl on the cover it would be all profit and a man can’t eat the picture which was the only part of it that hadn’t ran together like chop sooy and Florrie would of made just as big a [[base-hit|hit]] with me if she had of put in the time bakeing me a mess of cookys that she spent toneing up her ear lobs or something.

[015-015] Well Al I suppose you read about yesterday’s game in Chi. I been saying right along that the [[chicago-white-sox|White Sox]] was to lucky to loose and the only way I can figure out yesterday’s game is that they must be a rule in the National League where you can’t change from 1 pitcher to another pitcher till the other team gives their consent. From what I read in the papers Sallee could of been turned loose with his fast ball in a looking glass factory without damageing the goods and when Jackson and Collins begins to take a toe hold against a left hander its time to summons the Red X. You will notice Rowland didn’t waist no time getting Russell out of there and the next time he starts a left hander will be on the training trip next spring in Wichita where if you beat them to bad they won’t give you a card to the Elks.

[015-016] Your pal,

[015-017] **Jack**.

[015-018] Camp Grant, Oct. 16.

[015-019] **My *Cher Ami***: I suppose you will think I have gone crazy when you read the way I started this letter out and you will wonder if I have gone crazy. Well Al that is the French word for my dear friend in English so you see I have not gone crazy after all. I took my first lesson last night and it is going to be nuts to learn it because most of the words is just like English only spelled different and you don’t say them the same but the man learns us a dozen words and tells us how to say them and we keep saying them over till we get them down and it wont’ be long when we got enough of them learned so as we can jabber back and forth in front of the boys that didn’t have sense enough to learn it and they won’t know if we are calling them names or getting ready to murder them.

[015-020] Well Al we had Gen. Barry out overlooking us yesterday and he said we was a fine looking bunch of soldiers as he even seen and we put in most of the day digging trenchs just like the ones they got over in Germany and when we get them fixed up we will practice fighting for them till we can go through them Dutchmen like they was fly paper and I wouldn’t be surprised Al if we got word soon to pack up and start because Red Sampson one of the boys in our Co. has got a brother thats over there all ready and he is Gen. Pershing’s right hand bower and so he gets the dope pretty straight and in a letter Red got from him he says Gen. Pershing had asked Secty. Daniels to send over the best looking lot of soldiers from each camp and from what Gen. Barry said about us I suppose we will be the first to go but it may not be for a wk. or so because Red said he heard we wasn’t going till each Co. had a rifle.

[015-021] If we do have to go in a hurry I won’t be able to write you about where we are leaveing from and etc. on acct. of the censure because the German spy might get next to it and he could wire across to Germany and the submarine U boats would be on the outlook for us. But between you and I Red says we are libel not to go where the submarines can get a crack at us but we may slip around the other way and light in Japan and make the rest of the trip by R.R. and he says we may even not go to France but stay and help the Russians out. So Shorty Lahey was there and he has always got to say something so people will think he knows it all so he said the Russians didn’t need nobody to help them out because they were pretty near out now. So Red said “You will notice they didn’t loose much ground yesterday” and Shorty says “No they only loose 2 miles and they must of been a strong east wind blowing but I will bet you that if we do make the trip that way we will bump into them along about Ogden Utah.” So Red says “No because if they ever get to Utah they will hide in Salt Lake City where the Germans couldn’t tell them by their beards.” So then Shorty seen he was getting kidded and shut up.

[015-022] This a.m. we spent a half hour listening to a speech about the German gas and of course you have read about the gas Al and it isn’t like regular gas but its some kind of poison that the Germans lets it loose in the air and it floats across Nobodys land and comes to the other trenchs and if you haven’t got no mask its good night but we are all going to have masks to wear so the gas can’t hurt us. Red says thats one thing where the Russians have got it on us and they don’t have to be scared of dying from gastritis because the Germans haven’t no gas fast enough to catch up with them.

[015-023] Well Al the world serious is over just like I said it would be with the White Sox winner and each one of the boys gets $3,600.00 and that would of been my share only I loved my country more than a few dollars and I bet the boys feel kind of ashamed of themself to think I was the only one that passed up all that jack to work for [[us-army|Uncle Sam]] at $30.00 per mo. but between you and I Al I have got a scheme where I will make twice that amt. and if some of the rest of the boys here thought about it they could do the same thing but why should I tip them off because you can bet they wouldn’t tip me off to a good thing if they thought of it first.

[015-024] Here is the scheme when a man has got a family the govt. keeps out ½ of your [[salary|pay]] every month or more if you want them to and then the govt. sticks the same amt. in with it and sends it to your wife or who ever gets it. Say you are a private and getting about $30.00 per mo. and you tell the govt. to keep out $15.00 of it. So the govt. keeps $15.00 and sticks another $15.00 with it and sends it to your family.

[015-025] Well Al I am going to tell them to keep out my whole $30.00 per mo. and they will have to put another $30.00 with it and send the $60.00 to Florrie and she won’t need it so she can either send it to me or salt it away somewheres in my name and it means I will be getting $60.00 while the rest of them are dragging down $30.00 and if it was just luck on my part I wouldn’t think it was hardly fair but when a man figures something out in your head you got a right to take advantage of it and a man that give up a big league salary and the world serious dough to do their bit deserves something extra while the only way some of the rest of these birds could earn $30.00 per mo. outside of the army would be to ask for it with a peace of lead pipe.

[015-026] Well old pal bon sore for this time and that means good night in French and pretty soon I will be writeing you a whole letter in French only of course I wouldn’t do that because it would be like waisting that much paper because they couldn’t nobody in [[bedford-indiana|Bedford]] make heads or tales out of it and I might just as well save my labor for my pains as they say.

[015-027] Your pal,

[015-028] **Jack**.

[015-029] Camp Grant, Oct. 18.

[015-030] **Friend Al**: Well old pal I got a peace of news for you that I bet you will be tickled to death for my sake when I tell it to you. I guess I told you in my last letter about Gen. Barry inspecting us. Well Al I kind of thought I seen him looking at me like he liked the way I carry myself and etc. but I didn’t want to say nothing about it till I was sure but after breakfast this a.m. Capt. Nash sent for me and when I went in his office and saluted he says “Good morning Corporal Keefe.” Well Al of course that means I have been appointed a corporal and of course I expected it only I wasn’t looking for it so soon and while Capt. Nash didn’t say nothing it don’t take no Bobby Burns to figure out that the orders come from higher up.

[015-031] The corporals and sargents we had at first was men from the regular army and they been sending them away lately and now some of the boys from the ranks gets their chance. In order to get a corporal or a sergent a man has got to have the drills down perfect besides being a perfect physical specimen and good appearance and a man that the rest of the boys will look up to him and respect him and a man that don’t know the meaning of the word fear. Well Al I must of filled the bill and I will show Gen. Barry he didn’t make no mistake.

[015-032] My command is made up of 7 men that I am the boss of them and they contain Sebastian and Red Sampson and Shorty Lahey and a wop named Janinny or something and a big stropper named Hess and 2 boys named Gardner and Bowen and some of them is pretty rough birds but I won’t have no trouble handleing them because they know about my record in baseball and they can’t help from respecting a man that give up a big salary to help Uncle Sam out and the only I that might try and give me trouble is Lahey and I guess he has got better sense then trying some of his funny jokes with a corporal because when a private monkeys with a officer he is libel to wake up the next a.m. with no place to wear his hat.

[015-033] Well Al a corporal isn’t the highest officer in the army but its a step up and everybody has got to start at the bottom and Napoleon started as a corporal and the soldiers was all nuts about him and called him the little Corporal and maybe they will give me a nick name like that only of course it won’t be the little corporal because that would be like calling Jess Willard Tiny Jess or something and the salary is $36.00 per mo. instead of $30.00 and with that scheme I got fixed up with the govt. that will give me twice $36.00 per mo. or $66.00 and I’ll say thats a whole lot better then a private at $1.00 per day.

[015-034] I have all ready wrote and told Florrie about it and I bet she will go crazy when she reads my letter and after this when they call her Mrs. Keefe she can shrink up her shoulders and say “Mrs. Corp. Keefe please” and you will have to salute when you see me Al. Of course I mean that for a joke because what ever honors I get I wouldn’t leave them make no difference in our friendship and betwen you and I it will always be just plain Jack Keefe.

[015-035] Well Al we started today learning to throw bombs and of course that won’t be no trick for me and you might say it was waisting time for me to practice at it because when my arm feels OK I can throw in your vest pocket but today it was raining and I wouldn’t cut loose and take chances with my arm because I figure this war won’t last long and I guess I won’t have no trouble [[contract|signing]] up in the big league at my own turns after what I done. But you ought to seen the officer that was trying to learn us how and if they all throw like he its a wonder they hit Europe to say nothing about the Germans. He kept his arm stiff like he didn’t have no elbow joint and he was straight over hand all the while like Reulbach and you know what kind of control he had.

[015-036] We didn’t have no regular bombs but only stones and tomato cans but the way he throwed he couldn’t of took a baseball and hit the infield from second base and finely I told him and he said yes but if you crooked your arm you would wear it out because the regular bombs weighs almost 2 lbs. and you had to use a easy motion. How is that Al for a fresh bum trying to talk to me about easy motions and I had a notion to tell him to go back to France with his motions but I kept my temper and throwed a few the right way till my arm got to feeling sore.

[015-037] Well its 10 o’clock and after and I am going to turn in and it isn’t that I feel sleepy but when a man is a officer you feel like you ought to set an example to the men.

[015-038] Your pal,

[015-039] **Corp. Jack Keefe**.

[015-040] Camp Grant, Oct. 22.

[015-041] **Friend Al**: Well Al we had some lessons in trench takeing today and I feel like I had been in a football game or something. We would climb up out of the trenchs that was supposed to be the U.S. trenchs and run across Nobody’s Land and take the trenchs that was supposed to be the German trenchs and clean them out with rifles and bayonets and bombs and of course we didn’t have no real rifles and bombs but if we had of and they had been any Germans in the trenchs it would of been good night to them.

[015-042] We done it over and over till I was pretty near wore out but of course I pretended like I was fresh as a daisy because a good corporal wouldn’t never lay down till he was dead and its their business to set up an example for the boys and inspire them so I kept hollering like Hughey Jennings or somebody and every time we started out of our trenchs I would holler “Come on boys give them hell this time” and I guess it made a hit with the instructers because they kept smileing at me and talking about me between themselfs and I could pretty near guess what they said. But of course it made Shorty Lahey sore to see me getting all the attentions and he says to me “Who do you think you are Jonah Vark?” So I said “You tend to your business and show some life or I will Jonah Vark you in the jaw.”

[015-043] So afterwards when we was in the barracks he come up and says “If you are playing Jonah Vark you should ought to quit telling us to come on boys and give them hell because Jonah Vark wouldn’t never use a word like that.” So I said “I guess he would say a whole lot worse then that if he had a dirty rat like you in his command.” So that shut him up.

[015-044] Tonight they showed us some pictures that was supposed to be the West Pt. cadets drilling and Capt. Nash says if we ever got so as we could drill like that he would quit working us so hard. Well Al its all OK to hand that stuff to the boys that don’t know no more then to fall for it but I hope they didn’t suppose I was a sucker enough to think those was real pictures but of course I wouldn’t say nothing because if looking at a lot of fake pictures makes the boys work harder the sooner we will get sent to France.

[015-045] I was just talking to Red Sampson and he was telling me about a bird named Chambers in Co. A and it shows some people don’t know when they have got a good thing and don’t appreciate what people trys to do for them. I remember this bird comeing out with us on the train and they wouldn’t nobody go near him on acct. of him being such a bum and Red says he heard that for a while after we got here they had to chase this bird under the shower bath with a bayonet and he done most of his drilling in the guard house. So finely his captain told him he wouldn’t stand for no more of his monkey business and he would call him up in front of the court marshall if he didn’t behave himself.

[015-046] So then Chambers says all right he would make a new start and sure enough he cut it all out and begin to take a pride in himself and got the drills down pat and kept clean and his captain wanted to show him it payed to be a man and he made a corporal out of him.

[015-047] Well Al you can’t break the rules when you are a corporal no more than a private but this bird went to Chi the day before yesterday on a leave and he was supposed to be back at 11 p.m. last night but he don’t show till 2 a.m. and he was all lit up like the City of Benton Harbor and of course the guard nailed him and he got called up before his captain and he busted him and I don’t mean he cracked him in the jaw but when a man gets busted in the army it means you get reduced to a private. So I said to Red what a sucker this bird was and Red says maybe he wanted to get busted because a corporal has got such a load on their shoulders that lots of men would rather be a private. So I said it must be a fine kind of a man that would turn down a job in the army because it was a tough job and Red says “Yes but everybody ain’t like you and some men don’t want no responsibility but you are one of the kind that the more they have the better they like it and everybody could see you was a born leader the way you acted in that trench drill today.”

[015-048] So I suppose after all a man like Chambers has no business in a job like corporal because it is a cinch nobody would ever call him a born leader unless it was in the gin league but still a person would think he would try and behave himself after the captain give him that chance but still I should not worry and it is none of my business and all I got to do is set up the right kind of an example for my own command and leave the rest of them take care of themselfs.

[015-049] Your pal,

[015-050] **Jack**.

[015-051] Camp Grant, Oct. 23.

[015-052] **Friend Al**: Well I have quit takeing French class lessons and I quit because I felt it wasn’t fair to either myself or Capt. Nash because when a man is a corporal its all head work you might say and a man ought to keep their mind on their job evenings as well as day times and I felt like I couldn’t do that and be monking with French at the same time and it would be like as if I was back pitching baseball and trying to learn to play a saxophone or something at the same time and in the evenings when I ought to be figureing out how to pitch to Pipp instead of that I would have my mind on what keys to blow next though of course I just say that for a comparison because I could learn how to play the whole band and still make a sucker out of that bird because all you got to do is to pitch outside. But besides that I figured that the man who was trying to learn us French didn’t know what he was talking about and what is the use of learning it wrong and then you got to start all over again when we got over there. For inst. he asked me what was the English word for very in French so I knew it was *tres* so I said *tres* and he says no it was tray because you say the letter *e* like it was the letter *a* and you don’t pay no attention to the letter *s*. So I asked him what it was there for then and he said that was just the French of it so I had a notion to tell him to go and take a jump in the lake but I decided to just say nothing and quit. I guess the French people are not crazy and they wouldn’t nobody but a crazy man stick a letter in a word and then make up their mind to ignore it you might say and it would be just like as if I wanted a beer and I would go up to the bar and say “Give me a bee” and I guess the man would think I thought I was in a bee hive or something or else he would think I had a bee in my bonnet eh Al?

[015-053] But laying all jokes to one side I have got to much on my mind to be fooling with it and besides I put in a week on it and I figure I have got it down good enough so as I can get by and besides I am one of those kind that don’t have much to say but when theys something to be done you don’t have to send no blood hounds to find where I am at.

[015-054] Red Sampson got another letter today from his brother in France and Red says his brother and Pershing was right up close to the front where they could see the fighting and they was a big battle in Sept. that the papers didn’t get a hold of it and about 2,500 Frenchmen was killed. So Shorty Lahey asked if they was all privates and Red says No that in the French army they have things different and you don’t often see a private killed but when theys 25,000 men killed you can figure that at least 20,000 of them was corporals and sargents because the corporals and sargents has to go out in front of all the charges. Well Al I am glad its different in the U.S. army but at that I am not the kind of a man that would hang back for the fear of getting a bullet in me and if I was I would resign from my command and tell them to get somebody else.

[015-055] Your pal,

[015-056] **Jack**.

[015-057] Camp Grant, Oct. 24.

[015-058] **Friend Al**: Well Al this was Liberty Day and we had a parade in Rockford and they was also some ball games out here and that is the boys thought they was playing ball and everybody was crazy I should pitch for one of the teams but in the first place I didn’t feel like it would be fair and besides I figure its bad dope for the officers to mix up with the men and play games with them and etc. and thats not because I think I am any better then anybody else but if you hold yourself off they respect you that much more and I have noticed that Capt. Nash and the lieuts, don’t hang a round with nobody only themselfs and when it comes to the majors and colonels I guess they don’t even speak to their own wife only when they are danceing maybe and step on each others ft.

[015-059] Well Al I decided today to not try and work that little scheme I had about alloting my whole salary to Florrie and then the govt. would put the same amt. with it and I would be salting away $66.00 per mo. instead of $36.00 and I was talking to Corp. Haney about it and he says it couldn’t be done and I don’t know about that but any way I figured it wouldn’t be fair to the rest of the boys so I am going to allot $18.00 per mo. to Florrie to keep for me and that leaves me $18 per mo. to spend that is it leaves me that amt. on paper but when you come to figure it out Al I am paying $5.60 for soldiers insurance and $10.00 per mo. for another liberty bond I bought and that leaves me $2.40 per mo. to spend and how is that for a man that was drawing a salary in the big league but at that I have got it on some of the privates that gives up the same amt. for insurance and a liberty bond and they only gets $30.00 per mo. and ½ of that amt. gos to their wife so when it comes to the end of the month they owe $.60 for being a soldier.

[015-060] Speaking about the soldiers insurance with the kind I got if I was disabled they would have to give me $50.00 to $60.00 per mo. on acct. of me haveing Florrie and little Al and that would come in handy Al if I got my right arm shot off and couldn’t pitch but at that I know birds in the big league now thats drawing $400.00 to $500.00 per mo. and as far as their pitchings conserned they might just as well have both their arms shot off and include their head.

[015-061] Well anyway we won’t have to practice fighting no more with broom sticks and cans and etc. because Sargent James told us tonight that the rifles was comeing so I said to my boys that I hoped they was good shots so we could make a sucker out of the other squads and I told them if they was all as good a shot as me I wouldn’t have no kick because I figure that anybody thats got as good control when they throw or pitch should certainly ought to shoot straight. So Red Sampson says that if I was in the French army it wouldn’t do me no good to be a crack shot and I asked him why not and he says the corporals in the French army are not allowed to carry no guns but all they was supposed to do was run ahead of the privates and draw the fire and maybe if the Germans happened to not hit them they could pull out their scissors and cut the bob wire untanglements so as the privates wouldn’t have no trouble getting in to the German trenchs where they could use their bayonets.

[015-062] Red says “Instead of the pollutes trying to get to be a corporal they try not to because when they appoint you a corporal in the French army its a good night kiss and of course its a honor at that because it shows they think you are a game bird and don’t care for your own life as long as you help the cause and that is why they picked you out. Because a corporal don’t carry no arms of any kind and all he is is a kind of a decoy to kep the Germans shooting at him so as to protect the regular soldiers and that is why over 80% of the casualtys in the French army is corporals.”

[015-063] Well Al as I said before I am not in the French army and I should worry about what they do to corporals in the French army.

[015-064] I pretty near forgot to tell you that I am going home on leave Saturday and you can bet I am going this time sick or no sick because from all the rumors a round the camp we might be leaveing for across the pond any day now specially with the rifles comeing and that makes it look like we would soon be on our way and if I didn’t see Florrie and little Al before I left it would probably be the last time I would see them because something tells me Al that if I go over there I won’t never come back.

[015-065] Your pal,

[015-066] **Jack**.

[015-067] Camp Grant, Oct. 26.

[015-068] **Friend Al**: Well don’t be surprised if you read in the paper any a.m. where our regt. has been ordered to France but of course I don’t suppose they would come out in the paper with it because General Pershing don’t want it to get out what regts. is over there and probably you won’t hear nothing about it when we do go because they won’t be no chance for me to write to you and if you don’t hear from me for a long while you will know we have gone and the next time you hear from me will be from over there. I got the dope tonight from Red Sampson and he heard it from one of the men that was on guard yesterday and this man heard the Col. telling Capt. Gould of Co. B that General Pershing had sent for the best looking regt. out here and Gen. Barry had recommended our regt. and from what Red says we will probably go in a week or so and he don’t know if we are going by the way of the Atlantic or the Pacific but all as I hope is that we get there before the war is over.

[015-069] I am certainly glad now that I arranged for leave this wk. end because it will give me a chance to fix my affairs up before I go and if anything should happen to me they wouldn’t be no trouble for Florrie about property and etc. I certainly wish I had enough so as I could leave you and Bertha something to help you along old pal and maybe if they had give me more time I could of fixed things up but all as I can leave you now is my friendship and remember that if anything happens I was your old pal and you boys that stays home is the ones we are laying down our life for and if it wasn’t for men like we where would you be at Al and your familys?

[015-070] Well Al I am proud of my squad the way they took the news and we was the only ones that knew about it and yet they wasn’t a man in my command that didn’t act like he was tickled to death and thats the right kind of a spirit and I spoke about it to Red Sampson. I said “I am proud of all of you because instead of you whineing and putting on a long face you all act like you was going to a picnic or something.” So Red says he guessed the rest of the boys and him didn’t have no license to cry as long as I kept up my spirits. He says “Maybe it would be different if we was all corporals because then it would seem like we was leaveing home forever. But you are the bird thats takeing the chance and if you can keep smileing we would be a fine bunch if we broke down and begun to whine and I don’t suppose theys a man amongst us that has thought about danger to themselfs but its all whats going to happen to you.”

[015-071] Well Al thats the kind of a bunch to have under you and it makes a man think of Napoleon and how his men looked up at him.

[015-072] Well maybe you won’t get no more letters from me that is if the call comes before I leave tomorrow for Chi but if I get there OK I will write to you from there because probably by the time I get back here the orders will be to pack up and move and then I won’t have no time to write.

[015-073] Your pal,

[015-074] **Jack**.

[015-075] [[chicago-illinois|Chicago]], Oct. 28.

[015-076] **Friend Al**: Well Florrie is still in the hay yet and little Al is playing with himself on the floor and reading the pictures in the Sunday a.m. paper and I thought I would sleep late this a.m. but when a man gets in the habit of wakeing up early you get so as you can’t sleep after you wake up once and thats the way it was with me.

[015-077] Well Al I suppose you will be surprised at me saying it but I pretty near wish I wasn’t no officer but just a private like at first and I got a good notion to go back to the camp like Chambers did behind time and ½ stewed and the reason I feel like that is because I have got attached to my boys and I would pretty near rather give up going to France all together then quit them because it seems like it wouldn’t be hardly fair to leave them now that they have got so as they look up at me and I figure that even if I wasn’t a corporal no more but just 1 of them I could do more good then if I quit them entirely.

[015-078] I suppose you will wonder what I am getting at Al. Well on the train comeing from Rockford yesterday I was setting with Shorty Lahey and he was on leave to and I know its a mistake sometimes for a officer to pal a round with their men but I set with him on the train because I can’t stand it to hurt a man’s feelings and Shorty’s hearts in the right place with all his jokeing and etc. So we set down together on the train and got to talking things over and he says “Well Keefe you have got to be a corporal and that means you have made good and I wish I was in your shoes.”

[015-079] So I said that if he took care of himself and minded his business they wasn’t no reason why he wouldn’t be advanced higher up the ladder some time in the future and he says “Yes but now is the time I would like to be in your shoes because I would like to get over to France and get in it.” So I asked him what he meant and he says the dope Red Sampson was giving me was part of it right and part of it wrong and the right dope was that General Pershing hadn’t sent for our whole regt. but what he had sent for was all the non commission officers out of the regt. and that means all the corporals and sergents and they was the only ones going this time because the French army had ran out of non commission officers and General Pershing was going to lend them the best ones we had over here in training.

[015-080] So I said “Well it looks like I was elected and its 100 to 1 that I won’t never come back.” So Shorty says “Oh I don’t know about that and I think Red Sampson is wrong about them killing all them corporals because from what I heard they’s a few of them they don’t try and kill so they can take them prisoner and get information off them.”

[015-081] So I said “They would have a hell of a chance getting information off me because they could kill me before I would spill anything.” So Shorty says “You might not spill nothing at first but you would be a game bird if you stuck through all the tortures because when they ask you something and you don’t tell them they cut off a couple of toes and see if that won’t make you talk and so on till you don’t hardly know if you are alive but if you are game enough to stand all they give you why finely they will see what a game bird you are and then they finish you off so you won’t suffer no more. But if you tell them all you know right at first they won’t do nothing to you only of course you will be a prisoner there in Germany till the war is over and they make you work your head off without no food and they don’t even feed the guards because they want to keep them mad at the prisoners so as they will make them work harder and every time you act like you was loafing or something the guards scratchs their initials in you with their bayonet.”

[015-082] So I asked him where he got his dope and he says he didn’t know if it was all true or not but his wife’s 2 brothers was in the German army and they had wrote home about it and maybe it was all bunk.

[015-083] Well Al I figured I would take Florrie to a show somewheres last night because maybe it would be the last time but after supper I felt kind of sick on acct. of the change in food and I asked Florrie if she would just as leave stay home so I went to bed early and I thought I would get a good rest but I didn’t get no sleep and as I said I couldn’t sleep this a.m. and now I am waiting for her to get up for breakfast.

[015-084] I only wish they was some way for me to get out of this corporal and it isn’t that I can’t handle it but it seems like a shame to leave the other boys that almost worships me you might say and here is little Al playing on the floor and if his daddy was just a private I might maybe stay at Camp Grant all winter and come in and see Florrie and he every month.

[015-085] Your pal,

[015-086] **Jack**.

[015-087] Camp Grant, Oct. 30.

[015-088] **Friend Al**: Well Al I am not going to France at all that is right away and this time I got the dope straight from Capt. Nash and not from no Lahey or Sampson.

[015-089] Here is the way I come to find out Al. I was supposed to get back in camp Sunday night but I missed the train out of Chi and I took the first train yesterday a.m. and I got reported for being AWOL, and that means I was absent without no leave so I got called up in the orderly room in front of Capt. Nash.

[015-090] So he says “Well Keefe don’t tell me your aunt died.” So I asked him what he meant because I haven’t no aunt only by marriage that lives down in Texas. So he says “Do you know what we could do to you for being AWOL” So I said “I suppose you could bust me.” So he says “Yes and that isn’t all. If you was drunk or some excuse like that we could have you out in front of a fireing party or if we wanted to go easy with you we could send you down to Ft. Leavenworth for 10 yrs.” So I said “I wasn’t drunk sir and all the trouble was that I missed a train out of Chi and I didn’t miss it more than 2 minutes.” So he says “Well 2 minutes and 2 wks. don’t make no difference in this game. But you have been behaving yourself OK and we got a fine record in this Co. and I don’t want to loose no non commission officers because I haven’t got none now thats worth a dam. So you see that you don’t miss no more trains because the next time it will go a whole lot different. You are excused only that you won’t get no more leave for a month.”

[015-091] So I said thank you sir and told him I was sorry because I was in a hurry to get to France and didn’t want nothing to come up to interfere with me going and he says “You don’t want to go no more then I do but it looks like we would all be here till we die of old age.” So I asked him if the corporals wasn’t going ahead of the rest of the bunch and he says the corporals would go with the privates unless they was all shot by that time for being AWOL.

[015-092] So here I am Al and I have told the boys I was not going to quit them and I never seen nobody so tickled. Well Al I am glad to in a way and on the other hand its a big dissapointment but a man has got to learn to swallow their dissapointments in the army and take what comes.

[015-093] Your pal,

[015-094] **Jack**.
