---
description: "Chapter: Jack the Kaiser Killer"
id: 0160-Jack-Keefe-Stories-e6c09a2d-ch018
label: "Jack the Kaiser Killer"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

## Jack the Kaiser Killer

[014-001] Camp Grant, Sept. 23.

[014-002] **Friend [[you-know-me-al|Al]]**: Well Al I am writeing this in the recreation room at our barracks and they’s about 20 other of the boys writeing letters and I will bet some of the letters is rich because half of the boys can’t talk english to say nothing about writeing letters and etc. We got a fine bunch in my Co. Al and its a cinch I won’t never die in the trenchs because I will be murdered in my bed before we ever get out of here only they don’t call it bed in the army.

[014-003] They call it bunk and no wonder.

[014-004] Well Al I have been here since Wed. night and now it is Sunday and this is the first time I have not felt sick since we got here and even at that my left arm is so sore it is pretty near killing me where I got vacinated. Its a good thing I am not a left hander Al or I couldn’t get a ball up to the plate but of course I don’t have to think of that now because I am out of baseball now and in the big game but at that I guess a left hander could get along just as good with a sore arm because I never seen one of them yet that could break a pain of glass with their fast ball and if they didn’t have all the luck in the world they would be rideing around the country in a side door Pullman with all their baggage on.

[014-005] Speaking about baseball Al I suppose you seen where the [[chicago-white-sox|White Sox]] have cinched the penant and they will be splitting the [[world-series|world serious]] [[salary|money]] while I am drawing $30.00 per mo. from the Govmt. but 50 yrs. from now the kids will all stop me on the st. and make me tell them what hotel we stayed at in Berlin and when Cicotte and Faber and Russell begins to talk about what they done to the Giants everybody will have themself paged and walk out.

[014-006] Well Al a lot of things come off since the last time I wrote to you. We left Chi Wed. noon and you ought to seen the crowd down to the Union station to bid us good by. Everybodys wifes and sisters and mothers was there and they was all crying in 40 different languages and the women wasn’t allowed through the gates so farewell kisses was swapped between the iron spokes in the gates and some of the boys was still getting smacked yet when the train started to pull out and it looked like a bunch of them would get left and if they had I’ll say their wifes would of been in tough luck.

[014-007] Of course [[florrie-keefe|Florrie]] and little Al was there and Florrie was all dressed up like a horse and I bet a lot of them other birds wished they was in my shoes when the kissing battle begun. Well Al we both blubbered a little but Florrie says she mustn’t cry to hard or she would have to paternize her own beauty parlors because crying makes a girl look like she had pitched a double header in St. Louis or something. But I don’t know if you will believe it or not but little Al didn’t even wimper. How is that for a game bird and only 3 yrs. old?

[014-008] Well Al some alderman or somebody had got a lot of arm bandages made for us with the words Kaiser Killers printed on them and they was also signs stuck on the different cars on the train like Berlin or Bust and etc. and the Stars and Strips was flying from the back platforms so we certainly looked like regular soldiers even without no uniforms and I guess if Van Hindburg and them could of seen us you wouldn’t of needed a close line no more to take their chest measure.

[014-009] Well all our bunch come from the south side and of course some of them was fans and the first thing you know they had me spotted and they all wanted to shake hands and I had a smile for all of them because I have got it doped out that we are all fighting for [[us-army|Uncle Sam]] and a man ought to forget who you are and what you are and be on friendly turns with everybody till after [[world-war-i|the war]].

[014-010] Well Al they had told us to not bring much baggage and some of the boys come without even their tooth brush but they hadn’t some of them forgot to fetch a qt. bottle and by the time we got outside of the city limits the engineer didn’t have to blow his whistle to leave people know we were comeing. Somebody had a cornet and another fellow had a trombone and a couple of them had mouth organs and we all sung along with them and we sung patriotic songs like “Jonah Vark” and “Over There” and when they started on the “Star Spangled Banner” the guy I was setting along side of him hollered for them to not play that one and I thought he was a pro German or something and I was going to bust him but somebody asked him why shouldn’t they play it and he says because he couldn’t stand up and he wasn’t the only one either Al.

[014-011] The train stopped at a burg called Aurora and a bunch of the boys needed air so they got off, some of them head first and one bird layed down on the station platform and says he had changed his mind about going to war and he was going to sleep there a while and catch the first train back to Chi so we picked him up and throwed him back on our train and told him we would have the engineer back up to Chi and drop him off and he says OK and of course the train started ahead again but he didn’t know if we was going or comeing or looping the loop.

[014-012] Well the trombone blower finely blowed himself to a nap and while he was asleep a little guy snuck the trombone away from him and says “Look here boys I am willing to give my life for Uncle Sam but I am not going to die to no trombone music.” So he throwed the trombone out of the window without opening the window and the guy woke up that owned it and the next thing you know the Kaiser Killers was in their first battle.

[014-013] Well Al by the time we got to Camp Grant some of the boys looked like they was just comeing from the war instead of just going and I guess I was about the only one that was OK because I know how to handle it but I had eat some sandwiches that a wop give me on the train and they must of been poisoned or something because when I got off everything looked kind of blured.

[014-014] We was met by a bunch of officers in uniform. The guy that had throwed the trombone away had both eyes swelled shut and a officer had to lead him to the head quarters and I heard the officer ask him if he was bringing any liquor into the camp and he says yes all he could carry, but the officer meant did he have a bottle of it and he says No he had one but a big swede stuck his head in front of it and it broke.

[014-015] Over to the head quarters they give us a couple of blankets a peace and then they split us up into Cos. and showed us our barracks and they said we looked like we needed sleep and we better go to bed right after supper because we would have to get down to hard work the next a.m. and I was willing to go to bed without no supper after eating them dam sandwichs and the next time them wops trys to slip me something to eat or drink I will hang one on their jaw.

[014-016] Well Al the buggle has blowed for mess which is what they call the meals and you would know why if you eat some of them so I will close for this time and save the rest for the next time and my address is Co. C. 399th Infantry, Camp Grant, Ill.

[014-017] Your Pal,

[014-018] **[[jack-keefe|Jack]]**.

[014-019] Camp Grant, Sept. 24.

[014-020] **Friend Al**: Well Al they give us some work out today and I am pretty tired but they’s no use going to bed till 9 o’clock which is the time they blow the buggle for the men to shut up their noise. They do everything by buggles here. They get you up at a quarter to 6 which is first call and you got to dress in 15 minutes because they blow the assembly buggle at 6 and then comes the revelry buggle and then you eat breakfast and so on till 11 p.m. when they blow the taps buggle and that means everybody has got to put their lights out and go to sleep just as if a man couldn’t go to sleep without music and any way a whole lot of the boys go to sleep before 11 because with so many of us here how could the officers tell if we waited for the buggle or didn’t wait for it?

[014-021] Well Al about all we done the first 3 days was try and get the place to looking like something because the men that built the buildings was to lazy to clean up after themself and I wouldn’t of minded only for feeling so bad all day Thursday on acct. of that sandwich and Friday I felt rotten because a Dr. vacinated me and fixed me up so as I can’t catch small pox or tyford fever and I would rather have the both of them the same day then have that bird work on me again.

[014-022] Thursday a.m. after breakfast a bunch of us went to the Drs. and they give us a physical examination and before the Dr. examined me he says “Well is they anything the matter with you outside of a headache?” So I said “How do you know I got a headache” and he says because they was a epidemic of them in the camp. Well Al I could of told him why only of course I wouldn’t squeel on the rest of the boys so all I told him was about me eating that sandwich and he says all the boys must of eat them and that shows how much them wise Drs. knows.

[014-023] Well of course he didn’t find nothing the matter with me physicly and he says I was a fine specimen and the next place I went was to the head quarters or something where they give us our uniforms and you ought to see me in mine Al only the shoes is 6 sizes to big and I made a holler about it but the man says they wouldn’t be so big after I had wore them a while. They must be fine shoes that will srink Al because all the shoes I ever seen the more you wear them they get bigger. They give us each 2 pair shoes one to march in with cleats on the bottom and a hat and a hat cord and 5 pair sox and 2 shirts and a belt and 3 suits under wear and 2 cocky suits.

[014-024] And we had to tell our family history to a personal officer that writes down all about you on a card and what kind of work you done before so if the General or somebody tears their pants they won’t have to chase all over the camp and page a taylor because they can look at the cards and find out who use to be a taylor and send for him to sow them up.

[014-025] A lot of the boys give this officer a song and dance about how good they can drive a car and etc. so they can get a soft snap like driveing one of the officers cars and I could of got some kind of a snap only I come here to be a soldier and fight Germans and not mend their pants.

[014-026] The officer asked me my name and age and etc. and what I done in civil life so I said “I guess you don’t read the sporting page.” So he says “Oh are you a fighter or something?” So I said “I am a fighter now but I use to pitch for the White Sox.” So then he asked me what I done before that so I told him I was with [[terre-haute-indiana|Terre Haute]] in the Central League and [[charley-comiskey|Comiskey]] heard about me and bought me and then he sent me out to Frisco for a while and I stood that league on their head and then he got me back and I been with him about 3 years.

[014-027] So the officer asked me if I ever done anything besides pitch so I told him about the day I played the outfield in Terre Haute when Burns and Stewart shut their eyes going after a fly ball and their skulls come together and it sounded like a freight wreck and they was both layed out so I and Lefty Danvers took their place and in the 8th inning I come up with 2 on and [[base-hit|hit]] a [[curve-ball|curve]] ball off big Jack Rowan and only for the fence that ball wouldn’t of made no stops this side of Indpls.

[014-028] So then the officer says “Yes but didn’t you do something when you wasn’t playing ball?” so I told him a pitcher don’t have to do nothing only set on [[bench|the bench]] or hit fungos once in a while or warm up when it looks like the guy in there is beggining to wobble. So he says “Well I guess I will put you down as a pitcher and when we need one in a hurry we will know where to find one.” But I don’t know when they would need a pitcher Al unless it was to throw one of them bombs and believe me when it comes to doing that I will make a sucker out of the rest of these birds because if my arm feels OK they’s nobody got better control and if they tell me to stick one in a German’s right eye that is where I will put it and not in their stomach or miss them all together like I was a left hander or something.

[014-029] Well Al we done a little training Friday and Saturday but today was the first day we realy went to it. First of course we got up and dressed and then they was 10 minutes of what they call upseting exercises and then come breakfast which was oatmeal and steak and bread and coffee. The way it is now you got to get your own dishs and go up to the counter and wait on yourself but of course we will have waiters when things gets more settled. You also got to make your own bed and that won’t never kill nobody Al because all as we got is 2 blankets and you don’t have to leave the bed open all a.m. like at home because whatever air wanted to get in wouldn’t let these blankets stop it.

[014-030] Then they give us an hour of drilling and that was duck soup for me on acct. of the drilling we done on the ball club last spring and you ought to seen the corporal and sargent open their eyes when they seen me salute and etc. but some of the birds don’t know their right from their left and the officers had to put a stick of wood in their right hand so they would know it was their right hand and imagine if some of them was ball players and played left field. They would have to hire a crossing policeman to tell them where to go to get to their position and if they was pitchers they wouldn’t know if they was right hand pitchers or left hand pitchers till they begun to pitch and then they would know because if they were hog wild they would be left handers.

[014-031] The corporals and sargents come from the regular army but after a while Capt. Nash will pick some of us out to take their place and it is a cinch I will be picked out on acct. of knowing all about the drills etc.

[014-032] The next thing was a lecture on what they could do to us if we got stewed or something and how to treat the officers and we got to sir them and salute them and etc. and it seems kind of funny for a man that every time he walked out to pitch the crowd used to stand up and yell and I never had to sir Rowland or Collins. I’d knock their block off if they tried to make me.

[014-033] Well every time we wasn’t doing something else they sprung some more of them upseting exercises on us and I called the corporal to one side and says if he would excuse me I would pass up some of them because I didn’t need to exercise on acct. of playing baseball all summer and besides I was tired and he says these exercises was to fix me so I wouldn’t get tired and he made me go through with all of them. How is that for brains Al and I suppose if a man was up all night watching a corpse or something this bird would make you stay awake all the next day so you wouldn’t get sleepy.

[014-034] For dinner we had roast chicken and sweet potatoes and cream corn and biscuits and coffee and for supper they was bake beans with tomato sauce and bread and pudding and cake and coffee and the grub is pretty fair only a man can’t enjoy it because you got to eat to fast because if theys anything left on your plate when the rest of them birds gets through you got to fight to keep it from going to the wrong address. Well Al its pretty near time for the tattoo buggle which means the men has got to shut up and keep quiet so I am going to get ready for bed but I don’t know if I would rather have them keep quiet or not because when they are keeping quiet you don’t know what they are up to and maybe they are snooping a round somewheres waiting for a man to go to sleep so they can cut your throat. Some of them has been use to doing it all their life Al and they are beggining to miss it. But I don’t know if I wouldn’t just as leave die that way as from them upseting exercises.

[014-035] Your pal,

[014-036] **Jack**.

[014-037] Camp Grant, Sept. 26.

[014-038] **Friend Al**: Well Al don’t be surprised if you pick up the paper some a.m. and see where I’m gone and you may think I am just jokeing Al but I am telling you the truth and I am glad Florrie is fixed so she can make a liveing for herself and little Al because I wouldn’t bet a nickle I will be alive by the time this gets to you.

[014-039] I guess I all ready told you the kind of birds we got in our Co. Well the worst one in the bunch is a guy named Sebastian and of course he would have to be the one that got the bunk next to mine. Well Al you remember me writeing to you about the little runt that throwed that guy’s trombone away, well his name is Lahey but we call him Shorty on acct. of him being so short. Well I hadn’t payed much attention to this here Sebastian because he has always got a grouch and don’t say nothing only to mumble at the officers when they ask him some question but Shorty knows him and last night he told me all about him and he has been pinched 50 times for stabbing people but he has got some pull or something and they can’t never do nothing to him except once he served a turn at Joliet for cutting off a guy’s ears because he wouldn’t get up and give him a seat on a st. car. He has always got a knife hid on him somewheres and his first name is Nick so they call him Nick the Blade on acct. of always haveing a knife on him.

[014-040] I don’t know if I told you or not but we got a shed outside of the barracks with shower baths and etc. and everybody is supposed to take baths and keep themself clean and of course its a pleasure for a man like I because I got use to takeing them every day after the game and I don’t feel right unless I am clean but some of the birds hollered like a Indian the first time the officers made them get under the shower and you would think they never seen water before and I guess some of them hadn’t because when they come out afterwards the officers had to ask them their name.

[014-041] Well Al I was takeing a bath yesterday and this big Nick bird was standing there striped and he couldn’t get up the nerve to step under the shower and Corporal Daly come up behind him and give him a shove under the water and he give a bellow that you could hear from here to Rockford and I didn’t know who he was then and I couldn’t help from laughing and he seen me but he didn’t say nothing and I wouldn’t of thought no more about it only for what Shorty told me afterwards. Well Shorty was there to and he laughed at him to but Nick didn’t see him but he seen me and Shorty says I better keep my eyes pealed because Nick wouldn’t think no more of stabbing a man then picking his teeth and if theys one thing he won’t stand for its somebody laughing at him.

[014-042] Well I been keeping my eyes pealed all right and I kept them pealed all night last night but I can’t stay awake all night every night and the first time I doze off it will probably be the last time.

[014-043] Sebastian hasn’t spoke to nobody or looked at nobody today and when a man acts like that it means they are makeing plans. Well Al I only wish he was planning to dessert from the army and if I seen him trying to make his get away I wouldn’t blow no buggle to wake up the guards. I’ll say I wouldn’t Al.

[014-044] I pretty near forgot to tell you that Teddy Roosevelt was here today over looking us and he made a speech but they was about 20 thousand for him to talk to and I was a mile away and couldn’t hear nothing but I suppose he told the boys they was fine physical specimens and etc. Well Al that stuff is OK but if I wasn’t a fine physical specimen I might be somewheres where I could go to sleep without some stabber waiting to carve their initials in my Adams apple.

[014-045] Your pal,

[014-046] **Jack**.

[014-047] Camp Grant, Sept. 29.

[014-048] **Friend Al**: Well old pal you see I am still alive and I guess that is because by the time night comes a round Nick the Blade is all wore out with them upseting exercises and etc. and hasn’t got enough strenth left to carve nobody or maybe he has figured out the truth which is that I wasn’t realy laughing at him Al but when I am takeing a bath I feel so good that I am libel to bust out laughing at nothing you might say.

[014-049] But Sebastian isn’t the only bird I got to watch now Al because last night they sprung a new one on me and he just come into the camp yesterday and the man that was sleeping on the other side of me is sick in the infirmiary so they stuck this new one in his bunk and now I got them on both sides and I don’t know which is the worst Nick or him because this one wispers all night and it would be OK if he was wispering in his sleep or wispering to himself but he isn’t.

[014-050] I didn’t turn in till 11 and Nick was buzzing away like a saw buck and I figured on getting some sleep myself but I hadn’t no sooner layed down when the wispering begun on the other side. First I didn’t catch what he was trying to get at but I heard him the second time all right and he says “Do you want me to kill?” Well Al for 2 or 3 minutes I couldn’t get enough strenth up to turn over and look at him but the next time he repeated it over again I couldn’t stand it no more so I said “Are you talking to me?” And what do you think he said Al? He says “I am talking to God.”

[014-051] Well Al the connection couldn’t of been very good you might say because he kept asking the same question over and over and not getting no answer but how was I to know when the party at the other end would speak up and maybe say yes and they wasn’t nobody closer to him then me for him to work on so you can see what a fine nights rest I got Al and this a.m. I told Shorty Lahey about him and sure enough Al the bird is a gun man named Tom the Trigger and Shorty says he is a nut that thinks he is aces up with the all mighty and some times he imagines that they are telling him to go ahead and shoot and then he takes aim at whoever is handy.

[014-052] Well Al this was inspections day and everybody was supposed to have a clean shave and their hair brushed and all their buttons sowed on and their beds made up neat and their shoes and mess kits shinned bright and etc. and Capt. Nash and the lieuts. give us all the double O and some of the boys got a nice little baling out for the way they looked but I looked like a soldier ought to look Al and didn’t give them no chance to ball me out.

[014-053] But what difference is it going to make Al for me to look good and have things neat when I am sleeping between a man that if he can ever stay awake till I doze off he will dig a trench system in my chest with a stilleto and on the other side of me they’s a bird that the minute the lord says Fire he will make me look like a soup strainer. It don’t hardly seem like its worth while to be strick about looks when sooner or later they are bound to muss me and my bed both up.

[014-054] Your pal,

[014-055] **Jack**.

[014-056] Camp Grant, Oct. 3.

[014-057] **Friend Al**: Well old pal I just got some good news and this it is Al. Next Saturday they are going to let some of the boys go home on leave and I asked Corporal Daly to fix it up for me to go and he says he didn’t know if he could or not because most of the ones that’s going is men that has been here a mo. or more but on acct. of me haveing been with the White Sox they fixed it so as I could go and the world serious opens up in Chi Saturday and I won’t get away from here till Saturday noon so I can’t get there for the first game but I will see the Sunday game and won’t [[kid-gleason|Gleason]] and them pop their eyes out when I go down to the bench with my cocky suit on and shake hands with them and I bet Rowland will wish I was wearing the [[uniform|White Sox uniform]] instead of Uncle Sam’s uniform.

[014-058] Well Al I can’t hardly wait to get home and see Florrie and little Al and of course I will see them Saturday night and I will take them to the game Sunday and leave for back here after the game because a man has got to be back in camp at 11 Sunday night and the funny part is that Florrie was going to bring little Al and come and see me next Sunday but now I am going to see her and I have wrote her to not come.

[014-059] Well I am feeling to good to go to bed but that is where I ought to be Al because I wasn’t never so tired in my life because they hung a new one on us this p.m. Instead of giveing us upseting exercises from a quarter to 4 till a quarter after they made us all run 20 minutes without stopping and they says it was to improve our wind. Well before we was half through I didn’t have no wind to improve and I suppose some day they will pull all our teeth so as we can chew better. At that I would of been OK only my feet got to hurting and now I can’t hardly walk and all because the shoes they give you are about 6 sizes to small and they keep lectureing us about feet hygeine but how is a man going to keep your feet OK when they make you wear shoes that Houdini couldn’t get in or out of them.

[014-060] But listen Al the news about going to Chi isn’t the only peace of good news I got today because I also found out that this bird that Shorty called Tom the Trigger isn’t no gun man at all and this here Nick the Blade won’t do nothing to me because he is scared of the officers so I won’t have to lay awake no more nights worring but I didn’t find it out till today and here is how it come off.

[014-061] This a.m. I went to sleep right at breakfast and couldn’t keep my eyes open so Corporal Daly come up to me afterwards and asked me what was the matter so I told him I was to nervous to sleep nights on acct. of a crazy man bunking next to me and any minute he might take a notion and shoot me full of holes. I didn’t say nothing about Nick the Blade on the other side of me because he was standing where he could hear us. So Corporal Daly asked me who I was talking about and I told him and he laughed and says that if I waited for Castle which is this other bird’s name to start shooting I would probably die of old age or something because he is one of these objecters that don’t beleive in war and he told them about it the first day we got here and says he objected to being a soldier. So Capt. Nash asked him if he would object to unloading a few cars of coal and that is what he has been doing up and till last Friday and then he begun objecting to a shovel and he says he would like to join the rest of us and see what it was like and maybe he would loose his objections. So now they are giveing him a week to make up his mind what he is going to do and he is talking it over all the while with the [[harry-lord|Lord]] and if the Lord tells him its OK to kill people why well and good but he won’t practice on us because in the first place he hasn’t no gun and if he had one he wouldn’t know if it was to shoot with or stir your coffee.

[014-062] So afterwards I told Shorty Lahey he had made a mistake about Castle and he says “All right and if he is a objecter it is up to us to talk him out of it.” So after supper tonight Castle was seting right near me in the recreation room and Shorty come up to him and says “Well Castle haven’t you been able to get that party on the wire yet” so Castle asked him what he meant and he says he heard Castle was waiting for a message from somewheres telling him if he should be a soldier or not so Castle didn’t answer and begun to read. So Shorty says “You ain’t the only one that objects to war but we got to make the world safe for Democrats and you shouldn’t ought to object to getting your head blowed off in a good cause.” So Castle spoke up and said he didn’t object to getting killed but what he objected to was killing other people. So Shorty says “Well then all you got to do is stick along side of me in the trenches and when you get orders to go over the top you can slip me your gun and bayonet and I will see that they don’t nobody sneak off with them dureing your absents.” So then Castle got up and walked out on us.

[014-063] So I says to Shorty I said, “You certainly had the wrong dope on that bird and maybe you got Sebastian wrong to.” So he says “No I haven’t and I may as well tell you what he told me today. He told me he would of cut you up in slices long ago only if he done it here in the camp he wouldn’t have no chance to make his get away and he is waiting till some time he catchs you outside of the camp and then he will go to work on you. And if I was you and a married man I would rather get it here then in France because if you get it here your Mrs. can tend the funeral provide it they find enough of the slices to make it worth while.”

[014-064] Well Al he has got a sweet chance to catch me outside of the camp because when he is outside of the camp I will be inside of the camp and I am glad I found out the truth about both he and Castle and now maybe I can get some sleep.

[014-065] So all and all I feel a whole lot better then I did only for my feet but feet or no feet I will enjoy myself in Chi and I only wish I was going tomorrow instead of wait till Sat.

[014-066] Your pal,

[014-067] **Jack**.

[014-068] Camp Grant, Oct. 7.

[014-069] **Friend Al**: Well Al its Sunday night and I haven’t been to Chi or nowheres else and I don’t care if I ever go anywheres and the sooner they send me to France to the front line trenches I will be tickled to death.

[014-070] Well old pal I decided yesterday a.m. to stay here and not go and I made up my mind all of a sudden and it was partly because I wasn’t feeling good and my feet pretty near killed me and besides they are going to pick some of us out for corporals and sargents pretty soon and I figured a man would have a better chance of getting a officer job if you didn’t ask them for leave all the while. So as soon as I changed my mind about going I found one of the boys that was going and asked him to call Florrie up as soon as he got to Chi and tell her I couldn’t get off and for her to come out here today and see me and bring little Al.

[014-071] Well Al yesterday and today has been the 2 longest days I ever spent and it seems like a yr. since yesterday a.m. and it don’t hardly seem possible that I was feeling so good yesterday a.m. and now I don’t care if school keeps or not as they say. Yesterday a.m. I was up before the buggle blowed all ready and so excited I couldn’t hardly eat breakfast and just before inspections Shorty Lahey seen me smileing to myself and asked me what was the joke and I told him they wasn’t no joke only I was going home and he says he hoped I would have a good trip and come back safe in sound so I said I guessed they wasn’t no danger of anything happening to me and he says “You will be OK if you keep your eyes open.” So I said “What do you mean keep my eyes open.”

[014-072] So he says “Your a game bird but they’s no use of you takeing reckless chances so you want to be on the look out every minute till you get back.”

[014-073] So then I asked him what and the hell he was talking about and he says “Didn’t you know that Nick the Blade was going along with you?”

[014-074] Well Al it seems like Sebastian got wise that I was going home on leave and he seen a chance to get even with me for laughing at him or that is he thought I was laughing at him but I really wasn’t but any way as soon as he found out I was going he told them his brother in law had fell and struck his head on the brass rail and was dying and wanted him to come home and they eat it up and give him leave. So when Shorty tipped me off I said I would wait and go on a later train but Shorty says that wouldn’t do me no good because Nick wouldn’t be a sucker enough to try and pull anything on the train amidst all them soldiers but would wait till we was in Chi and then he would get his gang and lay for me and the way he generally worked was come right up to your flat and get you and if your wife or kid says I yes or no it would be taps for them to. And Nick could come back here to camp and they wouldn’t never know he was mixed up in it.

[014-075] Well Al I guess you know I am not scared of anything in the world as far as myself personly am concerned but Florrie isn’t one of the kind that would set there in a rocker and pair her finger nails while their husband was getting massacreed and little Al is a game bird to and a chip of the old block and they would both holler like a Indian and call for the police and you know what would happen to the both of them and I wouldn’t care for myself but if anything happened to them I would feel like I was the murder.

[014-076] So while I just laughed at Sebastian and his gang on my own acct. I would be a fine stiff to in danger my wife and baby and besides as I said I eat something for breakfast that didn’t set good on me and I don’t know if it was the coffee or the milk or what it was but I eat something that was poisoned and that’s a fine way to treat soldiers is to give them poison food and the easiest way to get the Germans killed off would be to invite them out here and board a while. And in the second place if a man asks for leave when he hasn’t only been here 2 wks. it would hurt my chance to get a corporal or a sargent and any way I figured Florrie would rather see something new like the camp then set through a ball game and of course it would be different if I was pitching but I suppose it was Faber’s turn today and I see where Cicotte trimmed them yesterday but at that the score would of been 1 and 1 if Felsch hadn’t of hit that ball out of the park and Sallee must be his brother in law or something to give him a ball like that to hit. If I was pitching he would be lucky to hit one up in the press box.

[014-077] So I told Sargent Leslie I wasn’t feeling good and would he fix it for me to take my leave some other time and he says I was the only soldier he ever seen that was to sick to go on their leave so then I told him my wife and kid was comeing out here to see me today and he says all right.

[014-078] So I didn’t go Al and the funny part of it is that somebody must of tipped Sebastian off that I wasn’t going and what does he do but get his leave called off to and he has been here all yesterday and today and that proves he is laying for me and just wanted to go because I was going and it looks like the only way I can ever get away from here is sneak out without letting nobody know I am going and even then he would probably send word to his gang in Chi to keep their eye on me till he come.

[014-079] I have caught him looking at me 2 or 3 times and I had a notion to ask him if he seen anything green but what is the use Al of starting something with a man like he and if I was to loose my temper and bust him Capt. Nash might hear about it and shut us both up in the guard house together and one or the other of us wouldn’t never come out alive and which ever one it was it would give the camp a black eye.

[014-080] Well Al about all I done today was look for Florrie and little Al and I didn’t give them up till 5 o’clock tonight because I thought maybe they had missed the a.m. trains and would come later and every time I seen a woman and kid toddleing up the road I would think sure it was them this time and I was dissapointed about 30 thousand times because they was at least that many women and kids here today and if they was all somebody’s wife Camp Grant must be infected with Mormons.

[014-081] All the women had baskets and boxs full of pie and jell and fried cakes and what all but they wasn’t no package of goodys with my name and address on them Al and they wasn’t no little schaefer yelling theres daddy when they seen me and running up to get huged.

[014-082] Well Al the man that was to call up Florrie come back this p.m. and come in the barracks just before I started this letter and I asked him I said “Well Bishop did you call up my wife like I told you?” His name is Bishop. “Hell” he says “I forgot all about it.” And honest Al his size is all that saved him the little srimph and if he was anywheres near a man I would of Bishoped him right in the eye. But I managed to keep my hands off of him and all as I said was for him to get out of my way before it was to late and then he begun to whine and says how sorry he was and he says “I got some excuse because I reached home just in time to be presented with a baby girl.”

[014-083] How is that for an excuse Al and the only wonder is that he didn’t forget if it was a boy or a girl before he got back here but of course a man like he wouldn’t have nothing but a girl. But isn’t it just my luck Al for me to trust somebody to do something and then for them to go and have a baby on me? And I hope every time he gos home she is yelling all night with the collect.

[014-084] Your pal,

[014-085] **Jack**.

[014-086] Camp Grant, Oct. 10.

[014-087] **Friend Al**: Well Al I wrote to Florrie Sun. night and told her what had came off and about this fat head forgetting to call her up and I just got a letter back from her and she says her and little Al both of them cried themself to sleep Saturday night because I didn’t show up and she had let little Al set up till 9 o’clock so as he could see his daddy in a uniform and when I didn’t come then or Sun. a.m. neither they thought I didn’t care for them no more so they went to the ball game Sun. p.m., and McGraw started another left hander and you probably read what happened to him and I suppose everybody is saying what a whale Faber is and who wouldn’t be a whale if they get 5 runs for you in one inning but even if you are a whale that don’t excuse you from trying to steal a base that one of your own men all ready got there ahead of you and hasn’t left yet.

[014-088] But Florrie and little Al are comeing out here next Sunday Al and this time they won’t be no mix up because I won’t depend on no half wit that the minute they become a father they go all to peaces.

[014-089] But what I wanted to tell you about was Sebastian. Well Al Shorty Lahey was trying to make me believe this bird was a bad egg and that they called him Nick the Blade because he always went a round with a knife and whittled you if you looked X eyed at him but the next time Shorty wants to kid somebody he better try it on some yapp that hasn’t been in the big league and I let him think he was stringing me just to see how far he would go with it but if he thought he had me fooled the shoes was on his feet not mine.

[014-090] Well Al Sebastian’s name is just plain Nick without no Blade on it and the only blade he ever pulled was a blade of grass or something because he use to help take care of the grounds at [[washington-senators|Washington]] Pk. before he was drafted and he has been one of my admirers for a long while and that is why he kept looking at me and he says he use to always try and get to the games when it was my turn to pitch and he has been wanting to talk to me ever since we been here but today was the first time he got up the nerve and he never had no intentions of going on leave last Sat. and to prove it he showed me a letter he got from his wife last Friday and she don’t spell very good but she spoke in the letter about comeing here to see him this next Sunday and nothing about him comeing there to see her and she is going to bring their 2 kids along and he says he never seen a man with a prettier wind up then I got and all together he is OK and when Shorty trys to make you beleive somebody is a murder he ought to pick out a man that looks like the part.

[014-091] I haven’t said nothing to Shorty and I won’t but what I will do is play a joke on him right back only I will make it a good one and not no fizzle like some of his.

[014-092] And oh yes Al they have sent Castle over to the quarter masters dept. and he won’t have a chance to kill nobody there except when they come after a pair of shoes.

[014-093] Your pal,

[014-094] **Jack**.
