---
description: "Chapter: The Courtship of T. Dorgan"
id: 0160-Jack-Keefe-Stories-e6c09a2d-ch030
label: "The Courtship of T. Dorgan"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: "chapter"
---

## The Courtship of T. Dorgan

[026-001] Chi, May 22.

[026-002] **Friend [[you-know-me-al|Al]]**: Well Al I suppose you seen what I done to the N.Y. bunch yesterday and when it was over [[kid-gleason|Gleason]] called me to 1 side in the club house and says he thought it was about time I was getting the real jack so if I would bring my old contract over to the pk. today he would give me a new 1 calling for $3,000.00 per annum. So today I took my old contract over to the pk. and Gleason told me to take it up in the office and I took it up there and the old man give me my new 1 and says now go ahead and show me you are worth it. Well I will show him Al and when a man gets fair treatment from a club why you work all the harder for them.

[026-003] Well Gleason told me to not say nothing to none of the other ball players about the matter as they might maybe take it in their head to hold up the club for more jack so I didn’t tell nobody only Tom Dorgan that rooms with me when we are out on the road and the best pal a man ever had and they’s no danger of him asking for more jack as he is just a 3th string catcher and all the closer he ever gets to the ball game is down in the bull pen warming up somebody but he is a regular guy and I only wished he could get in there and show them something.

[026-004] Well when I told him about my new contract he said I was a lucky stiff to be getting all that jack and besides that have a beautiful wife and a couple kiddies and a nice home where all as he has got is 1 dinky little rm. over on Grand Blvd. that he can’t squeeze in or out of it without barking his ears. So I told him I said “I can’t get you no more jack old pal but the next gal that looks X eyed at me I will turn her over to you and welcome as 1 wife is about all as I can handle and then some.”

[026-005] At that I would like to find him some nice gal Al as a man don’t know they are liveing till you get married and I can’t help from feeling sorry for a bird that has to go home nights after the ball game and open up the close closet and talk to his other suit.

[026-006] Well when I told [[florrie-keefe|Florrie]] about me getting the $600.00 raise she asked me what would we do with it and I said I didn’t know yet and she says why not buy a car as we could have some time rideing around old Chi in a car evenings and take in the different pks. and etc. and take our friends along and show them a time. So I said “You have got a fine idear of what cars costs these days and for $600.00 you can’t even buy a tire rench.” So she begin telling me about the 2nd hand car the Dumonts which is her new pardners in the beauty parlor down town and they got it for $700.00 and its a 1917 5 passenger Peel and runs and looks like new and they must be a whole lot more bargains if a person would just get out and look for them so just to stall her I said I would keep my eyes open and if I seen a real bargain I would grab it off but what and the he‑ll is the use of us blowing our jack on a car when the Dumonts has all ready got 1 and all as we half to do is call them up and ask for the correct time and they would probably invite us out for a spin.

[026-007] Personly Al I don’t see no use in anybody buying a car now as they won’t be nowheres to go after the 1 of July and besides when I am out on the road with the club Florrie would want to drive it herself and we would half to hire a steeple jack to get she and the car down off in the top of the [[boston-red-sox|Boston]] store.

[026-008] Well Al I won’t half to work no more vs. the N.Y. club this serious but will probably work vs. the [[washington-senators|Washington]] club which comes next and he will save me for the game Walter pitchs as Walter is going pretty good now and a man has just about got to shut them out to beat him.

[026-009] Your pal,

[026-010] **[[jack-keefe|Jack]]**.

[026-011] Chi, May 27.

[026-012] **Friend Al**: Well Al the way some people runs a ball club its a wonder we can stay in the U.S. let alone 1st place. Well yesterday Griffith started Jim Shaw against us and Gleason thought it was a good spot to try out big Lowdermilk so the 2 of them went to it but pretty soon they was both out of there and it come along the 8th inning with the Washington club a couple runs ahead and he stuck me in there to stop them and next thing you know [[walter-johnson|Johnson]] was in there for them to try and hold the lead but we knocked his can off and beat them out.

[026-013] Well of course I hadn’t no idear that Gleason would send me back at them today after the work I done so the Dumonts was out to the game with Florrie and after the game I come out and the Dumonts had a mighty sweet looking doll with them named Miss Mulvihill or something so Dumont made the remark that it was pretty dry in Chi on a Sunday so why didn’t we all hop in his car and go out to Lyons where they was plenty to eat and drink.

[026-014] Well then Florrie said it didn’t seem right for Miss Mulvihill to not have no man along when her and Mrs. Dumont both had their husband so Dumont asked me if they wasn’t 1 of the ball players that was [[base-hit|single]] that would like to go along. So I happened to think about Tom Dorgan so I went back in the club house and got him and you ought to seen his eyes pop out when he got a look at the Mulvihill trick. Well we went out to the car and it was the 1st time I seen it and Florrie had told me it looked like new but if it does why Jack Lapp has got a pompador. And when they said it was a 5 passenger car they meant 4 people and a weather strip.

[026-015] Well the next thing was how was we going to set and Mrs. Dumont said she always set in the front seat to keep her husband from driveing to fast so that left I and Florrie and Miss Mulvihill and Tom for the soap box in back so Florrie said it looked like Miss Mulvihill would half to set on Tom’s lap. Well both partys had a hemorage to the cheek when they heard that and Miss Mulvihill said she guessed not and why didn’t Florrie set on my lap and Florrie said she had tried that to many times so any way the way we went was with Florrie and Miss Mulvihill squeezed along the side of me and Tom on my lap and I don’t know how far it is to Lyons but by the time we got there I thought we must be all of us in the Coast League.

[026-016] Well we set out on the porch of the joint out there and ordered up a few drinks and everybody acted like they had came to the morgue to identify a body till finely I begin pulling some of my stuff and I wished you could of heard Miss Mulvihill split her sides only I kind of felt sorry for poor Dorgan as he acted like the cat had his tongue or something and the gal must of thought she had been pared off with Dummy Taylor. Well we had some more drinks and a chicken dinner and when the check come around Dorgan was still speechless and Dumont was danceing with Florrie so I was elected on the 1st ballad and Miss Mulvihill made the remark that I shouldn’t ought to [[salary|pay]] for everything and just jokeing I said I was tickled to death to pay for being in her company and she blushed up like a school girl and give me a smile and I couldn’t help from feeling sorry for Dorgan but I can’t help it if that’s the way the gals feels Al and I only wished I could be just friends with them and nothing more.

[026-017] Well when it come time to go home I made the remark that I wasn’t crazy about holding Tom on my lap again along with the extra load he had picked up in the mean wile so what does Miss Mulvihill do but say that if Florrie did not mind she would just as leaf set on my lap and Florrie said go ahead so that’s the way we come home and even with Dumont zig zaging all over the road and hitting her up about 12 miles per hr. all the way it didn’t seem more then 5 minutes when we come to where Miss Mulvihill lived and dropped her off and I seen her to the door and I said to her how did she like my friend Mr. Dorgan and she said “Why don’t you speak for yourself John?” How is that Al she calling me John the 1st time she ever seen me and I didn’t know they was anybody realy knew my name was John as they all been calling me Jack ever since I was a knee high grass hopper you might say.

[026-018] Well when I and Florrie got home I got the silent treatmunt but she will get over it Al like they all do and anybody would think it was my fault that I wasn’t born with a hair lip or something.

[026-019] But wait till I tell you what come off today. It wasn’t till pretty near 5 this a.m. when we rolled in this a.m. and I got up about 11 this a.m. and finely got over to the ball pk. and I felt like the supper dishs and finely it come time for batting practice and Gleason said you work today and I said what was he talking about as I worked yesterday and he said yes but it wasn’t only 2 [[inning|innings]] just long enough to warm me up so I had to get in there and try and pitch and of course it had to be the day when [[george-weaver|Weaver]] and Collins and all of them went to he‑ll behind me and the Washington club went mad and got 4 runs which is more then they usually get all through May and Harper shut us out with 3 hits though he didn’t even have a nightgown on the ball and after the game Gleason asked me where I was last night and I told him I was out and he said yes and you are out today again to the amt. of $50.00. Well Al if he makes that fine stick I will quit baseball and go in some business where a man can get fair treatmunt and sometimes I think I better get out of baseball any way as a man that is a star in the game if he has got any looks at all why the gals all loose their nut about him and bother you to death even if you turn your back every time they look at you and a man hasn’t no business being before the public in a position where the gals can look you over and make a fool out of themself when you have got a wife and 2 kiddies.

[026-020] Your pal,

[026-021] **Jack**.

[026-022] Chi, June 1.

[026-023] **Friend Al**: Well Al I just come back from the pk. and Cleveland give us a trimming but it was about time as we win the 1st 3 we played with them. We leave for [[detroit-tigers|Detroit]] tonight and go east from there and won’t be back in old Chi till the last of the mo.

[026-024] Well Al they was some excitement out in the old ball yard yesterday but beleive me it wouldn’t of never came off if I had of been in there pitching or even down there on [[bench|the bench]]. The way that it come off was that I pitched the p.m. game Decoration Day and give them a good licking and Gleason called off the $50.00 fine he plastered on me last wk. and said I didn’t need to dress yesterday but could set up in the stand with Florrie. Well the Dumonts and Miss Mulvihill was also out to the game and we all set together and I kind of explained the game to Miss Mulvihill and I kept talking fast for the fear she would bring up something personal. Well the game wasn’t much of a game as we had them licked to death but along in the 8th inning the Cleveland bunch was sore on acct. of the way we was makeing them like it and [[tris-speaker|Speaker]] hit a ball down towards [[chick-gandil|Gandil]] and Chick made quite a stop of the ball and run over and stepped on the bag long before Spoke got there but Spoke was kind of sore so he slid in to the bag and that made Gandil sore and they begin barking at each other and next thing you know they was at each other and the rest of the boys was all scared and left them go to it and finely Gandil had his shirt tore off and the umps put them both off of the field. Well Al it wouldn’t of never of happened if I had of been in there as the minute Speaker had of started anything I would knocked him for a gool and it would of been good night Mr. Speaker. Just like I told Jack Graney out there on the field today I said “Speaker better not never try no monkey business like that on me or Fohl will be scarring the bushs for a new center fielder.”

[026-025] Well Miss Mulvihill was setting next to me when the fight come off and I could feel her kind of tremble so I guess I must of kind of squeezed her hand and I told her to not worry because if I seen that either 1 of them was realy going to get hurt I would run down there and knock them both for a gool. So she give me a smile and made some remarks about how nice it must be to be so big and I kind of laughed it off and then I seen Florrie kind of looking at us so I cut it out.

[026-026] Well the fight must of kind of went to Dumont’s bean and any way he asked us all down to the Dearborn for supper and Mrs. Dumont said we better get Tom Dorgan along so as Miss Mulvihill would have somebody to play with and she kind of made a face but didn’t say nothing so I got a hold of him and we went down there. Well Tom is a pretty fair dancer and he kept asking Miss Mulvihill to dance and of course she couldn’t say no though I guess she would of rather set at the table and talk things over but I was glad he kept her danceing at that as I was afraid things might get to personal if her and I was left at the table alone. Well finely we started home and on the way she managed to ask me where we was going to stop in Detroit and I told her so I suppose she will be sending me a post card or a night letter or something and if she does why all as I can do is just pretend like I didn’t get it. But any way we are on our way tonight Al and if we can come back from this trip in 1st place why the race is as good as win you might say as the way I and Cicotte and Williams is going they’s no club in the league can catch us in the stretch. Personly Al wile I don’t never like to leave home I am kind of glad we are going this time for Miss Mulvihill’s sakes if nothing else as the less she sees of me for a wile she will be better off.

[026-027] I will write to you from Detroit or somewheres in the east.

[026-028] Your pal,

[026-029] **Jack**.

[026-030] N.Y., June 5.

[026-031] **Friend Al**: Well Al we just got in from Detroit and we played against Jennings club like we was the Red X 2nd team and if we finish up the trip like we started we will be lucky to come home in a passenger train. I suppose you read about how they beat me Al and it looks like they was enough bad breaks against me to last a whole season and the only peace of luck I had all the while we was there didn’t have nothing to do with baseball but I did happen to run acrost a bird that wants to sell a car and its a 1918 Blaine that hasn’t only been drove 4,000 miles and it looks like it was just out of the shop. I took [[ray-schalk|Cracker]] Schalk out to see it and he said I would be a sucker to not grab it off but the bird wants $1,200.00 which is about twice as much is I figured on paying for a car so I didn’t do nothing but I kind of think he took a fancy to me and if I hold off a wile he will come down to somewheres near my price. Any way I have got his name and address and if I decide I want to pay somewheres near his price why all as I half to do is wire him.

[026-032] Well Al I didn’t get no word from that little gal Miss Mulvihill wile we was in Detroit and I hope she finely got some sence in her head but speaking about Miss Mulvihill I have kind of got a idear that this here Tom Dorgan is stuck on her as whenever we get up in the rm. together that is about all as he can talk about and the day we left Detroit he asked me if I thought it would do any harm him writeing her and of course I said why no it wouldn’t and I felt like telling him it wouldn’t do no good neither one but I guess he will find that out for himself soon enough without me telling him. Only I can’t help from kind of feeling sorry for the both of them and I feel sorry for him because he has fell for a gal that has left her heart run away from her to a place where it won’t get her nothing and I feel sorry for her for looseing her nut over a man that has all ready got a wife and troubles of my own.

[026-033] But Dorgan of course don’t know nothing about what has past between her and I and wile we was setting together on the train comeing east he asked me if I thought they was anything I could do to help him get in right with her. Well I told him I would do the best I could as I would like to see them both happy but between you and I Al about the only thing I could do to help his case along would be to put myself out of the way and maybe in time she would forget me but I have got Florrie and the kiddies to think of and after all a man’s family comes before your friends.

[026-034] Well old pal I expect to pitch 1 of the games here and the N.Y. club is going like wild men wile we act like we was trying to see who could hit the highest foul but after the luck I had in Detroit I should ought to get some kind of luck here and all as I ask is a even break and I will make Pipp and some of the rest of them think they have got the pip eh Al?

[026-035] Your pal,

[026-036] **Jack**.

[026-037] Boston, June 11.

[026-038] **Friend Al**: Well old pal it looks like your old pal should ought to start a matrimony burro and charge a commission for fixing it up between couples that wants to get married though this time I guess the want to is all on 1 side and I am afraid my efforts is going to be waisted. I suppose you will wonder what am I talking about. Well I guess I told you about Josie Mulvihill that little queen out in Chi that Tom Dorgan went nuts over her well instead of them hitting it off why she kind of lost her noodle over me without me never looking X eyed at her and of course she is waisting her time over me as I have all ready got a wife and beleive me 1 of them is enough.

[026-039] Well any way Dorgan can’t think of nothing else only she and this a.m. up in the rm. he asked me did I think they was any chance for him in that direction and of course I couldn’t come out and tell him what I realy thought so I said “Well you can’t never tell till you try.” So he says “Yes but I am a busher in the lady league and I don’t know how to go about it and if I was to ask her and she node me I wouldn’t never dast face 1 of them again.” He said “How would it be if you was to just drop her a friendily letter and kind of mention my name in it and ask her what she thinks about me and kind of give me a boost and feel her out and if she answers you back why we can come pretty close to telling if I have got a chance or have not got a chance.”

[026-040] Well Al I couldn’t do nothing only say OK so I have wrote her a letter giveing Tom a boost and I am going to mail it to her special and here is what it says in it.

[026-041] > *Dear Miss Mulvihill*: Well Miss Mulvihill I suppose you will be surprised recieveing a letter from 1 who you have hardily had time to get acquainted and a specially a married man but I am writeing this in behalf of a pal of mine who I won’t half to tell you his name as you can guess who it is when I say that you have been out a couple times on partys with him which I was along at the same time with the wife and the Dumonts.

[026-042] > This man Miss Mulvihill has not yet win his spurrs in the big league yet and might do better if traded to another club as a young catcher breaking in has not got much of a chance on our club with a man like Ray Schalk a specially when you have got a couple of faults that a youngster has got to over come before they will make a big league catcher. I know you don’t know a whole lot about baseball and if you seen this boy stand up there behind the plate and catch you might think he was OK and as good as anybody where a man that knew baseball could tell you what was the matter with him. 1 thing wile he has got a fair arm he has got to get in a certain position to peg and looses time before he can cut the ball loose and another thing he is what we call spike shy that is when a man is comeing in to the plate it seems like he has not got the nerve to block them off but trys to stand to 1 side and tag them as they are slideing past. But this boy may overcome these faults or he might make a grand catcher for some minor league club.

[026-043] > Well Miss Mulvihill I and this boy has been rooming together on the road ever since the season opened and wile he don’t draw no star salery I wouldn’t ask for a better roomy and when we have a little beer or something up in the rm. I am always glad to pay for it and I feel towards him like he was a young brother that hasn’t got started yet in a money way you might say but if he keeps his eyes open and works hard he has got a chance to make good in the big league or at lease in Class A.

[026-044] > Now I don’t want you to feel like as if I am butting in and trying to run your fairs but this boy asked me would I put in a word for him and try and find out how he stands with you and I can say to you Miss Mulvihill that you could do a whole lot worse then give this boy a chance and wile you may not like him just at the 1st he is 1 of these birds that the more you see of him he is just the same all the wile so if he gives you a ring on the phone when we get home why it won’t hurt nothing if you make a date with him.

[026-045] > As for you and I personly girlie you know how matters stands with me and some times its to late to mend like in this case but a person can forget anybody if they try and we can be just good friends like I am with other girlies that is friends of my wife and all go out and have a good time together and no harm done. So if you will give this boy a chance and let by gones be by gones why it looks to me like it would be a good move both ways and remember that looks is not everything or money neither one.

[026-046] > With my personal regards and of course I don’t half to tell you to not let this go no father and if you can’t see your way clear why no harm done but I wished you would try and find time to write and tell me: how you feel in regards to this matter and beleive me your sinsere friend.

[026-047] So that is what I wrote her Al and I signed my name and I feel like I had killed 2 birds with the same stone as she won’t make no more fuss over me and she will either give this boy a chance when he gets home or else she will tell him right off in the real where to head in at and the sooner he gets the bad news he will get over it that much sooner.

[026-048] Well I suppose you seen in the paper what I done to [[babe-ruth|Babe Ruth]] yesterday and its no wonder they call him Babe Al as I had him swinging like a baby in a cradle and the only 2 times he even fouled the ball was when Liebold run back and catched the fly ball and another time when Gandil speered that line drive off in him but he would of [[strikeout|struck out]] on that ball only it was a bran new ball and I tried to [[curve-ball|curve]] it and it didn’t break like I intend it.

[026-049] Well we leave here for Philly Friday night and after we get through with them we go to Washington and then Detroit for 1 game and then home. In the mean wile kindest regards to Bertha and don’t take no bad money.

[026-050] Your pal,

[026-051] **Jack**.

[026-052] Detroit, June 22.

[026-053] **Friend Al**: Well Al we leave in a couple hrs. for old Chi and play the Cleveland club there tomorrow and I thought I was going to work here today but I guess Gleason wanted to save me up for the Cleveland club. Well I will make them like it and maybe they won’t feel so cocky after I get done with them.

[026-054] Well Al it looks like I would soon be a Barney Oldfield or something. I guess I told you that they was a bird here in Detroit that wants to sell me a 1918 Blaine car for $1,200.00 and all the boys that seen it said I was a sucker if I didn’t grab it off. Well when we got here today the 1st bird I seen was the bird that owns this car and he wanted to know if I had made up my mind or not. So I told him no I had not and he would half to give me a little more time or else cut down on the price. So he said he couldn’t do neither as he had a offer from a man here in Detroit to take it off in his hands at $1,200.00 and the man wants it right away and will pay cash and the only reason why he hadn’t sold it to him was on acct. of takeing a kind of a fancy to me and he would rather see me get it then anybody else as he felt like we was old friends on acct. of him seeing me on the ball field so often. So I said well I only had about $800.00 in the bank and I would half to talk it over with the wife 1st any way so finely he said that if I would give him a $100.00 for a option on it he would hold on to it for a wk. before he sold it to somebody else and then I could wire him if I want it or not and that will give me plenty of time to talk it over with Florrie.

[026-055] Well Al it looks like such a bargain that I would be a fool to not take it and Florrie will feel the same way when I tell her about it and I have gave the bird my check for a $100.00 and if Florrie will go in with me 50 50 why I will wire the bird and tell him the [[contract|deal]] is closed and then I will ask Gleason to leave me run over here from Chi some night and drive it back the next day and that way I won’t only loose 1 day all together and when I get that old car back in old Chi beleive me I will burn up old Michigan Ave. only they will be 1 understanding and that is that Florrie can’t drive the car neither wile I am in Chi or out on the road as I don’t trust no woman to drive a car and a specially 1 that is always looking all over the st. to see if they’s some dame that has got sporter close then her.

[026-056] The bird took me out to the ball pk. this p.m. in the machine and it run like a watch charm and he asked me if I didn’t want to try and run it a wile to see how easy it run but I don’t want to take no chance of running a machine that don’t belong to me and besides it won’t take me no time to learn how to run it by myself as they’s nothing I ever tried yet that I couldn’t pick it up like childs play.

[026-057] Well its pretty near train time Al and besides they isn’t much news to write. I guess I told you about me writeing to Josie Mulvihill in Chi that Tom Dorgan is nuts over her and I wrote to try and give him a boost and see how he stood with her. Well the last day we was in Washington I had a night letter from her and all as it said was “Tell Mr. Dorgan the same thing I told you once why don’t he speak for himself.” So I showed him the message and his face kind of fell and I couldn’t help from feeling sorry for him as it looks like he is barking on the wrong tree but I guess he will get over it and I hope the poor little gal will have sence enough to get over something herself as she must know they can’t be nothing only friendship between her and I and the sooner she forgets all about me so everybody will be better off.

[026-058] Your pal,

[026-059] **Jack**.

[026-060] Chi, June 24.

[026-061] **Friend Al**: Well Al from all I ever seen of Bertha I wouldn’t never accuse her from being a spend drift but beleive me she has not got nothing on Florrie. When I got back from Detroit yesterday a.m. and told her about this here car that I had took a option on it and could get it for $1,200.00 and everybody said it was a bargain and I would be a sucker to not grab it off so she said well why don’t you buy it. So I said that is all right to talk about buying it but I am about $600.00 shy and I figured that as long as I and you is both going to get the benefits out of the car you would go in with me 50 50 and pay for half of the car. So she said “All right I will pay for half of the car if you will agree that it belongs to the both of us and not just you and I can take it out and drive it when ever I feel like.” So I said nothing doing as I wouldn’t trust her to drive a lawn more let alone a car and a specially in a town like Chi where its a dull day when a 100 people don’t get bumped off in a automobile wreck.

[026-062] So she said all right then nothing doing and you can either pay for the car yourself or go without it so I thought if she was going to be stubborn why I would be stubborn to as 2 could play in that game so it looks like we wouldn’t have no car as I am not going to buy no cheap 1 for no $600.00 after seen that Blaine that is worth $2,000.00 or better and the bird trying to give it to me for $1,200.00 you might say. So it looks like I would do my motoring in a 60 passenger 35th st. limousine eh Al?

[026-063] Well Gleason started me vs. the Cleveland club yesterday and as usual the boys wasn’t hitting behind me and it come up to the 7th inning with the score 3 and 2 against us and we had a couple men on and 2 out and Gleason takes me out and sends Jack Collins up to hit and Coumbe made a monkey out of him and that’s the way it always goes and some day Gleason will get wise to himself and find out that I can hit as good as anybody on the club against left handers. Any way Danforth went in to finish and they got a couple more off in him and finely beat us 5 and 3.

[026-064] But beleive me Al they come near being more excitement out there then just the baseball game. I was warming up before the game and Speaker come over towards our bench and I thought he was going in the club house or somewheres but he stopped along side of me and he said “Jack Graney said you wanted to see me.” So I said I hadn’t told Graney nothing of the kind so he said “Well what he said was that if I ever started anything with you Fohl would half to start scarring the bushs for a new center fielder.” So I said “I never said nothing like that Spoke and if Graney told you that he was just kidding.” So then Speaker hollered to Graney to come over and he come over and Speaker says “This big goof says he never said what you said.” So Graney says “Well he did and if he says he didn’t he is a liar.” So I said “You better not call me a liar or I will liar you all over the ball pk.” So Graney said it looked like I and him would half to settle it but Speaker said “No I will take it off in your hands.”

[026-065] Well Al it was all as I could do to keep from socking the both of them and I was just going to sock Speaker when I happened to think that it would probably mean I would get put off in the field and Gleason was depending on me to work the game so I pretended like I thought they was jokeing and I said “I don’t want no trouble with neither of you 2 boys out here on the field but if you are looking for trouble I will come down to your hotel tonight and we can settle it there.” So Spoke said all right and don’t forget where we are stopping at and the clerk will give you the rm. No.

[026-066] Well what they was trying to do Al was start a fight with me and get me put off the field and Gleason is up against it for pitchers and besides he didn’t have nobody else warmed up but I was to smart for them and didn’t fall for it. But beleive me if it hadn’t of been for us being up in the race and every game counts I would of socked the both of them.

[026-067] Well finely the game started and the 1st ball I throwed come pretty close to Graney’s bean and he said I better not try none of that business or he would hit me with a bat so I just laughed at him and I tried to throw the next 1 at his head but the ball kind of slipped and went right in his groove and he happened to catch it just right and hit it to left field and made 2 bases. Well I got the next bird but Speaker come up and said to throw 1 at his head and see what would happen. Well I wasn’t going to leave him bluff me so I tried to get 1 close enough to scare him but I wasn’t warmed up good yet and kind of wild and I got the ball outside and he hit it down the left foul line for 2 bases and at that Jackson should ought to of held him to a single but any way Graney scored and then Liebold let a fly ball get away from him and Speaker scored and that is how they got 2 of their runs. Well Graney and Speaker tried to ride me all the p.m. but I give them back what they sent and what they was trying to do was start a scrap so as I would get suspend it but I was to foxy for them. Well Al I was going down to their hotel last night and call their bluff and knock the both of them for a gool but when I got home the baby was acting kind of croopy and I was afraid to leave the house.

[026-068] Well we play Cleveland here once more tomorrow and then we go to St. Louis and I will work 1 of the games there and I will make a monkey out of them.

[026-069] Tom Dorgan told me tonight that he had called up Josie Mulvihill and was going to take her out somewheres tonight to a picture or somewheres and dance and I suppose she made the date so as she could tell him once in for all that they wasn’t no chance for him and I only hope she lets him down easy as he is 1 of these silent birds that takes it mighty hard when the gals treats you rough.

[026-070] Your pal,

[026-071] **Jack**.

[026-072] St. Louis, June 28.

[026-073] **Friend Al**: Well Al it looks like I am going to be a demon motorist after all Florrie or no Florrie. I just wired a telegram to the bird in Detroit saying I would buy the Blaine for $1,200.00 if he would hold on to it for me till the 7 of July. We have got a off day in the schedule that day and I can easy get leaf from Gleason to run over to Detroit and get the old boat and drive her back to Chi and won’t even loose a day.

[026-074] Well I suppose you will wonder what has happened to change my mind and if some body has gave me a birthday present of $600.00 or something. Well nothing like that old pal but still and all its going to be just the same like a birthday present and instead of the whole amt. comeing out of our family I am going to spend the $600.00 like I planned and 3 poor suckers is comeing through with the rest of it.

[026-075] Well I suppose you will wonder have I went crazy or what am I talking about. Well Al I have went crazy like a fox and you will say so to when I tell you what I am going to pull off. Well they’s a bird here in St. Louis name Jack Casey that I have ran around with him ever since I been comeing here and maybe you have heard of him but any way he has got a stable of fighters and he has put on some bouts himself here in St. Louis and he knows the game from A to Z. Well he has gave me a steer on a whole lot of fights how to bet on them and I never loose a nickle yet on his dope. Well I was out with him last night and we was all over St. Louis lapping them up and we run in to a bunch of boxers and boys that is interested in the fight game and as soon is they heard who I was they popped their eyes out and said they had been a admirer of mine for a long wile and always wanted to meet me and if Jimmy Burke had a few pitchers like myself maybe the St. Louis club could get somewheres.

[026-076] Well finely the talk got around to the Willard Dempsey fight in Toledo the 4 of July and I asked some of the boys how they thought it was comeing out and they all kind of stalled and said it looked pretty even and it looked like a even money bet and etc. but I could see they was stalling and finely Casey come out with it. Well Al these birds is all in a position to know and they couldn’t have nothing only the right dope and here is what they give me.

[026-077] It seems like Tex Ricketts that is running the fight has spent a whole lot of jack building the arena in Toledo and he can’t expect to break better than even on the 1 fight and if Dempsey was to win why they wouldn’t be nobody left for him to fight so they are going to leave the arena up and Willard is going to get the decision in this fight and then they are going to match them up again for Labor Day and get the crowd back there a 2nd time and clean up a bunch of jack and the 2nd time they fight it will be on the level but this time the cards is all stacked for the big fellow to win and any way he is to big for this other guy to reach him. So Casey said if he was I and wanted to clean up a peace of jack why to go ahead and bet my head off on the big fellow to win this bout and they wasn’t no way I could loose unless Willard drops dead from cramps or something when they get in the ring.

[026-078] Well I said I would think it over and 1 of the boys said I better not think to long as it might be to late as it is only 5 more days now before the fight and he said if I wanted to put up my jack he knew a friend of his that wasn’t on the inside and he couldn’t see nothing only Dempsey and this friend would take any bet I would make and this bird said he would see that I got the jack when I win. Well I said I didn’t want to rob no friend of his and besides I didn’t have the jack along with me to put it up and he said he would take me check but I said I would rather wait till I get to Cleveland and maybe the odds would be different and I could get some odds on the big fellow instead of even money.

[026-079] Well that’s the dope Al and these birds know what they are talking about and if I was you and had a few dollars to bet why I would put it up on big Jess and not say nothing about what I have told you as the more people that knows about it why it will effect the betting.

[026-080] Personly when I was through with Casey and his friends I come back to the hotel and some of the boys was still setting around the lobby in the hotel and I set down with them and told them what I had found out and Buck Weaver is 1 of these smart Alex that always knows more then anybody else so he says “Well I will tell you what I think of your dope I will take all the jack you want to bet on the big fellow.” So 1 word lead to another and I said I didn’t want to rob no pals that was on the same club with me but they kept acting smarty and finely I kind of loose my temper and I said I would bet $600.00 even money if I didn’t half to put it up and Weaver said he would take $200.00 of it and a couple more of the boys took $200.00 a peace and they covered the whole $600.00 and God help them but it will learn them not to be so smarty in the future.

[026-081] So you see Al that I am going to have the big car after all and I am glad I can get it without Florrie putting in her jack as now I will own the car all myself and she won’t half nothing to say only ask me to take her rideing and when I am out on the road with the club I will have the old buggy locked up in some garage where she can’t get a hold of it and try to clime trees.

[026-082] Well I made a monkey out of this club today and won’t half to work no more till we get to Cleveland where I can get another whack at Speaker and Graney and if they try any more of their smart business on me I will give them the Jess Willard only they won’t want to come back for no 2nd dose on Labor Day or no other day and speaking about Cleveland reminds me that they are going to make us go there Sunday night and play a postpone game Monday and I can’t see no sence to it only that is the last day before the country goes dry and I suppose they want us to spend it in a dry town for the fear we might enjoy ourself.

[026-083] That is 1 place where poor Tom Dorgan has got it on us as Gleason has left him home this trip and he will be in old Chi the night of the 30 of June where he can get all as he wants to drink so he isn’t so unlucky after all even if the ladys don’t go nuts over him.

[026-084] Well Al its time to go to bed and don’t forget what I said about betting your jack on the big fellow if you have got any to spare and in the mean wile come on you big Jessica.

[026-085] Your pal,

[026-086] **Jack**.

[026-087] Chi, July 5.

[026-088] **Friend Al**: Well Al its good night car and good night everything else and the way I feel I don’t care if school keeps or not. I am glad I didn’t advise you to bet no dough on the big fellow and if you bet some on your own hook why all as I have got to say is that I am sorry and it wasn’t my fault or them boys down to St. Louis neither one as I have knew Casey several yrs. and I know he wouldn’t give me no bad steer and the way it looks like to me is that Dempsey double crossed the big fellow and everybody else and of course only for what they told me down there I would of bet my jack on Dempsey instead of on the other fellow as in the 1st place Jess wasn’t in no shape to fight and besides when a bird 24 yrs. old fights a man pretty near 40 why its 10 to 1 he will knock him for a gool.

[026-089] Well Al your old pal will do his rideing around on st. cars this summer at lease unless we win the [[world-series|world serious]] and then of course I will have enough jack to buy the finest car made and not no broke down 2nd hand Blaine and they say it costs a million dollars to run a Blaine any way as they are he‑ll on tires and the cylinders keeps getting gumed up. Well they’s 1 good thing and that is that Florrie don’t know nothing about it and if she did why I wouldn’t never hear the last of it but I am not the kind to cry over sour milk and whatever is comeing to me why I take it with a smile and go on my way. I suppose that bird in Detroit will try and hold on to the $100.00 I give him for a option but he won’t never get away with that Al and I have all ready wired him a telegram to send it back to me at once and if he don’t why the next time we hit Detroit I will knock him for a gool.

[026-090] Speaking about Detroit I suppose you seen what happened in the game yesterday p.m. and when a busher like Flagstead can get to me for 3 hits why you know I am not myself.

[026-091] Well Al I am to sick in tired of everything to write you much of a letter and besides they’s nothing to write about you might say only except 1 thing and that is that Tom Dorgan called me to 1 side in the club house after the game this p.m. and said to not leave till he was ready to go with me so we come down under the stand together and there was this Mulvihill dame waiting for him and grinning like a monkey and Tom couldn’t hardily talk he was so fussed up but finely it come out that they are engaged to be married and they wanted to thank me for kind of helping them fix it up and she is wearing a big diamond solitary stone that he just bought for her this a.m. and he told me on the quite that he bought it with some of the jack he win on the fight down to Toledo.

[026-092] Well good luck to them Al and they can have each other as far is I am concerned and I am glad she is off in my hands as she was getting to be a kind of a pest writeing me letters and night telegrams and 1 thing another and she might of knew that a married man don’t want nothing to do with even a young gal let alone 1 that’s way up in the paints. So I say good luck to them both Al and God help them.

[026-093] Well the boys on the club has began calling me Jess and I guess they think its a joke or something but 1 of these days when I ain’t feeling my best they won’t think its such a joke when they pull some of their funny stuff on me and I Jess them in the jaw.

[026-094] Your pal,

[026-095] **Jack**.
