---
description: 'I was billeted for a time with other war correspondents in an old house in the rue Amiral Courbet, on the way to the river Somme from the Street of the Three...'
id: Part-V-Ch-07
label: 'Part V, Chapter VII'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: 'chapter'
---

[086-001]I was billeted for a time with other war correspondents in an old house in the rue Amiral Courbet, on the way to the river Somme from the Street of the Three Pebbles, and with a view of the spire of the cathedral, a wonderful thing of delicate lines and tracery, graven with love in every line, by Muirhead Bone, and from my dormer window. It was the house of Mme. de la Rochefoucauld, who lived farther out of the town, but drove in now and then to look at this little mansion of hers at the end of a courtyard behind wrought-iron gates. It was built in the days before the Revolution, when it was dangerous to be a fine lady with the name of Rochefoucauld. The furniture was rather scanty, and was of the Louis Quinze and Empire periods. Some portraits of old gentlemen and ladies of France, with one young fellow in a scarlet coat, who might have been in the King’s Company of the Guard about the time when Wolfe scaled the Heights of Abraham, summoned up the ghosts of the house, and I liked to think of them in these rooms and going in their sedan-chairs across the little courtyard to high mass at the cathedral or to a game of bezique in some other mansion, still standing in the quiet streets of [[amiens|Amiens]], unless in a day in March of 1918 they were destroyed with many hundreds of houses by bombs and [[artillery|gunfire]]. My little room was on the floor below the garret, and here at night, after a long day in the fields up by [[pozieres|Pozières]] or Martinpuich or beyond, by Ligny-Tilloy, on the way to [[bapaume|Bapaume]], in the long struggle and slaughter over every inch of ground, I used to write my day’s despatch, to be taken next day (it was before we were allowed to use the military wires) by King’s Messenger to England.

[086-002]Those articles, written at high speed, with an impressionism born out of many new memories of tragic and heroic scenes, were interrupted sometimes by air-bombardments. Hostile airmen came often to Amiens during the Somme fighting, to unload their bombs as near to the station as they could guess, which was not often very near. Generally they killed a few women and children and knocked a few poor houses and a shop or two into a wild rubbish heap of bricks and timber. While I wrote, listening to the crashing of glass and the antiaircraft fire of French guns from the citadel, I used to wonder subconsciously whether I should suddenly be hurled into chaos at the end of an unfinished sentence, and now and again in spite of my desperate conflict with time to get my message done (the censors were waiting for it downstairs) I had to get up and walk into the passage to listen to the infernal noise in the dark city of Amiens. But I went back again and bent over my paper, concentrating on the picture of war which I was trying to set down so that the world might see and understand, until once again, ten minutes later or so, my willpower would weaken and the little devil of fear would creep up to my heart and I would go uneasily to the door again to listen. Then once more to my writing … Nothing touched the house in the rue Amiral Courbet while we were there. But it was into my bedroom that a shell went crashing after that night in March when Amiens was badly wrecked, and we listened to the noise of destruction all around us from a room in the Hôtel du Rhin on the other side of the way. I should have been sleeping still if I had slept that night in my little old bedroom when the shell paid a visit.

[086-003]There were no lights allowed at night in Amiens, and when I think of darkness I think of that city in time of war, when all the streets were black tunnels and one fumbled one’s way timidly, if one had no flash-lamp, between the old houses with their pointed gables, coming into sharp collision sometimes with other wayfarers. But up to midnight there were little lights flashing for a second and then going out, along the Street of the Three Pebbles and in the dark corners of side-streets. They were carried by girls seeking to entice English officers on their way to their billets, and they clustered like glowworms about the side door of the Hôtel du Rhin after nine o’clock, and outside the railings of the public gardens. As one passed, the bright bull’s-eye from a pocket torch flashed in one’s eyes, and in the radiance of it one saw a girl’s face, laughing, coming very close, while her fingers felt for one’s badge.

[086-004]“How dark it is tonight, little captain! Are you not afraid of darkness? I am full of fear. It is so sad, this war, so dismal! It is comradeship that helps one now! … A little love … a little laughter, and then—who knows?”

[086-005]A little love … a little laughter—alluring words to boys out of one battle, expecting another, hating it all, lonely in their souls because of the thought of death, in exile from their own folk, in exile from all womanhood and tender, feminine things, up there in the ditches and shell-craters of the desert fields, or in the huts of headquarters staffs, or in reserve camps behind the fighting-line. A little love, a little laughter, and then—who knows? The sirens had whispered their own thoughts. They had translated into pretty French the temptation of all the little devils in their souls.

[086-006]“*Un peu d’amour—*”

[086-007]One flash-lamp was enough for two down a narrow street toward the riverside, and then up a little dark stairway to a lamp-lit room … Presently this poor boy would be stricken with disease and wish himself dead.
