---
description: 'In order to distract the enemy’s attention and hold his troops away from the main battlefront, “subsidiary attacks” were made upon the German lines as far no...'
id: Part-III-Ch-06
label: 'Part III, Chapter VI'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: 'chapter'
---

[049-001]In order to distract the enemy’s attention and hold his troops away from the main battlefront, “subsidiary attacks” were made upon the German lines as far north as Bellewarde Farm, to the east of [[ypres|Ypres]], and southward to La Bassée Canal at Givenchy, by the troops of the Second and Third Armies. This object, wrote [[sir-john-french|Sir John French]], in his despatch, “was most effectively achieved.” It was achieved by the bloody sacrifice of many brave battalions in the 3rd and 14th Divisions (Yorkshire, Royal Scots, King’s Royal Rifles, and others), and by the Meerut Division of the Indian Corps, who set out to attack terrible lines without sufficient artillery support, and without reserves behind them, and without any chance of holding the ground they might capture. It was part of the system of war. They were the pawns of “strategy,” serving a high purpose in a way that seemed to them without reason. Not for them was the glory of a victorious assault. Their job was to “demonstrate” by exposing their bodies to devouring fire, and by attacking earthworks which they were not expected to hold. Here and there men of ours, after their rush over No Man’s Land under a deadly sweep of machine-gun fire, flung themselves into the enemy’s trenches, bayoneting the Germans and capturing the greater part of their first line. There they lay panting among wounded and dead, and after that shoveled up earth and burrowed to get cover from the shelling which was soon to fall on them. Quickly the enemy discovered their whereabouts and laid down a barrage fire which, with deadly accuracy, plowed up their old front line and tossed it about on the pitchforks of bursting shells. Our men’s bodies were mangled in that earth. High explosives plunged into the midst of little groups crouching in holes and caverns of the ground, and scattered their limbs. Living, unwounded men lay under those screaming shells with the panting hearts of toads under the beat of flails. Wounded men crawled back over No Man’s Land, and some were blown to bits as they crawled, and others got back. Before nightfall, in the dark, a general retirement was ordered to our original line in that northern sector, owing to the increasing casualties under the relentless work of the German guns. Like ants on the move, thousands of men rose from the upheaved earth, and with their stomachs close to it, crouching, came back, dragging their wounded. The dead were left.

[049-002]“On the front of the Third Army,” wrote Sir John French, “subsidiary operations of a similar nature were successfully carried out.”

[049-003]From the point of view of high generalship those holding attacks had served their purpose pretty well. From the point of view of mothers’ sons they had been a bloody shambles without any gain. The point of view depends on the angle of vision.
