---
description: "[1] In Russian, “silen.”"
id: 1241-卡拉马佐夫兄弟-7dc515ea-ch119
label: "FOOTNOTES"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[114-001][1] In Russian, “silen.”

[114-002][2] A proverbial expression in Russia.

[114-003][3] [[grushenka|Grushenka]].

[114-004][4] i.e. setter dog.

[114-005][5] Probably the public event was the Decabrist plot against the Tsar, of December 1825, in which the most distinguished men in Russia were concerned.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.

[114-006][6] When a monk’s body is carried out from the cell to the church and from the church to the graveyard, the canticle “What earthly joy...” is sung. If the deceased was a priest as well as a monk the canticle “Our Helper and Defender” is sung instead.

[114-007][7] i.e. a chime of bells.

[114-008][8] Literally: “Did you get off with a long nose made at you?”—a proverbial expression in Russia for failure.

[114-009][9] Gogol is meant.

[114-010]*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV ***

[114-011]Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

[114-012]Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

[114-013]START: FULL LICENSE
