---
description: 'Treaty of Fort Stanwix — Red Jacket''s growing influence'
id: ch06
label: 'Chapter VI: Treaty of Fort Stanwix'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[006-001]Union of the Western Indian Tribes contemplated—Hostile influence of the

[006-002]agents of Great Britain in [[canada|Canada]]—Ambitious project of [[joseph-brant|Thayendanegea]] or

[006-003]Brant—[[council-of-tioga-point|Council at Tioga Point]]—Indian Ceremonies—Visit of [[cornplanter|Cornplanter]] and

[006-004]others at the seat of government—Kindly feeling of [[george-washington|Washington]]—Fresh

[006-005]occasion of trouble.

[006-006]When [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]], at the treaty of [[fort-stanwix|Fort Stanwix]], in 1784, projected the

[006-007]bold idea of the union of all the Indian tribes on the continent, to

[006-008]resist the aggressions of the whites, he may not have thought it would

[006-009]soon come near having a practical fulfillment. This thought grew out of

[006-010]the circumstances and necessities of the times, and was the natural

[006-011]forecast of a great mind. His words sank deep into the hearts of his

[006-012]people,—they were carried beyond the bounds of that [[council-fire]],—they

[006-013]went gliding along with the light canoe that plied the Lakes,—and were

[006-014]wafted onward by the waters of the Ohio and Mississippi. Several causes

[006-015]contributed to give direction and force to this movement.

[006-016]Prominent among them was the fact, that the treaty of peace with Great

[006-017]Britain in 1783, though it put an end to the war, did not secure friendly

[006-018]relations between the two countries. Hostile feelings had been engendered

[006-019]and were still cherished, particularly by those who had taken refuge in

[006-020]Canada, in the early part of the Revolutionary struggle. Some of them were

[006-021]very active in stirring up Indian hostilities among the tribes at the

[006-022]west.

[006-023]But prominent above all others were the exertions of Thayendanegea, or

[006-024]Brant, the famous war-chief, from whose leadership the inhabitants of our

[006-025]frontier settlements had suffered so severely, during the war of the

[006-026]Revolution. Very soon after the treaty at Fort Stanwix in 1784, from the

[006-027]dissatisfaction growing out of that treaty, and other indications among

[006-028]the Indians, he began to entertain the ambitious project of forming a

[006-029]grand Indian confederacy, of which he would be chief, embracing not only

[006-030]the Iroquois, but all of the Indian nations of the great North-west. He

[006-031]had given the entire summer of 1785, to the business of visiting these

[006-032]nations, and holding councils among them, with a view to the furtherance

[006-033]of this object. [Footnote: See Stone's Life and Times of Brant, Vol. 2, p.

[006-034]248.]

[006-035]He visited England at the close of this year, "ostensibly for the purpose

[006-036]of adjusting the claims of the loyal [[mohawk-nation|Mohawks]] upon the crown, for

[006-037]indemnification of their losses and sacrifices in the contest, from which

[006-038]they had recently emerged." [Footnote: See Stone's Life and Times of

[006-039]Brant, Vol. 2, p. 248.]

[006-040]… "Coupled with the special business of the Indian claims, was the

[006-041]design of *sounding the British government, touching the degree of

[006-042]countenance or the amount of assistance which he might expect from that

[006-043]quarter, in the event of a general Indian war against the United

[006-044]States*." [Footnote: Ibid.]

[006-045]His arrival at Salisbury was thus noted in a letter from that place, dated

[006-046]December 12, 1785, and published in London. "Monday last, Colonel Joseph

[006-047]Brant, the celebrated King of the Mohawks, arrived in this city from

[006-048]America, and after dining with Colonel De Peister, at the head-quarters

[006-049]here, proceeded on his journey to London. This extraordinary personage is

[006-050]said to have presided at the late Grand Congress of Confederate chiefs, of

[006-051]the Indian nations in America, and to be by them appointed to the conduct

[006-052]and chief command in the war, *which they now meditate against the United

[006-053]States of America*. He took his departure for England immediately as

[006-054]that assembly broke up; and it is conjectured that his embassy to the

[006-055]British Court is of great importance." [Footnote: Life of Brant, Vol. 2,

[006-056]p. 249.]

[006-057]No public, decisive answer, for obvious reasons, was given to this

[006-058]application for countenance and aid in the contemplated war, for this part

[006-059]of the errand of the Mohawk chief, was "*unknown to the public at that

[006-060]day*." [Footnote: Life of Brant, Vol. 2, p. 249.]

[006-061]Captain Brant on his return to America in 1786, entered once more upon the

[006-062]work of combining the Indian forces, and assembled a grand confederate

[006-063]council, which was held at Huron village, near the mouth of [[detroit|Detroit River]].

[006-064][Footnote: It was attended by the [[iroquois-confederacy|Six Nations]], the Hurons, Ottawas,

[006-065]Miamis, Shawanese, Chippewas, Cherokees, Delawares, Pottowattamies, and

[006-066]Wabash, confederates.]

[006-067]An address to the Congress of the United States was agreed upon at this

[006-068]council, pacific in its tone, provided no encroachments were made upon

[006-069]their lands west of the Ohio river. This was their ultimatum previous to

[006-070]the war, in which they were afterwards united.

[006-071]At the treaty of peace between Great Britain and the United States in

[006-072]1783, it was stipulated that the military posts south of the great lakes

[006-073]should be surrendered. This surrender was refused, on the plea that the

[006-074]United States had not fulfilled an agreement on her part, to see the just

[006-075]claims, due the subjects of Great Britain, cancelled.

[006-076]From certain correspondence at this time it appears that there were other

[006-077]reasons also, for the witholding of these forts. Their surrender was

[006-078]earnestly desired on the part of the United States, as it was well

[006-079]understood, they gave encouragement to the hostile combinations, that at

[006-080]this time were going on.

[006-081]In a letter to Captain Brant by Sir John [[sir-william-johnson|Johnson]] dated Quebec, March 22d,

[006-082]1787, he says, "Do not suffer an idea to hold a place in your mind, that

[006-083]it will be for your interest to sit still and see the Americans attempt

[006-084]the posts. [Footnote: Oswegatchie, [[oswego|Oswego]], [[fort-niagara|Niagara]], Detroit and Mackinaw.]

[006-085]*It is for your sakes chiefly, if not entirely, that we hold them.* If

[006-086]you become indifferent about them, they may perhaps be given up; what

[006-087]security would you then have? You would be at the mercy of a people whose

[006-088]blood calls aloud for revenge; whereas, by supporting them, you encourage

[006-089]us to hold them, and encourage new settlements, already considerable, and

[006-090]every day increasing by numbers coming in, who find they can't live in the

[006-091]States. Many thousands are preparing to come in. This increase of his

[006-092]Majesty's subjects will serve as a protection to you, should the subjects

[006-093]of the States, by endeavoring to make further encroachments on you,

[006-094]disturb your quiet." [Footnote: Stone's Life and Times of Brant.]

[006-095]Another letter soon after, by Major Mathews seems to confirm the above

[006-096]statements. "His Lordship [Footnote: Lord Dorchester, Governor General of

[006-097]Canada, formerly Sir Guy Carlton.] wishes them (the Indians), to act as is

[006-098]best for their interest; he cannot begin a war with the Americans, because

[006-099]some of their people encroach and make depredations upon parts of the

[006-100]Indian country; but they must see it is his Lordship's *intention to

[006-101]defend the posts*; and that while these are preserved, the Indians must

[006-102]find great security therefrom, and consequently the Americans greater

[006-103]difficulty in taking their lands; but should they once become masters of

[006-104]the posts, they will surround the Indians, and accomplish their purpose

[006-105]with little trouble." [Footnote: Life of Brant, Vol. 2, p. 271.]

[006-106]Thus it is seen that those at the head of British affairs in Canada, while

[006-107]they studiously avoided coming into open collision with the United States,

[006-108]were viewing with satisfaction the gathering war-cloud, and were lending

[006-109]their influence to extend and intensify its threatening character.

[006-110]The only course left for the United States was to prepare for the

[006-111]conflict; and while forces were being summoned to take the field, they

[006-112]were preceded by efforts of a pacific character.

[006-113]A treaty was held with the Six Nations at Fort Harmar, on the Muskingum,

[006-114]in January, 1789, by Gen. St. Clair, in behalf of the United States, with

[006-115]a view to renew and confirm all the engagements, made at the treaty of

[006-116]Fort Stanwix in 1784. Goods amounting to three thousand dollars were

[006-117]distributed among the Indians, after the satisfactory conclusion and

[006-118]signing of the treaty. [Footnote: Indian treaties.]

[006-119]At the same time a treaty was concluded with the Wyandot, Delaware,

[006-120]Ottawa, Chippewa, Pottowattamie and Sac nations, and goods distributed

[006-121]among them amounting to six thousand dollars, for a relinquishment of

[006-122]their claim to western lands.

[006-123]These negotiations were doubtless attended with a beneficial influence,

[006-124]but they could not arrest the tide of warlike feeling that had been

[006-125]created. Hostilities were continued throughout the long line of our

[006-126]frontier settlements, and two of the [[seneca-nation|Senecas]] having been killed by some

[006-127]bordermen of Pennsylvania, a great excitement was awakened among them.

[006-128]Our government, anxious to remove the new occasion of disaffection,

[006-129]immediately disavowed the act, sought to bring the perpetrators of the

[006-130]crime to justice, and invited a friendly conference of the Iroquois at

[006-131][[tioga-point|Tioga Point]].

[006-132]This council was convened on the sixteenth and remained in session until

[006-133]the twenty-third of November, 1790.

[006-134]The chiefs in attendance at this council, and who took an active part in

[006-135]its deliberations, were Fish Carrier, [[farmer-s-brother|Farmer's Brother]], [[hendrick|Hendrick]], Little

[006-136]Billy and Red Jacket.

[006-137][[timothy-pickering|Colonel Pickering]], as commissioner on the part of the United States, was

[006-138]present.

[006-139]Red Jacket, their principal speaker, portrayed in a vivid and strong

[006-140]light, the sorrow they experienced, the injustice they had suffered, and

[006-141]the unpleasant feelings aroused among them. A large number of Indians were

[006-142]present, and were powerfully moved, and deeply affected by his speech.

[006-143]Colonel Pickering, on the other hand, gave a very clear view of the facts

[006-144]in the case, showing conclusively the innocence of the government in the

[006-145]murder committed, and after a time succeeded in allaying the excitement,

[006-146]drying up their tears, and wiping out the blood that had been shed.

[006-147]This council was enlivened by good cheer, and the observance of ceremonies

[006-148]common among the Indians.

[006-149][[thomas-morris|Thomas Morris]], who was present, was at this time adopted into one of their

[006-150]tribes. His father, Robert Morris of [[philadelphia|Philadelphia]], having purchased of

[006-151]Massachusetts, in 1790, the pre-emptive right to that part of Western New

[006-152]York, not sold to Phelps and Gorham, sent his son, as preparatory to the

[006-153]negotiations he desired to make with the Indians, and for the general

[006-154]management of his business connected with the undertaking, to reside in

[006-155][[canandaigua|Canandaigua]]. While here he was diligent in cultivating an acquaintance

[006-156]with the principal chiefs of the Iroquois confederacy, who resided in that

[006-157]region. In this he was successful, and soon became a general favorite

[006-158]among them. He was in attendance with Colonel Pickering at Tioga Point,

[006-159]where the Indians determined to adopt him into the Seneca nation, and Red

[006-160]Jacket bestowed upon him the name himself had borne, previous to his

[006-161]elevation to the dignity of Sachem; O-ti-ti-ani, "*Always Ready*." It is

[006-162]beautifully described by Colonel Stone, and is given in his language.

[006-163]"The occasion of which they availed themselves to perform the cermony of

[006-164]conferring upon young Morris his new name, was a religious observance,

[006-165]when the whole sixteen hundred Indians present at the treaty, united in an

[006-166]offering to the moon, then being at her full. It was a clear night, and

[006-167]the moon shone with uncommon brilliancy. The host of Indians, and their

[006-168]neophite, were all seated upon the ground in an extended circle, on one

[006-169]side of which a large fire was kept burning. The aged [[cayuga-nation|Cayuga]] chieftain,

[006-170]Fish Carrier, who was held in exalted veneration for his wisdom, and who

[006-171]had been greatly distinguished for his bravery from his youth up,

[006-172]officiated as the high priest of the occasion;—making a long speech to

[006-173]the luminary, occasionally throwing tobacco into the fire, as incense. On

[006-174]the conclusion of the address, the whole company prostrated themselves

[006-175]upon the bosom of their parent earth, and a grunting sound of approbation

[006-176]was uttered from mouth to mouth, around the entire circle.

[006-177]"At a short distance from the fire a post had been planted in the earth,

[006-178]intended to represent the stake of torture, to which captives are bound

[006-179]for execution. After the ceremonies in favor of Madam Luna had been ended,

[006-180]they commenced a war-dance around the post, and the spectacle must have

[006-181]been as picturesque as it was animating and wild. The young braves engaged

[006-182]in the dance were naked, excepting a breech-cloth about their loins. They

[006-183]were painted frightfully, their backs being chalked white, with irregular

[006-184]streaks of red, denoting the streaming of blood. Frequently would they

[006-185]cease from dancing, while one of their number ran to the fire, snatching

[006-186]thence a blazing stick, placed there for that purpose, which he would

[006-187]thrust at the post, as though inflicting torture upon a prisoner. In the

[006-188]course of the dance they sung their songs, and made the forests ring with

[006-189]their wild screams and shouts, as they boasted of their deeds of war, and

[006-190]told the number of scalps they had respectively taken, or which had been

[006-191]taken by their nation. During the dance those engaged in it, as did others

[006-192]also, partook freely of unmixed rum, and by consequence of the natural

[006-193]excitement of the occasion, and the artificial excitement of the liquor

[006-194]the festival had well nigh turned out a tragedy. It happened that among

[006-195]the dancers was an [[oneida-nation|Oneida]] warrior, who in striking the post, boasted of

[006-196]the number of scalps taken by his nation during the war of the Revolution.

[006-197]Now the Oneidas, it will be recollected, had sustained the cause of the

[006-198]colonies in that contest, while the rest of the Iroquois confederacy, had

[006-199]espoused that of the crown. The boasting of the Oneida warrior therefore,

[006-200]was like striking a spark into a keg of powder. The ire of the Senecas was

[006-201]kindled in an instant, and they in turn boasted of the number of scalps

[006-202]taken from the Oneidas in that contest. They moreover taunted the Oneidas

[006-203]as cowards. Quick as lightning the hands of the latter were upon their

[006-204]weapons, and in turn the knives and tomahawks of the Senecas began to

[006-205]glitter in the moon-beams, as they were hastily drawn forth. For an

[006-206]instant it was a scene of anxious, almost breathless suspense, a deathstruggle seeming inevitable, when the storm was hushed by the

[006-207]interposition of Old Fish Carrier, who rushed forward, and striking the

[006-208]post with violence, exclaimed '*You are all a parcel of boys. When you

[006-209]have attained my age, and performed the warlike deeds that I have

[006-210]performed, you may boast of what you have done; but not till then.*'

[006-211]"Saying which he threw down the post, put an end to the dance, and caused

[006-212]the assembly to retire. This scene in its reality must have been one of

[006-213]absorbing and peculiar interest. An assembly of nearly two thousand

[006-214]inhabitants of the forest, grotesquely clad in skins and strouds, with

[006-215]shining ornaments of silver, and their coarse raven hair falling over

[006-216]their shoulders, and playing wildly in the wind as it swept past, sighing

[006-217]mournfully among the giant branches of the trees above, such a group

[006-218]gathered in a broad circle of an opening in the wilderness, the starry

[006-219]canopy of heaven glittering above them, the moon casting her silver mantle

[006-220]around their dusky forms, and a large fire blazing in the midst of them,

[006-221]before which they were working their spells, and performing their savage

[006-222]rites, must have presented a spectacle of long and vivid remembrance."

[006-223][Footnote: Stone's Life and Times of Sa-go-ye-wat-ha.]

[006-224]This meeting conducted with evident good feeling, served much to allay the

[006-225]excitement and anger of the Senecas, and other tribes there represented,

[006-226]but the question concerning their lands, was still agitated and created

[006-227]dissatisfaction.

[006-228]With a view to obtain some concession in their favor, Cornplanter, Half

[006-229]Town and [[big-tree|Big Tree]] visited Philadelphia, which was at that time the seat of

[006-230]the general government, very soon after the council at Tioga Point. They

[006-231]were especially anxious to obtain the restoration of a portion of land

[006-232]south of Lake Erie, and bordering upon Pennsylvania, which was occupied by

[006-233]Half Town and his clan. They represented it as the land on which Half Town

[006-234]and all his people live, with other chiefs who always have been, and still

[006-235]are dissatisfied with the treaty at Fort Stanwix. "They grew out of this

[006-236]land, and their fathers grew out of it, and they cannot be persuaded to

[006-237]part with it. *We therefore entreat you to restore to us this little

[006-238]piece.*"

[006-239]This appeal, so simple and touching, was responded to by President

[006-240]Washington with great kindness. He reminded them that the treaty at Fort

[006-241]Stanwix had been fully confirmed at Fort Harmar in 1789, that it was not

[006-242]within his province to annul the provisions of a treaty, especially one

[006-243]that had been concluded before his administration commenced, yet he

[006-244]assured them that Half Town and his people, should not be disturbed, in

[006-245]the peaceful occupancy of the land in question.

[006-246]From the friendly manner in which they were received and treated by the

[006-247]President, and the generous gifts bestowed, they returned home feeling

[006-248]satisfied that the ruler of the thirteen fires would do them no injustice,

[006-249]and they were hence better reconciled to the people he governed. Before

[006-250]leaving, however, they were engaged to go in company with [[colonel-proctor|Colonel Proctor]],

[006-251]of the Indian Department, on an embassy of peace to the hostile tribes at

[006-252]the West, which was undertaken in the following spring.

[006-253]On reaching their own country it was found that another outrage had been

[006-254]committed by a party of border-men, upon the Senecas at Beaver Creek, in

[006-255]the neighborhood of Pittsburg, in which three men and one woman were

[006-256]killed.

[006-257]Cornplanter immediately sent runners with a dispatch to the government,

[006-258]informing them of the event, and with the earnest inquiry, "Our father,

[006-259]and ruler over all mankind, *speak now and tell us, did you order those

[006-260]men to be killed*?"

[006-261]The secretary of war utterly disclaimed and denounced the transaction,

[006-262]promised them restitution, and that the offenders should be brought to

[006-263]justice. These times were so fruitful in difficulties, that ere one was

[006-264]healed another was created; yet our government by wise and prompt measures

[006-265]were after this successful, in securing peace with all of the Iroquois

[006-266]family within its borders.
