---
description: 'Treaty of Canandaigua — Relations with the United States'
id: ch08
label: 'Chapter VIII: Treaty of Canandaigua'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[008-001]Expedition to the Indian Country—[[george-washington|Washington]]'s charge to Gen. St. Clair—

[008-002]Approach to the Indian villages—Sudden surprise—Disasterous battle—

[008-003]Indian victory—Retreat of the Americans—Boldness of the Indians—

[008-004]Friendly Indian deputation—Welcome of the governor of Pennsylvania—Red

[008-005]Jacket's reply—Address of President Washington—Reply of [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]]—

[008-006]Cause of Indian hostilities.

[008-007]Indian hostilities still continued to destroy the peace and safety of our

[008-008]frontier settlements. And Congress with a view to provide relief, resolved

[008-009]to increase our military force, and place in the hands of the Executive,

[008-010]more ample means for their defense. A new expedition was therefore

[008-011]projected. General St. Clair, governor of the territory west of the Ohio,

[008-012]was appointed commander-in-chief of the forces to be employed.

[008-013]President Washington had been deeply pained by the disasters of General

[008-014]Harmar's expedition to the Wabash, resulting from Indian ambushes. In

[008-015]taking leave of his old military comrade, St. Clair, he wished him success

[008-016]and honor; at the same time to put him on his guard, said,—"You have your

[008-017]instructions from the secretary of war. I had a strict eye to them, and

[008-018]will add but one word—Beware of a surprise! You know how the Indians

[008-019]fight. I repeat it—*Beware of a surprise*!" With these warning words

[008-020]sounding in his ear, St. Clair departed. [Footnote: Irving's life of

[008-021]Washington.]

[008-022]On the seventh of September, 1791, General St. Clair set out for the

[008-023]Indian country. The American banner was unfurled and waved proudly over

[008-024]two thousand of her soldiers, as with sanguine hopes and bright

[008-025]anticipations, they took up their line of march for the Miami, designing

[008-026]to destroy the Indian villages on that river, expel the savages from the

[008-027]region, and by establishing a line of posts to the Ohio river, prevent the

[008-028]Indians from returning to a point, where they had been the occasion of

[008-029]great mischief. On their way they constructed two forts, Hamilton and

[008-030]Jefferson, and advanced but slowly, having to open for themselves a way

[008-031]through the forest. Too many of those composing this little army were

[008-032]deficient in soldier-like qualities. They had been recruited from the offscourings of large towns and cities, enervated by idleness, debauchery,

[008-033]and every species of vice, which unfitted them for the arduous service of

[008-034]Indian warfare. Hence insubordination, and frequent desertion, were among

[008-035]the difficulties encountered.

[008-036]Not until the third of November, did they come near the Indian villages on

[008-037]the Miami. On the evening of that day they selected a position on the bank

[008-038]of a creek, which favored their purpose, and bivouacked for the night.

[008-039]Their number, from desertion, and those left to garrison the forts,

[008-040]amounted to but fourteen hundred. The place of their encampment was

[008-041]surrounded by close woods, dense thickets, and the trunks of fallen trees,

[008-042]affording a fine cover for stealthy Indian warfare.

[008-043]It was the intention of St. Clair to throw up a slight work on the

[008-044]following day, and then move on to attack the Indian villages. The plan of

[008-045]this work he concerted in the evening with Major Ferguson, of the

[008-046]artillery. In the mean time, Colonel Oldham, an officer commanding the

[008-047]militia, was directed to send out that evening, two detachments, to

[008-048]explore the country and gain what knowledge they could of the enemy. The

[008-049]militia showed signs of insubordination, complained of being too much

[008-050]fatigued, and the order apparently could not be enforced. The militia were

[008-051]encamped beyond the stream, about a quarter of a mile in advance, on a

[008-052]high flat, a position much more favorable than was occupied by the main

[008-053]body. The placing of sentinels, about fifty paces from each other, formed

[008-054]their principal security against surprise.

[008-055]At an early hour the next morning, the woods about the camp of the

[008-056]militia, swarmed with Indians, and a terrific yell, followed by sharp

[008-057]reports of the deadly rifle, were startling sounds, in the ear of the

[008-058]newly recruited soldier. The militia returned a feeble fire, and

[008-059]immediately fled toward the main body of the army. They came rushing in,

[008-060]pell-mell and threw into disorder the front rank, drawn up in the order of

[008-061]battle. The Indians, still keeping up their frightful yell, followed hard

[008-062]after the militia, and would have entered the camp with them, but the

[008-063]sight of troops drawn up with fixed bayonets to receive them, checked

[008-064]their ardor, and stopping short they threw themselves behind logs and

[008-065]bushes, and poured in a deadly fire upon the first line, which was soon

[008-066]extended to the second. Our soldiers were mown down at a fearful rate.

[008-067]The Indians fought with great desperation. They charged upon the center of

[008-068]the two main divisions commanded by General Butler, and Colonel Darke with

[008-069]unexampled intrepidity. They aimed a destructive fire upon the

[008-070]artillerists from every direction, and swept them down by scores. The

[008-071]artillery if not very effective, was bravely served. A quantity of

[008-072]canister and some round shot were thrown in the direction whence the

[008-073]Indians fired; but concealed as they were, and seen only occasionally, as

[008-074]they sprang from one covert to another, it was impossible to direct the

[008-075]pieces to advantage; and so effective was the fire upon them, that every

[008-076]artillery officer, and more than two-thirds of the men, were killed or

[008-077]wounded.

[008-078]St. Clair, unable to mount his horse, was borne about on a litter, and in

[008-079]the midst of peril and disaster, gave his orders with coolness and

[008-080]judgment. Seeing to what disadvantage his troops fought with a concealed

[008-081]enemy, he ordered Colonel Darke, with his regiment of regulars, to rouse

[008-082]the Indians from their covert with the bayonet, and turn their left flank.

[008-083]This was executed with great spirit; the enemy were driven three or four

[008-084]hundred yards; but for want of cavalry or riflemen, the pursuit slackened,

[008-085]and the troops were forced to give back in turn, and the Indians came on

[008-086]with a deadlier aim, the moment pursuit was relinquished. Strenuous

[008-087]efforts were made by the officers, early in the engagement, to restore

[008-088]order, which resulted in making themselves a mark, and they were cut down

[008-089]by the quick-sighted enemy.

[008-090]All the officers of the Second regiment were cut off except three. The

[008-091]contest disastrous from the first, had now continued for more than two

[008-092]hours and a half. The loss of so many officers, and the hopeless condition

[008-093]of the army, the half of them killed, and the situation of the remainder

[008-094]desperate, brought discouragement to many a brave heart. It was useless to

[008-095]make further effort, which promised only a more fatal result. A retreat

[008-096]therefore was ordered, Colonel Darke being directed to charge the Indians

[008-097]that intercepted the way toward Fort Jefferson, and Major Clark with his

[008-098]battalion to cover the rear; these movements were successfully made, and

[008-099]the most of the troops that remained collected in a body, with such of the

[008-100]wounded as could possibly hobble along with them; thus they departed,

[008-101]leaving their artillery and baggage.

[008-102]The retreat, though disorderly, was accomplished without difficulty, as

[008-103]the Indians did not pursue them far, from a desire to return for plunder.

[008-104]Yet the entire way, for near thirty miles, the distance to Fort Jefferson,

[008-105]bore the marks of a trepidation that seemed to characterize the entire

[008-106]engagement. The soldiers continued to throw away their guns, knapsacks, or

[008-107]whatever else impeded their flight, even when at a wide remove from all

[008-108]danger.

[008-109]The army reduced by killed, wounded and desertion to about one-half its

[008-110]original number, fell back upon Fort Washington, the point of starting,

[008-111]and thus unfortunately closed a campaign, concerning which the highest

[008-112]expectations had been entertained. It was a heavy blow upon our infant

[008-113]republic, and spread over our country a gloom, which was greatly deepened

[008-114]by a sorrow for the loss of many worthy and brave men, who though they

[008-115]freely sacrificed their lives, could not avert these disasters.

[008-116]The Indians, on account of this further victory, were elated beyond

[008-117]endurance, and conducted more haughtily than ever before. Their incursions

[008-118]were more frequent, their depredations more extensive, and their cruelties

[008-119]more excessive. The frontier inhabitants, especially of Pennsylvania, and

[008-120]Kentucky, never felt more insecure, and were never more exposed to loss of

[008-121]life, plunder and burning. In some instances whole settlements were broken

[008-122]up, by those who left their homes and sought, in the more densely peopled

[008-123]sections of the east, places of greater security.

[008-124]These circumstances served to impart a deeper interest to the visit of a

[008-125]friendly deputation, consisting of about fifty chiefs of the Iroquois, who

[008-126]came to [[philadelphia|Philadelphia]] early in the spring of 1792, in compliance with the

[008-127]request of [[timothy-pickering|Colonel Pickering]] made at Painted Post the preceding year. Red

[008-128]Jacket was a prominent member of this delegation.

[008-129]Their presence had been solicited, with the view of calling the attention

[008-130]of the leading chiefs, to thoughts and efforts for the improvement of

[008-131]their race; as well as by kind and generous treatment, to bring them into

[008-132]firmer alliance with the United States. And it is a pleasing thought that

[008-133]amid the wrongs done to the Indian, we are able to point to earnest and

[008-134]well intended endeavors, on the part of our government, to promote his

[008-135]welfare.

[008-136]The governor of Pennsylvania cordially welcomed this deputation,

[008-137]representing the happiness their coming had created, and assuring them

[008-138]that every provision had been made, to render their stay agreeable,

[008-139]closing his remarks in these words:

[008-140]"Brothers: I know the kindness with which you treat strangers that visit

[008-141]your country; and it is my sincere wish, that when you return to your

[008-142]families, you may be able to assure them, that the virtues of friendship

[008-143]and hospitality, are also practiced by the citizens of Pennsylvania."

[008-144]To this welcome Red Jacket, a few days afterward replied, apologizing for

[008-145]not answering it sooner, and expressing the pleasure it afforded them, of

[008-146]meeting in a place where their forefathers in times past, had been wont to

[008-147]greet each other in peace and friendship, and declaring it as his wish,

[008-148]that the same happy relations might be established, and exist between the

[008-149]United States and all of the Indian tribes.

[008-150]His remarks on peace were introduced by a beautiful reference to a picture

[008-151]of Penn's treaty with the Indians, and an enconium on the governors of

[008-152]Pennsylvania for their uniformly peaceable disposition.

[008-153]It has been said of him as having occurred at a subsequent visit to the

[008-154]seat of our government, that when shown in the rotunda of the capitol, a

[008-155]panel representing, in sculpture, the first landing of the Pilgrims, with

[008-156]an Indian chief presenting them an ear of corn, in token of a friendly

[008-157]welcome, he exclaimed,—"*That was good.—The Indian knew they came from

[008-158]the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]], and he was willing to share the soil with his

[008-159]brothers.*"

[008-160]When another panel was pointed out to him representing Penn's treaty,—he

[008-161]exclaimed sadly,—"*Ah! all's gone now.*" [Footnote: Drake's Book of

[008-162]the Indians.]

[008-163]The Indians were again addressed by President Washington, who gave them a

[008-164]hearty welcome to the seat of government, declaring that they had been

[008-165]invited by his special request, to remove all causes of discontent, devise

[008-166]plans for their welfare, and cement a firm peace. He wished them to

[008-167]partake of all the comforts of the earth to be derived from civilized

[008-168]life, to be enriched by industry, virtue and knowledge, and transmit these

[008-169]invaluable blessings to their children.

[008-170]The western Indians had charged the United States with an unjust

[008-171]possession of their lands. They desired no lands, he said, but such as had

[008-172]been fairly obtained by treaty, and he hoped the error might be corrected.

[008-173]For the further explanation of his views and wishes, he commended them to

[008-174]General Knox, the secretary of war, and Colonel Pickering; concluding his

[008-175]address with these words:—

[008-176]"As an evidence of the sincerity of the desire of the United States for

[008-177]perfect peace, and friendship with you, I deliver you this white belt of

[008-178]wampum, which I request you will safely keep."

[008-179]The president having thus appointed Colonel Pickering and General Knox, to

[008-180]attend to the further conferences with the Indians, Red Jacket's reply to

[008-181]the president's address, was made to them. His address was directed mainly

[008-182]to Colonel Pickering.

[008-183]Taking in his hand the belt presented by President Washington, he spoke

[008-184]very much as follows:

[008-185]"Your attention is now called to the words of the American Chief, when,

[008-186]the other day he welcomed us to the [[council-fire|great council fire]] of the thirteen

[008-187]United States. He said it was from his very heart; and that it gave him

[008-188]pleasure to look around and see so large a representation of the Five

[008-189]Nations of Indians. That it was at his special request we had been invited

[008-190]to the seat of the general government, with a view to promote the

[008-191]happiness of our nation, in a friendly connection with the United States.

[008-192]He said also that his love of peace did not terminate with the Five

[008-193]Nations, but extended to all the nations at the setting sun, and it was

[008-194]his desire that universal peace might prevail in this land.

[008-195]"What can we, your brothers of the [[iroquois-confederacy|Five Nations]], say in reply to this part

[008-196]of his speech, other than to thank him, and say it has given a spring to

[008-197]every passion of our souls.

[008-198]"The sentiment of your chief, who wishes our minds might all be disposed

[008-199]to peace,—a happy peace, so firm that nothing shall move it,—that it may

[008-200]be founded on a rock,—this comparison of the peace to a *rock, which is

[008-201]immovable*, has given joy to our hearts.

[008-202]"The president observed also, that by our continuing in the path of peace,

[008-203]and listening to his counsel, we might share with you all the blessings of

[008-204]civilized life; this meets with our approbation, and he has the thanks of

[008-205]all your brothers of the Five Nations.

[008-206]"And further, that if we attended to his counsel in this matter, our

[008-207]children and children's children, might partake of all the blessings which

[008-208]should rise out of this earth.

[008-209]"The president observed again, that what he had spoken was in the

[008-210]sincerity of his heart, and that time and opportunity would give evidence

[008-211]that what he said was true. And we believe it because the words came from

[008-212]his own lips, and they are lodged deep in our minds.

[008-213]"He said also that it had come to his ears that the cause of the

[008-214]hostilities of the western Indians, was their persuasion that the United

[008-215]States had unjustly taken their lands. But he assured us this was not the

[008-216]case; that none of his chiefs desired to take any of their land, without

[008-217]agreeing for it; and that the land, given up at the treaty at Muskingum,

[008-218]he concluded had been fairly obtained.

[008-219]"He said to us that in his opinion the hostile Indians were in error, that

[008-220]whatever evil spirit, or lies had turned them aside, he wished could be

[008-221]discovered, that they might be removed. He had a strong wish that any

[008-222]obstacles to the extension of peace westward, might be discovered, so that

[008-223]they might be removed.

[008-224]"In conclusion he observed that our professions of friendship and regard,

[008-225]were commonly witnessed by some token; therefore in the name of the United

[008-226]States, he presented us with this white belt, which was to be handed down

[008-227]from one generation to another, in confirmation of his words, and as a

[008-228]witness of the friendly disposition of the United States, towards the

[008-229]peace and happiness of the five confederated nations."

[008-230]Red Jacket here laid down the white belt presented by the president, and

[008-231]taking up a belt of their own, continued his speech as follows:

[008-232]"Now let the president of the United States possess his mind in peace. Our

[008-233]reply to his address to us the other day has been brief, for the belt he

[008-234]gave us is deposited with us, and we have taken firm hold of it. We return

[008-235]our united thanks for his address, in welcoming us to the seat of the

[008-236]great council, and for the advice he has given us.

[008-237]"We have additional pleasure in knowing that you, Con-neh-sauty [Footnote:

[008-238]Col. Pickering.] are appointed to assist us, in devising the means to

[008-239]promote and secure the happiness of the Six Nations.

[008-240]"Now open your ears, Representatives of the Great Council, Hear the words

[008-241]we speak. All present of the Great Council, [Footnote: Referring to

[008-242]members of Congress present.] and our brethren of the Five Nations, hear!

[008-243]We consider ourselves in the presence of the Great Spirit, the proprietor

[008-244]of us all.

[008-245]"The president has in effect told us we are freemen, the sole proprietors

[008-246]of the soil on which we live. This has gladdened our hearts, and removed a

[008-247]weight that was upon them. This indeed is to us an occasion of joy, for

[008-248]how can two brothers speak freely together, unless they feel they are upon

[008-249]equal ground?

[008-250]"We now speak freely, as they are free from pressure, and we join with the

[008-251]president in his wish, that all the evils which have hitherto disturbed

[008-252]our peace, may be buried in oblivion. This is the sincere wish of our

[008-253]hearts.

[008-254]"Now, Brother, continue to hear, let all present open their ears, while

[008-255]those of the Five Nations here present speak *with one voice*. We wish

[008-256]to see your words verified to our children, and children's children. You

[008-257]enjoy all the blessings of this life; to you therefore we look to make

[008-258]provision, that the same may be enjoyed by our children. This wish comes

[008-259]from our heart, but we add that our happiness cannot be great if, in the

[008-260]introduction of your ways, we are put under too much constraint.

[008-261]"Continue to hear. We, your brothers of the Five Nations, believe that the

[008-262]Great Spirit let this island [Footnote: The Indians use the term *island*,

[008-263]in speaking of this continent.] drop down from above. We also believe in

[008-264]his superintendency over this whole island. He gives peace and prosperity,

[008-265]he also sends evil. Prosperity has been yours. American brethren, all the

[008-266]good which can spring out of this island, you enjoy. We wish, therefore,

[008-267]that we and our children, and our children's children, may partake with

[008-268]you of that enjoyment.

[008-269]"I observe that the Great Spirit might smile on one people, and frown on

[008-270]another. This you have seen, who are of one color, and one blood. The king

[008-271]of England, and you Americans strove to advance your happiness by

[008-272]extending your possessions on this island, which produces so many good

[008-273]things. And while you two great powers were contending for those good

[008-274]things, by which the whole island was shaken, violently agitated, is it

[008-275]strange that our peace, the peace of the Five Nations, was shaken and

[008-276]overthrown?

[008-277]"But I will say no more of the trembling of this island. All in a measure

[008-278]is now quiet. Peace is restored. Our peace, the peace of the Five Nations

[008-279]is beginning to bud forth. But still there is some shaking among our

[008-280]brethren at the Setting Sun; and you, of the thirteen fires, and the king

[008-281]of England know what is our situation and the cause of this disturbance.

[008-282]Here now, you have an ambassador, [Footnote: Referring to the British

[008-283]envoy to the United States.] as we are informed from the king of England.

[008-284]Let him in behalf of the king, and the Americans, adjust all their

[008-285]matters, according to their agreement, at the making of peace—and then

[008-286]you will soon see all things settled among the Indian nations. Peace will

[008-287]extend far and near. Let the president and the ambassador use all their

[008-288]exertions to bring about this settlement, according to the peace, and it

[008-289]will make us all glad, and we shall consider both as our real friends.

[008-290]"Brother: Continue to hear! Be assured we have spoken not from our lips

[008-291]only, but from our very hearts. Allow us then to say: That when you

[008-292]Americans and the king made peace, he did not mention us, showed us no

[008-293]compassion, notwithstanding all he said to us, and all we had suffered.

[008-294]This has been the occasion to us, the Five Nations, of great loss, sorrow

[008-295]and pain. When you and he settled the peace between you two great nations,

[008-296]he never asked for a delegation from us, to attend to our interests. Had

[008-297]this been done, a settlement of peace among all the western nations might

[008-298]have been effected. But neglecting this, and passing us by unnoticed, has

[008-299]brought upon us great pain and trouble.

[008-300]"It is evident that we of the Five Nations have suffered much in

[008-301]consequence of the strife between you and the king of England, who are of

[008-302]one color and of one blood. But our chain of peace has been broken. Peace

[008-303]and friendship have been driven from us. Yet you Americans were determined

[008-304]not to treat us in the same manner as we have been treated by the king of

[008-305]England. You therefore desired us at the re-establishment of peace, to sit

[008-306]down at our ancient fireplaces, and again enjoy our lands. And had the

[008-307]peace between you and the king of England been completely accomplished, it

[008-308]would long before this have extended far beyond the Five Nations.

[008-309]"BROTHER CON-NEH-SAUTY: We have rejoiced in your appointment, for you are

[008-310]specially appointed with General Knox, to confer with us on our peace and

[008-311]happiness. We hope the great warrior will remember, that though a

[008-312]*warrior*, he is to converse with us about *peace*; letting what concerns

[008-313]war sleep; and the counselling part of his mind, while acting with us, be

[008-314]of *peace*.

[008-315]"Have patience, and continue to listen. The president has assured us that

[008-316]he is not the cause of the hostilities now existing at the westward, but

[008-317]laments it. Brother, we wish you to point out to us of the Five Nations,

[008-318]*what you think is the real cause*.

[008-319]"We now publicly return our thanks to the president, and all the

[008-320]counsellors of the thirteen United States, for the words he has spoken to

[008-321]us. They were good, unqualifiedly good. Shall we observe that he wished

[008-322]that if the errors of the hostile Indians could be discovered, he would

[008-323]use his utmost exertions to remove them?

[008-324]"BROTHER! You and the king of England are the two governing powers of this

[008-325]island. What are we? You both arc important and proud; and you cannot

[008-326]adjust your own affairs agreeably to your declarations of peace. Therefore

[008-327]the western Indians are bewildered. One says one thing to them, and

[008-328]another says another. Were these things adjusted, it would be easy to

[008-329]diffuse peace everywhere.

[008-330]"In confirmation of our words, we give this belt, which we wish the

[008-331]president to hold fast, in remembrance of what we have now spoken."

[008-332][Footnote: This speech, given by Col. Stone from a manuscript of J. W.

[008-333]Moulton, Esq., on account of its importance, is presented almost entire. A

[008-334]few changes have been made, but the ideas of the orator, and the language

[008-335]mostly in which they are given, have been strictly maintained, while the

[008-336]changes are no greater than would have been made, had two reporters taken

[008-337]the words as they came from the lips of the orator.]

[008-338]A very touching reference is made in this speech, to the manner in which

[008-339]the Indians had been treated by Great Britain, when peace was concluded

[008-340]with the United States. Notwithstanding the promises and high expectations

[008-341]held out to them, at the commencement of the war, and their sacrifices and

[008-342]services during its continuance, no notice was taken, no mention made of

[008-343]them in the treaty of peace. In the expressive language of Red Jacket,

[008-344]"*the king showed them no compassion*." They had for years fought side

[008-345]by side with the soldiers of Britain, they had, with stealthy tread, come

[008-346]down upon our settlements far removed from the seat of war, surprised

[008-347]peaceful inhabitants, slain defenseless women and children, plundered and

[008-348]burned their dwellings, and wrought in the hearts of the American people a

[008-349]sense of wrong, that cried for redress. What could be their position, now

[008-350]that the armies of Britain are withdrawn? The armies of Britain defeated,

[008-351]could they, single handed, cope with the American army? These were

[008-352]questions that weighed deeply on their minds. Did they expect the hand of

[008-353]friendship to be extended toward them? To be invited to councils of peace,

[008-354]—to the intimacies, hospitalities, and kindly feeling manifested on this

[008-355]occasion? The orator was deeply impressed by it, and notes the contrast

[008-356]apparent in the conduct toward them, of Britain and America. "*You

[008-357]Americans were determined not to treat us in the same manner, as we had

[008-358]been treated by the king of England. You desired us at the reestablishment of peace, to sit down at our ancient fire-places, and again

[008-359]enjoy our lands*." He further very significantly refers to the occasion of

[008-360]the hostile feelings among the Indians at the West. It was because the

[008-361]peace between England and America "*had not been fully accomplished*." In

[008-362]other words, hostile feelings were still cherished, and their *outward

[008-363]manifestation* could be seen, in the plundering and massacres, still

[008-364]carried on among our frontier settlements. The establishment of a *true

[008-365]peace* between the two countries,—the existence and cultivation of

[008-366]genuine amicable relations between them, would, in his view, end all this

[008-367]trouble, and "*diffuse peace everywhere*."

[008-368]We have already had occasion to notice the unfriendly feeling, cherished

[008-369]by the [[british-indian-department|British Indian Department]] in [[canada|Canada]], toward the United States; and

[008-370]evidence will be afforded further on, of their being deeply implicated in

[008-371]the hostilities endured, coming from the Indians on our western border.
