---
description: 'Religious controversies — Missionary efforts among the Senecas'
id: ch10
label: 'Chapter X: Religious Controversies'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[010-001][[canandaigua|Canandaigua]] at an early day—Facts in the early settlement of Bloomfield—

[010-002]Indian Council—Its object—Indian parade—Indian dress—Opening of

[010-003]Council—Speeches—Liberal offers of the government—Mr. Savary's Journal

[010-004]—Treaty concluded—Account of [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]] by [[thomas-morris|Thomas Morris]].

[010-005]Canandaigua at an early day was the objective point for all who were

[010-006]seeking what was called the [[genesee-river|Genesee country]]. It was at the head of

[010-007]navigation. Parties coming from the east could transport their goods by

[010-008]water from Long Island Sound to Canandaigua, with the exception of one or

[010-009]two carrying places, where they were taken by land.

[010-010]We can hardly realize that at that time there was here a widely extended

[010-011]forest, in all its loneliness and grandeur. Its first trees were cut down

[010-012]in the fall of 1788, soon after Mr. Phelps had concluded his treaty of

[010-013]purchase with the Indians. By means of them a log store-house was

[010-014]constructed, near the outlet of the lake. The family of a Mr. Joseph Smith

[010-015]took possession of it in the spring of 1789. Judge J. H. Jones, who in the

[010-016]fall of 1788, was one of a party to open a road between Geneva and

[010-017]Canandaigua, witnessed, on revisiting the latter place in 1789, a great

[010-018]change.

[010-019]"When we left," he says, "in the fall of '88, there was not a solitary

[010-020]person there;—when I returned fourteen months afterwards, the place was

[010-021]full of people; residents, surveyors, explorers, adventurers; houses were

[010-022]going up; it was a thriving, busy place." During the following year quite

[010-023]a nucleus for a town had gathered here. In 1794, Mrs. Sanborne, an

[010-024]enterprising landlady, whose eye kindled with the recollection of those

[010-025]days, served up in a tea saucer the first currants produced in the Genesee

[010-026]country. [Footnote: Conversation of the author with Mrs. Sanborne.]

[010-027]Canandaigua at that time and for many years after was head-quarters for

[010-028]all who were making their way into what at that time was called the Indian

[010-029]country, and from the respectability and enterprise of its early

[010-030]inhabitants, it became attractive as a place of residence.

[010-031]But though considerable improvements had been made here, the entire region

[010-032]was new, romantic and wild. Such was its condition at the time of the

[010-033]great Indian council that convened here in the autumn of 1794. Indians and

[010-034]deer, and wolves, and bear were very abundant and were mingled with the

[010-035]early associations of those who contributed to make this an abode of

[010-036]elevation and refinement. The cow-boy, often startled while on his way by

[010-037]the appearance of a bear, went timidly forth on his evening errand,

[010-038]inspired with courage by the thought that he might, for his protection,

[010-039]shoulder a gun. Bear incidents, narrow escapes from fighting with bears,

[010-040]and bear stories of every description, entered largely into the staple of

[010-041]their conversation, and many an evening's hour was thus beguiled away,

[010-042]around the huge and brightly blazing fire of the early pioneer.

[010-043]"Did you hear," said a Mrs. Chapman to a Mrs. Parks, how neighbor Codding

[010-044]came near being killed yesterday?

[010-045]"Mercy! no. How did it happen?

[010-046]"Mr. Codding was in the woods splitting rails, and just as he was turning

[010-047]around to take up his axe to cut a sliver, don't you believe he saw a

[010-048]great bear sitting up on his hind legs, and holding out both fore paws

[010-049]ready to grab him."

[010-050]"Mercy on us! What did he do?

[010-051]"What did he do? He took up his axe, and instead of cutting the sliver,

[010-052]cut into the old bear's head. But the axe glanced and only cut into the

[010-053]flesh, without killing the bear, and he ran away with the axe sticking

[010-054]fast in the wound.

[010-055]"Awful! Awful! How thick the bears are getting to be! Husband says they

[010-056]have killed off most all of our hogs.

[010-057]"Your hogs! Just think once, there was a great bear came the other night

[010-058]and got hold of a hog in Asahel Sprague's hog-pen, and would have killed

[010-059]him, if Mr. Sprague hadn't shot the old fellow.

[010-060]"Yes, and last summer when Mr. Sperry was gone off to training, there was

[010-061]a bear came in the day time and tackled one of their hogs right in their

[010-062]own door yard; but Mrs. Sperry and the children screamed so awfully, and

[010-063]gave him such a tremendous clubbing, he was glad to put off into the woods

[010-064]again.

[010-065]"Ha! Ha! She was about up to Jim Parker, who broke a bear's back with a

[010-066]hand-spike in driving him out of his corn field, just as he was climbing

[010-067]over the fence." [Footnote: Facts which transpired in the early history of

[010-068]Bloomfield. See Turner's History.]

[010-069]Wolves were equally if not more numerous, destroying in some instances

[010-070]entire flocks of sheep, so that there was not a farmer in the region who

[010-071]did not suffer more or less from their depredations.

[010-072]It was something of an off-set to these annoyances that deer were very

[010-073]abundant, and furnished the inhabitants with an ample supply of their

[010-074]delicious meat. The Indians while assembled here during the council, often

[010-075]killed more than a hundred of them in a single day.

[010-076]The object of convening this council was to settle difficulties of long

[010-077]standing, and quiet the minds of the Iroquois, who were much disturbed by

[010-078]the warlike spirit prevailing at this time among the Indians at the West.

[010-079]The influences from this source were of such a nature as to render many

[010-080]among these friendly tribes exceedingly bold. In some instances on

[010-081]entering the houses of settlers they would manifest a very haughty temper,

[010-082]and rudely demand a supply of their wants as though they were still

[010-083]proprietors and lords of the soil, and the settlers only their servants or

[010-084]tenants.

[010-085]The settlers themselves began to feel unpleasantly about their position.

[010-086]During the spring of this same year while Thomas Morris was painting his

[010-087]house, erected the previous summer, and making other improvements around

[010-088]it, indicating his design of having a permanent and inviting home, it so

[010-089]happened that a company of settlers in passing by, paused to view with

[010-090]astonishment what was going on. From a feeling of insecurity they had just

[010-091]abandoned their new locations in this region, and had come thus far on

[010-092]their way, having resolved to return to the more safe and quiet homes they

[010-093]had left at the east. But beholding the enterprise of Mr. Morris, and the

[010-094]business and thrift that prevailed here on every side, they inferred that

[010-095]their situation could not be so very precarious, and wisely concluded to

[010-096]return and carry forward the improvements commenced by themselves.

[010-097]The Indian council, held during the months of October and November, had

[010-098]been appointed before the victory of General Wayne, noticed in the

[010-099]preceding chapter, had transpired. This had much to do in giving a

[010-100]favorable turn to the proceedings, and of securing those pacific relations

[010-101]with the Iroquois, that were then established. Before this these tribes

[010-102]and the Indians generally were stimulated with the idea that they might

[010-103]form and maintain in the North-west an independent nationality, that would

[010-104]reflect once more the pride and glory of the ancient dominion of the

[010-105]Iroquois. But when the news of this signal victory was circulated among

[010-106]them, their spirits were humbled and broken. They seemed to relinquish

[010-107]this dream of greatness, and gave themselves up to the stern demands of an

[010-108]evident necessity. This sad intelligence, however, did not reach them

[010-109]until the council had been for several days in progress. Its first opening

[010-110]was darkened by no cloud of evil. There was nothing to hinder the exercise

[010-111]of that proud bearing with which their past greatness, and a hopeful

[010-112]future inspired them.

[010-113]They began to assemble by the arrival of the [[oneida-nation|Oneidas]] on the eleventh of

[010-114]October. The [[onondaga-nation|Onondagas]], [[cayuga-nation|Cayugas]], and a part of the [[seneca-nation|Senecas]], led by

[010-115][[farmer-s-brother|Farmer's Brother]], came in on the fourteenth. [[cornplanter|Cornplanter]] at the head of

[010-116]the Allegany clan of Senecas arrived on the sixteenth, and Red Jacket with

[010-117]his, on the eighteenth.

[010-118]On assembling, a degree of dignity and decorum was manifested, which

[010-119]served to indicate their ideas of the forms and proprieties due to the

[010-120]occasion. Before reaching the [[council-fire|council fire]] the chiefs and warriors halted,

[010-121]carefully decorated themselves after their manner, and then marched to

[010-122]meet those appointed to confer with them on the part of the government,

[010-123]and after passing around and encircling them, with the train, the leader

[010-124]stepped forth, formally announced their arrival in obedience to the

[010-125]summons they had received, at the same time delivering the belt brought by

[010-126]the messenger sent to call them together.

[010-127]The next tribe that came, halted and prepared themselves as the others,

[010-128]were received by the tribe or tribes already on the ground, who also

[010-129]arrayed themselves in their uniform, and having received their welcome,

[010-130]salutes being fired and returned, they marched all together and formed in

[010-131]a circle around the commissioners, when the same ceremony was observed, as

[010-132]before, of delivering the belt. They proceeded thus until all the Indians

[010-133]had assembled to the number of about sixteen hundred.

[010-134]It was an occasion for the display of Indian pageantry, and though it may

[010-135]have been more rude than among nations calling themselves civilized, it

[010-136]was the same in its essential elements, and this council was ushered in

[010-137]with as true a military spirit as though banners had been flying, bayonets

[010-138]gleaming, and soldiers marching to the liveliest, or most heart-stirring

[010-139]sounds of music.

[010-140]The uniform of the Indian was not as the dress of the European,

[010-141]ornamented, epauletted, tinselled; it was a more simple, less expensive,

[010-142]but not a less time honored mode of adorning his person. Though his

[010-143]military coat was of paint of different colors with which he was striped

[010-144]in a distinguishing manner, he regarded it no doubt as gorgeous and gay.

[010-145]Instead of the gracefully waving plume he was bedecked with the feathers

[010-146]of the kingly eagle; beads and shells served in the place of military

[010-147]buttons; and his trophies in the chase, and in war, he regarded as forming

[010-148]a prouder sash than the richest scarf of scarlet or of blue.

[010-149]Canandaigua, in years gone by, has often witnessed scenes of proud

[010-150]military display. But never will there be witnessed so grotesque, and in

[010-151]many respects so imposing a parade as appeared on this occasion. The

[010-152]neighboring forest swarmed with life, and resounded with the wild yell and

[010-153]deafening war-whoop of the Indian. It was his gala day, and highly fitting

[010-154]that before surrendering these grounds forever to the dominion and usages

[010-155]of another race, he should come forth once more from his native wilds, and

[010-156]depart in the fullness of his strength, as the sun passing from under a

[010-157]cloud, sheds his full glory over the earth before sinking beneath the

[010-158]western horizon. This was his last day of pride on ground hallowed in the

[010-159]memories of the past.

[010-160]The occasion called forth an unusual attendance. It was known that Colonel

[010-161][[timothy-pickering|Pickering]] who had been appointed to hold this treaty, would come prepared

[010-162]to give them a grand feast, and distribute among them a large amount of

[010-163]money and of clothing. Hence they all came. "For weeks before the treaty,

[010-164]they were arriving in squads from all their villages, and constructing

[010-165]their camps in the woods, upon the lake shore, and around the court-house

[010-166]square. The little village of whites was invested, overrun with the wild

[010-167]natives. It seemed as if they had deserted all their villages, and

[010-168]transferred even their old men, women and children to the feast, the

[010-169]carousal, and the place of gifts. The night scenes were wild and

[010-170]picturesque; their camp fires lighting up the forest, and their whoops and

[010-171]yells creating a sensation of novelty not unmingled with fear, with the

[010-172]far inferior in numbers who composed the citizens of the pioneer village

[010-173]and the sojourners of their own race." [Footnote: History of the Phelps

[010-174]and Gorham Purchase.]

[010-175]The council was formally opened on the eighteenth of October, by a speech

[010-176]of condolence on the part of the Oneidas and Onondagas, to the Senecas,

[010-177]Cayugas, [[tuscarora-nation|Tuscaroras]] and Delawares, some of whom were present, on account

[010-178]of the death of a number of their chiefs since the last meeting.—It was

[010-179]with a view to "*wipe away their tears,—brighten their faces, and clear

[010-180]their throats*,"—that they might speak freely at the council fire.

[010-181]Red Jacket in reply made a very sympathetic, and as it was regarded at the

[010-182]time, beautiful address, presenting belts and strings of wampum to

[010-183]"*unite each to the other as the heart of one man*."

[010-184]Next was given a speech of congratulation by Colonel Pickering, who

[010-185]appointed a council of condolence on the following Monday for the

[010-186]Delawares, who were mourning for a young brother killed by a white man.

[010-187]The ceremony of burying the dead,—covering the grave with leaves to

[010-188]obscure it from sight,—of burying the hatchet taken from the head of the

[010-189]victim, thus representing his death by violence,—of covering it with

[010-190]stones and pulling up and planting over it a pine tree, so that in after

[010-191]years it should never be disturbed; of wiping the blood from the head of

[010-192]the victim, and tears from the eyes of the mourners,—these things

[010-193]represented by speech and action having been performed, the council was

[010-194]opened in earnest on the day following.

[010-195]In reply to Colonel Pickering's remarks of the preceding day respecting

[010-196]peace, and upon keeping the chain of friendship bright, Fish Carrier, an

[010-197]aged and influential chief, in a speech of some length recounted the

[010-198]history of the whites and of their intercourse with the red men from their

[010-199]first settlement in this country. He referred to the manner in which they

[010-200]had been received, to the friendship, that had existed before the

[010-201]controversy of the United States with Great Britain, and to the

[010-202]negotiations that had taken place since that time, the grievances they had

[010-203]suffered, dwelling particularly upon the dissatisfaction still existing

[010-204]among them about the treaty at [[fort-stanwix|Fort Stanwix]] in 1784. "The commissioners

[010-205]were too grasping, they demanded of us too much." But as they had taken

[010-206]hold of the chain of friendship with the fifteen fires they were disposed

[010-207]to hold fast; but he thought it needed brightening up a little.

[010-208]Colonel Pickering in reply to them said they ought not to think very hard

[010-209]of them about that treaty, for they had just come out of a long and bloody

[010-210]war, and as they had been victorious the [[iroquois-confederacy|Six Nations]] ought not to blame

[010-211]them for feeling a little proud; and they ought not to be surprised, in

[010-212]view of what had taken place during the war, if the commissioners were

[010-213]somewhat severe.

[010-214]A deputation from the [[society-of-friends-seneca|Quakers]] was present at this council, and their

[010-215]address being read and interpreted, was received by the Indians with much

[010-216]satisfaction.

[010-217]At the opening of the council the next day, a request was presented by

[010-218]some of the Indian women, who desired that their views might be heard; and

[010-219]permission being granted, Red Jacket spake in their behalf.

[010-220]He represented that the women had taken a deep interest in everything

[010-221]pertaining to the wellfare of their nation; and he requested the [[sachem-chieftainship|sachems]]

[010-222]and warriors, as well as the commissioner, to give an attentive

[010-223]consideration to the views of those he had been chosen to represent. They

[010-224]had attended upon the council, had listened to all that had been said, and

[010-225]they desired it to be understood that their views were in accordance with

[010-226]those of their sachems and chiefs. They felt that the white people had

[010-227]caused them a great deal of suffering. The white people had pressed and

[010-228]squeezed them together until their hearts were greatly pained, and they

[010-229]thought the white people ought to give back all their lands. A white woman

[010-230]had told the Indians to repent; [Footnote: Referring to Jemima Wilkinson.]

[010-231]they wished in turn to call upon the white people to repent; they needed

[010-232]to repent as much as the Indians; and they hoped the white people would

[010-233]repent and not wrong the Indians any more.

[010-234]The commissioner thanked them for their speech, saying he had a high

[010-235]respect for the women, and would be happy to hear from them whenever they

[010-236]had anything to say.

[010-237]After several days had passed without coming to anything decisive in

[010-238]regard to the main object of the council; Colonel Pickering called their

[010-239]attention to the fact of their grievances, saying they had been together

[010-240]sometime and talked them over and had found but two rusty places in the

[010-241]chain of friendship, one of which they had already brightened. But the

[010-242]other spot they thought was too deep to be cleared up. It related to their

[010-243]lands. He then showed them maps which clearly pointed out the limits

[010-244]agreed upon in their treaties, and by a distinct statement of the

[010-245]negotiations and treaties that had been made at different times with them,

[010-246]and afterward confirmed, proving that the claims of the United States were

[010-247]just, he declared himself ready to stipulate concerning their grievances,

[010-248]that they should still have the privilege of hunting upon the lands they

[010-249]had ceded, and that their settlements thereon should remain undisturbed.

[010-250]He further assured them that the United States would increase their

[010-251][[treaty-annuities|annuity]] from fifteen hundred to four thousand five hundred dollars, to say

[010-252]nothing about the presents he had brought them amounting to ten thousand

[010-253]dollars. These he would distribute in case of a favorable termination of

[010-254]their council. He hoped in view of these liberal offers they would dismiss

[010-255]their complaints, bury the hatchet deep and take hold of the chain of

[010-256]friendship so firmly as never again to have it torn from their grasp.

[010-257]The Indians appeared to be pleased with these offers, and promising to

[010-258]regard them favorably, spent several days in deliberating among

[010-259]themselves, inviting to their councils the Quakers, a deputation of whom,

[010-260]as we remarked were present. William Savary, one of their number made the

[010-261]following interesting note of his observations at the time.—

[010-262]"Oct. 30. After dinner John Parrish and myself rode to view the Farmer's

[010-263]Brother's encampment which contained about five hundred Indians. They are

[010-264]located by the side of a brook in the woods: having built about seventy or

[010-265]eighty huts, by far the most commodious and ingeniously made of any I have

[010-266]seen. The principal materials are bark, and boughs of trees, so nicely put

[010-267]together as to keep the family dry and warm. The women as well as the men

[010-268]appeared to be mostly employed. In this camp there are a large number of

[010-269]pretty children, who in all the activity and buoyancy of health, were

[010-270]diverting themselves according to their fancy. The vast number of deer

[010-271]they have killed, since coming here, which they cut up and hang round

[010-272]their huts inside and out to dry, together with the rations of beef, which

[010-273]they draw daily, give the appearance of plenty to supply the few wants to

[010-274]which they are subjected. The ease and cheerfulness of every countenance,

[010-275]and the delightfulness of the afternoon, which the inhabitants of the

[010-276]woods seemed to enjoy with a relish far superior to those who are pent up

[010-277]in crowded and populous cities, all combined to make this the most

[010-278]pleasant visit I have yet made to the Indians; and induced me to believe

[010-279]that before they became acquainted with the white people, and were

[010-280]infected with their vices, they must have been as happy a people as any in

[010-281]the world. In returning to our quarters we passed by the Indian council,

[010-282]where Red Jacket was displaying his [[iroquois-oratory|oratory]] to his brother chiefs on the

[010-283]subject of Colonel Pickering's proposals."

[010-284]Mr. Savary again observes:—"Red Jacket visited us with his wife and five

[010-285]children, whom he had brought to see us. They were exceedingly well clad,

[010-286]in their manner, and the best behaved and prettiest Indian children I have

[010-287]ever met with." [Footnote: As quoted by Col. Stone.]

[010-288]Various councils and deliberations with the Indians, resulted finally in

[010-289]the conclusion of a treaty, which was quite satisfactory to all the

[010-290]parties.—By this treaty peace was again declared to be firmly

[010-291]established, the different tribes were confirmed in their reservations,

[010-292]and lands that had not been sold, the boundaries of which were accurately

[010-293]described, and the United States engaged never to claim these lands, or

[010-294]disturb the Six Nations in the free use and enjoyment of them. The Six

[010-295]Nations pledged themselves also not to claim any other lands within the

[010-296]boundaries of the United States, nor disturb the people of the United

[010-297]States in the free use and enjoyment thereof. It was stipulated also that

[010-298]the United States should have the right of way for a public road from Fort

[010-299]Schlosser to Lake Erie, have a free passage through their lands, and the

[010-300]free use of harbors and rivers adjoining and within their respective

[010-301]tracts of land, for the passing and securing of vessels and boats, and

[010-302]liberty to land their cargoes, where necessary for their safety.

[010-303]In consideration of these engagements the United States were to deliver

[010-304]the presents, and pay the annuity as already intimated in the promise of

[010-305]Colonel Pickering.—The money thus pledged was to be expended yearly

[010-306]forever in purchasing clothing, domestic animals, implements of husbandry,

[010-307]and other utensils suited to their circumstances, and for compensating

[010-308]useful artificers who might be employed for their benefit.

[010-309]It was further agreed that for injuries done by individuals on either

[010-310]side, private revenge should not take place, but that complaint be made by

[010-311]the injured party to the nation to which the offender belonged, and that

[010-312]such measures were then to be pursued as should be necessary for the

[010-313]preservation of peace and friendship. [Footnote: Indian Treaties. Favored

[010-314]with a copy by O. Parrish. Esq., of Canandaigua, N. Y.]

[010-315]The conclusion of this treaty was regarded as a great point gained.

[010-316]Previous to this time, such of the Iroquois as remained in their ancient

[010-317]seats, were but partially reconciled to the United States, and were

[010-318]oscilating in their friendship. But henceforth they were uniformly

[010-319]steadfast in the allegiance they had promised.

[010-320]The holding of this council was further useful in withdrawing the

[010-321]attention of this large body of Indians with their warriors, who had been

[010-322]earnestly solicited to join their hostile brethren at the West.

[010-323]During the progress of the council there were several speeches made, but

[010-324]as they are not of special interest or importance they have not been

[010-325]given. Colonel Stone mentions an evening when quite a number of the chiefs

[010-326]dined with Colonel Pickering. He says,—"Much good humor prevailed on this

[010-327]occasion. The Indians laid aside their stoicism, indulged in many

[010-328]repartees, and manifested the keenest relish for wit and humor. Red

[010-329]Jacket, in particular, was conspicuous for the readiness and brilliance of

[010-330]his sallies." [Footnote: Col. Stone's Life and Times of Red Jacket.]

[010-331]Not far from this time, and with reference it is believed to this treaty,

[010-332]Thomas Morris says,—"Red Jacket was, I suppose, at that time about thirty

[010-333]or thirty-five years of age, of middle height, well formed, with an

[010-334]intelligent countenance, and a fine eye; and was in all respects a fine

[010-335]looking man. He was the most graceful public speaker I have ever known;

[010-336]his manner was most dignified and easy. He was fluent, and at times witty

[010-337]and sarcastic. He was quick and ready at reply. He pitted himself against

[010-338]Colonel Pickering, whom he sometimes foiled in argument. The colonel would

[010-339]sometimes become irritated and lose his temper; then Red Jacket would be

[010-340]delighted and show his dexterity in taking advantage of any unguarded

[010-341]assertion of the colonel's. He felt a conscious pride in the conviction

[010-342]that nature had done more for him, than for his antagonist."

[010-343]"A year or two after this treaty, when Colonel Pickering from post master

[010-344]general, became secretary of war, I informed Red Jacket of his promotion.

[010-345]—'Ah!' said he,—'We began our public career about the same time; he knew

[010-346]how to read and write; I did not, and he has got ahead of me.—If I had

[010-347]known how to read and write I *should have got ahead of him*.'"

<!-- Source: 2386145434587187443_7339-3.txt.html -->
