---
description: 'Red Jacket opposition to missionaries — Defense of Seneca traditions'
id: ch11
label: 'Chapter XI: Red Jacket Opposition to Missionaries'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[011-001]Valley of the [[genesee-river|Genesee]]—Indian misgivings—Mill yard—Effort to obtain

[011-002]their land—Council at [[big-tree|Big Tree]]—Coming of the Wadsworths—Indian villages

[011-003]—Refusal to sell—Discussion between [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]] and [[thomas-morris|Thomas Morris]]—

[011-004]Breaking up of the Council.

[011-005]The valley of the Genesee was a favorite resort of the Indian. His trail

[011-006]led along its banks and brought him at short intervals to Indian villages,

[011-007]or the head-quarters of Indian chiefs. Its flats were broad and beautiful,

[011-008]and were bordered on either side by hills that rose gradually to their

[011-009]summit, where they stretched out into extensive table lands. These hills,

[011-010]as we ascend the valley gradually become higher and higher, until we are

[011-011]brought into the vicinity of mountain elevations, where the scenery

[011-012]becomes very romantic, and the country much broken. The valley itself is

[011-013]almost of uniform width from its commencement, a few miles south of the

[011-014]city of Rochester, to the pleasant and thriving village of Mount Morris.

[011-015]Here these flats which are quite extensive and exceedingly rich and

[011-016]beautiful, appear to leave the river and follow its tributary, the

[011-017]Canaseraga, to a point about sixteen miles above; diminishing somewhat in

[011-018]width as they ascend, until they come near the present village of

[011-019]Dansville, where the hills again recede and forming a large basin, enclose

[011-020]it on the south, presenting the appearance of a magnificent amphitheater.

[011-021]The Canaseraga is here joined by two streams, Stony Brook and Mill Creek,

[011-022]which flow down from the highlands beyond, over precipices, and through

[011-023]gorges deep and wild, where rugged cliffs defying all attempts at culture,

[011-024]rise abruptly at times, from one to three hundred feet on either side. The

[011-025]Indian's trail conducted him to these wilds, which still remain the most

[011-026]unchanged of all his ancient haunts. Here are solitudes seldom visited by

[011-027]man, where are treasured sublimities that enchain the mind, and inspire a

[011-028]feeling of devotion in the heart of the beholder. Here the Indian,

[011-029]undisturbed by other sights or sounds, may yet listen to the voice of the

[011-030]waterfall as it sounded in the ear of his fathers, or to the gentle murmur

[011-031]of the stream discoursing now, as it did to them, in passing hurriedly

[011-032]over its rocky bed. [Footnote: Who would ever suspect that a railroad

[011-033]would stride across any of these deep chasms? How presumptuous.]

[011-034]Beyond this point the Canaseraga itself, as it flows from its source among

[011-035]the hills bordering on Pennsylvania, passes often through deep ravines,

[011-036]narrow defiles, and overhanging cliffs. The same is true also of the

[011-037]Genesee river above Mount Morris. Its course is marked by scenery rarely

[011-038]surpassed in sublimity and grandeur. [Footnote: The High Banks, as they

[011-039]are called, near Mt. Morris, and a similar formation, together with the

[011-040]falls, near Portage, have attracted the attention, and are often visited

[011-041]by the tourist.—J. N. H.]

[011-042]The Indian as he followed his trail leading up along its banks, paused

[011-043]often to listen to the thunder of its waterfalls, or to watch its course

[011-044]while threading its way at the bottom of ravines, hundreds of feet beneath

[011-045]the jutting point where he was standing. The territory marked by this

[011-046]river was unsurpassed in the magnificence and beauty of its scenery, and

[011-047]in the variety and richness of its soil; and the Indian who lived for the

[011-048]most part in the open world, found here a home congenial to his spirit,

[011-049]and he loved it. The white man saw and loved it too. But he loved it not

[011-050]as the Indian, who looked upon it as already complete. The hills brought

[011-051]him venison, the valleys corn, and the streams on every side abounded in

[011-052]fish, the beautiful speckled trout, which fairly swarmed in all of these

[011-053]waters. What could he want more? He loved it as it was; just as it came

[011-054]from the forming hand of the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]].

[011-055]The white man loved it for what he saw he could make of it; but how little

[011-056]he thought his making, would mar the desirableness and beauty of the

[011-057]Indian's home. He had already obtained of the Indian a title to all his

[011-058]land lying on the east side of this river. He had even been allowed to

[011-059]cross over to the west side, and look upon that generous *Mill Yard*,

[011-060]twelve miles square, as his own. A very extensive gift it is true, but as

[011-061]it was proposed to erect at the Genesee falls a saw mill, which was

[011-062]claimed to be a vastly benevolent institution, and would be useful to the

[011-063]Indians as well as whites, inasmuch as it would save the immense labor of

[011-064]splitting and hewing logs for plank, as they were going to make the water

[011-065]of the river split the logs and hew them at the same time; it was claimed

[011-066]that this surrender on the part of the Indians, would be but a just offset

[011-067]against the self-denial, great expense, and severe labor of the whites, in

[011-068]establishing so benign an institution as a *saw mill*, in these western

[011-069]wilds. This is one among many instances of the benevolence of the white

[011-070]man toward the Indian.

[011-071]If the Genesee country was prized by the Indian, it was regarded with a

[011-072]wishful eye by the white man. And as he had obtained what was on the east

[011-073]side of the Genesee river, he was not content without a larger portion on

[011-074]the west. Already the tide of emigration had brought him to the utmost

[011-075]limit of his possessions, and he could hardly refrain from looking, with a

[011-076]wishful eye, upon the fertile fields lying beyond.

[011-077]The Indian on the other hand, began to feel uneasy about having sold so

[011-078]much of his land. He regretted very much the permission he had given the

[011-079]white man to own one foot of ground, on the west side of the Genesee

[011-080]river. Natural boundaries with him weighed more than with the white man;

[011-081]and had the white man's possessions been confined strictly to the east

[011-082]side of the river, he would have felt better satisfied though it had cost

[011-083]him a larger area of ground. The white man's mode of running lines and of

[011-084]measuring land, he did not comprehend or appreciate. But when the line was

[011-085]made by a creek, river, or mountain, he understood it, and it harmonized

[011-086]better with his views of fitness, in dividing up the surface of this great

[011-087]earth. He was utterly unschooled in the art of computing by acres and

[011-088]roods. But the water's edge he had traversed with his light canoe, and

[011-089]with every point and islet on the lakes he was familiar. He had followed

[011-090]the rivers to where they came bubbling up from their rocky bed amid

[011-091]mountain elevations, and there was not a tributary stream or run, by whose

[011-092]side he had not rested, or by whose music he had not been charmed, keeping

[011-093]pace with it, as it went innocently busying and babbling along on its

[011-094]downward way. With any or all of these landmarks he was familiar, and when

[011-095]fixed upon as boundaries, he could readily recur to, and religiously keep

[011-096]them; for they had been made by the Great Spirit, and it was his lifestudy to know them.

[011-097]Not satisfied with the large purchase already made, the white man

[011-098]contemplated still greater acquisitions of Indian land. Little did the red

[011-099]man suspect, while roaming unmolested over his native hills, that in

[011-100]civilized circles, the advantages and disadvantages of his cherished home

[011-101]were canvassed, and made the subject of negotiation and purchase. And it

[011-102]awakened his deepest surprise when assured, that without his knowledge or

[011-103]consent, his land had been sold. He was not aware that his ignorance of

[011-104]the value of his country, for the purposes of civilization, was made a

[011-105]subject of barter among his superiors in knowledge, and that men of

[011-106]enterprize were willing to pay for the privilege of making a bargain with

[011-107]him for his lands.

[011-108]This right, as we have seen, was claimed by the government; Massachusetts

[011-109]holding the right of buying the Indian lands in Western New York. This

[011-110]right, under sanction of which the Phelps and Gorham purchase was made,

[011-111]was in part sold, as related in a preceding chapter. The pre-emptive right

[011-112]to the remainder was bought by Robert Morris in the spring of 1791. He resold soon after, to a company of gentlemen in Holland; pledging himself to

[011-113]survey the entire tract, and extinguish the Indian title. Thirty-five

[011-114]thousand pounds sterling of the purchase money were retained, as a

[011-115]guaranty of his fulfilling these engagements.

[011-116]It became an object therefore for Mr. Morris to obtain, at as early a

[011-117]period as practicable, a conference with the Indians, and their consent to

[011-118]sell this land. Owing to their extreme reluctance to part with any more

[011-119]land, he had not been able to persuade them to appoint a council for this

[011-120]purpose, and committed the further prosecution of this to his son Thomas.

[011-121]Hence the occasion given to notice the presence of Thomas Morris at the

[011-122]Indian councils, particularly that at [[tioga-point|Tioga Point]]. For several years he

[011-123]had been cultivating an acquaintance with the Indians, residing in their

[011-124]midst, attending their councils, and making himself generally agreeable;

[011-125]and by means of his own personal influence with the chiefs, and unwearied

[011-126]exertions he gained their permission to hold a council, which assembled at

[011-127]Big Tree, the present site of Genesee, in August, 1797.

[011-128]This had already become the residence of the white man. James and William

[011-129]Wadsworth, from Durham, Conn., had emigrated hither as early as the year

[011-130]1790. Under their auspices a new settlement had been commenced. On rising

[011-131]ground which commanded a fine view of the flats, stood their large block

[011-132]house. The same site has still its attractions, for what at a later day,

[011-133]was the old Wadsworth mansion.

[011-134]The coming of the Wadsworths into this region, which was still in

[011-135]possession of the Indians, and their prominence in its subsequent history,

[011-136]would seem to justify a more extended notice.

[011-137]In the spring of 1790, James Wadsworth, then a young man of twenty-two,

[011-138]was debating with himself the question of his future calling in life. He

[011-139]had graduated at Yale College in the fall of '87:—had spent the winter of

[011-140]'87 and '88, at Montreal, [[canada|Canada]], teaching school. He had no thought of

[011-141]teaching as his life-work, and what would he do next? was his earnest

[011-142]inquiry. Some one suggested that he should study medicine; but this did

[011-143]not suit him. As he had received a liberal education, it was further

[011-144]intimated that he should lead a professional life and become a lawyer, or

[011-145]a minister.

[011-146]After duly considering the matter, choosing for this purpose the

[011-147]retirement of a neighboring wood, he returned the answer,—"I am not

[011-148]satisfied with either of these professions."

[011-149]"What will you do, then?" was the inquiry. He replied, "I know God has

[011-150]made me for something, and I am trying to find out what that is."

[011-151]With his mind thus unsettled, he determined to visit his uncle, Colonel

[011-152]Jeremiah Wadsworth, of Hartford. This uncle had pursued a sea-faring life,

[011-153]entering upon it at first for the benefit of his health, and following it

[011-154]afterward, from a love for the employment. From a sailor before the mast,

[011-155]he came to be mate, and captain, and at the breaking out of the

[011-156]Revolutionary war he had retired from the sea, and had settled at

[011-157]Hartford, Conn. He was appointed commissary of the Connecticut line, and

[011-158]subsequently had important trusts committed to his charge, by his own

[011-159]State, and also by the [[philadelphia|Congress at Philadelphia]], having reference to the

[011-160]pay, clothing and subsistence of the Continental troops.

[011-161]In the discharge of his official duties he had formed an acquaintance with

[011-162]Oliver Phelps; and after Mr. Phelps had secured an interest in the Genesee

[011-163]country, he represented its advantages to Colonel Wadsworth in such

[011-164]glowing colors, as led him to purchase a considerable tract of land in

[011-165]that region. Being a man of wealth and advanced in life, he had no thought

[011-166]of emigrating thither, but designed to provide for his interests by

[011-167]employing an agent.

[011-168]As soon as James Wadsworth arrived at the house, he was met at the door by

[011-169]his uncle, who eagerly grasped his hand and exclaimed,—"James, I am glad

[011-170]you have come, you are the very man I have been wanting to see."

[011-171]It was not long before they were deeply engaged in discussing the Genesee

[011-172]question, this becoming the chief topic of conversation during the visit.

[011-173]As the result, James purchased on advantageous terms a part of the tract

[011-174]at Big Tree, and became agent for the remaining lands, qualified by the

[011-175]condition that his brother William would consent to accompany him in the

[011-176]proposed emigration. [Footnote: Conversation of the author with Nehemiah

[011-177][[john-niles-hubbard|Hubbard]], Esq., of Middletown, Conn., and statements in Turner's History.]

[011-178]The two brothers jointly entered upon the undertaking, and commenced

[011-179]preparations for their journey into this, at that time, far-off

[011-180]wilderness. An ox cart, and ox team, are in wide contrast with the

[011-181]conveniences of travel enjoyed at present. Yet with these, and two or

[011-182]three hired men, and a colored woman, a favorite slave belonging to the

[011-183]family, William set forth to encounter the vicissitudes and dangers

[011-184]involved in the enterprise. It was a slow and wearisome journey, most of

[011-185]the way rough, and some of the way requiring to be opened and prepared for

[011-186]travel.

[011-187]James, with provisions and a small supply of household furniture, went by

[011-188]the sound, the Hudson, and the head of navigation on [[canandaigua|Canandaigua]] outlet.

[011-189]He arrived at Canandaigua three days in advance of his brother.

[011-190]From this point their journey was comparatively easy. They pursued the

[011-191]route taken by Sullivan in '79, yet not without having frequently to cut a

[011-192]way for their team and cart. They arrived at their point of destination on

[011-193]the 10th of June, 1790.

[011-194]Captain Horatio, and John H. Jones preceded the Wadsworths, and other

[011-195]families came into the region soon after. But the country was full of

[011-196]Indians. Their villages swarmed with life in every direction. Ken-de-wah

[011-197]or Big Tree, as principal chief was at the head of a numerous clan,

[011-198]located on the bluffs near by. Not far from them on the river was a

[011-199]village of the [[tuscarora-nation|Tuscaroras]]. Two miles below was [[oneida-nation|Oneida]] Town, a large

[011-200]village of Oneidas. Near the present site of [[avon|West Avon]] was another

[011-201]principal village, whose chief was Ga-kwa-dia, or Hot Bread. Above was

[011-202]another large village called [[little-beard|Little Beard]]'s Town, occupying the present

[011-203]site of Cuylerville. Further on were Allen's Hill, Squaky Hill and

[011-204]Gardeau, the residence of the "White Woman." Her husband was principal

[011-205]chief of the clan at this point. Further on at Nunda, was another village,

[011-206]its principal chiefs were Elk Hunter and Green Coat. Still higher up on

[011-207]the river at Caneadea, was another considerable village, whose chief was

[011-208]John Hudson. [Footnote: It was here the author's grandfather, as an Indian

[011-209]prisoner, had to run the gauntlet in the spring of 1782.

[011-210]The author remembers Hudson very well. Often visiting his grandfather's

[011-211]house in Angelica, N. Y. When a boy he often sat on Hudson's knee, whom he

[011-212]regarded as a very pleasant, kind Indian.]

[011-213]These villages were mostly in the vicinity of Big Tree, a region which at

[011-214]that time was not without its charms, and has since been regarded as

[011-215]possessing attractions in soil and scenery, unsurpassed by any in the

[011-216]State.

[011-217]It was here the council, solicited by Thomas Morris, assembled.

[011-218]The unfinished block house of the Wadsworths was engaged for the

[011-219]accommodation of those particularly interested with Mr. Morris in

[011-220]conducting the council; and a large tent covered with boughs, and prepared

[011-221]with rows of seats, and a platform, furnished a place suited to their

[011-222]deliberations.

[011-223]The United States, though not directly concerned as a party in this

[011-224]council, were interested in the welfare of the Indians, and appointed a

[011-225]commissioner to watch over their rights, and see that no injustice took

[011-226]place. Massachusetts reserved this right in the sale of her pre-emptive

[011-227]title. Accordingly Colonel Wadsworth of Connecticut, appeared as

[011-228]commissioner on the part of the United States, and General Wm. Shepard in

[011-229]behalf of the commonwealth of Massachusetts. William Bayard of New York

[011-230]represented the interests of the [[holland-land-company|Holland company]], and Mr. Morris, appeared

[011-231]through his agents, Thomas Morris and Colonel Williamson. The engagements

[011-232]of Mr. Williamson calling him away, the responsibility of conducting the

[011-233]treaty devolved upon Thomas Morris.

[011-234]A large number of Indians were present, brought together by the prospect

[011-235]of good cheer, no less than their interest in the object of their

[011-236]assembling.

[011-237]The council being duly opened, the commissioners offered their

[011-238]credentials, and explained the reason of their appointment; after which

[011-239]Mr. Morris presented in a speech of some length, the object for which they

[011-240]had been convened. Representing the desire of his father to obtain by

[011-241]purchase a part, or all of their lands, and how much better it would be

[011-242]for them to dispose of all, except what were actually needed for

[011-243]settlement, and place the money at interest, than to retain in their

[011-244]possession uncultivated wastes, whose only value to them could be such as

[011-245]were derived from the chase; and that this advantage would not be lost,

[011-246]for they could still use it for hunting, the same as before. He concluded

[011-247]by offering them the sum of one hundred thousand dollars, for the entire

[011-248]tract that remained to them in the State, allowing them such reservations

[011-249]as might be needed for actual use.

[011-250]The Indians after deliberating for a time returned an unfavorable answer;

[011-251]saying "they did not wish to part with any more of their land."

[011-252]Mr. Morris replied, urging them to reconsider the case, that they ought

[011-253]not to decide hastily, setting before them in various ways the favorable

[011-254]terms he had proposed.

[011-255]After deliberating once more, they returned the answer they had already

[011-256]given.

[011-257]Meetings and speeches thereupon succeeded; [[farmer-s-brother|Farmer's Brother]], [[cornplanter|Cornplanter]],

[011-258]Little Billy, Little Beard, and Red Jacket, taking part in the discussion,

[011-259]the chief burden of which fell upon the latter.

[011-260]When Mr. Morris urged upon their attention the liberal sum he had proposed

[011-261]to pay for their lands:—

[011-262]Red Jacket replied,—"We are not yet convinced that it is best for us to

[011-263]dispose of them at any price."

[011-264]"But," said Mr. Morris, "what value can they be to you as they now are,

[011-265]any further than the consciousness that you own them?"

[011-266]"Yes," said Red Jacket, *but this knowledge is everything to us. It

[011-267]raises us in our own estimation. It creates in our bosoms a proud feeling

[011-268]which elevates us as a nation*. Observe the difference between the

[011-269]estimation in which a [[seneca-nation|Seneca]] and an Oneida are held. We are courted, while

[011-270]the Oneidas are considered as a degraded people, fit only to make

[011-271]*brooms* and *baskets. Why this difference*? It is because the

[011-272]Senecas are known to be the proprietors of a *broad domain*, while the

[011-273]Oneidas are *cooped up in a narrow space*."

[011-274]"Ah," said Mr. Morris, "you presume too much in regard to the consequence

[011-275]of your nation. It is far from being as great as you seem to suppose; and

[011-276]in proof of this let me refer you to the manner in which your deputation

[011-277]to the Miamis was received in 1793. Though large and composed of many of

[011-278]the first men of your nation, it had but little influence."

[011-279]"Very true," replied Red Jacket, "*and why*? It was because we were in

[011-280]*bad company. We went with the pale faces*. Had we gone alone, we

[011-281]should have been treated with the *dignity which belongs to the Senecas

[011-282]throughout the world*."

[011-283]While Red Jacket was still standing some one interposed the remark,—

[011-284]"*he's a coward*." Turning round with a look of contempt, and in tone

[011-285]and manner expressing the deepest sarcasm, he said,—"YES, I AM A COWARD."

[011-286]And then waving his hand over the broad and beautiful lands that were

[011-287]spread out before them, added: "*assure me that you can create lands like

[011-288]these, which the Great Spirit has made for us his red children, so that

[011-289]you can give us lands like them in return, and I will be brave:* UNTIL

[011-290]THEN, I AM A COWARD,—I DARE NOT SELL THESE LANDS." [Footnote:

[011-291]Conversation of the author with Wm. Jones.]

[011-292]The commissioners together with the agent of the Holland company, who had

[011-293]been looking on and anxiously observing the proceedings for about two

[011-294]weeks, began to regard the undertaking as hopeless, and urged Mr. Morris

[011-295]to use more decisive means with them, and bring them to terms one way or

[011-296]the other.

[011-297]Though contrary to Mr. Morris' convictions from his knowledge of the

[011-298]Indian character, as to its being the best method to pursue, he yielded to

[011-299]their solicitations; and when the Indians presented him the offer of a

[011-300]single township on the line of Pennsylvania, at one dollar an acre, Red

[011-301]Jacket assuring him that he could sell this at a sufficient advance, to

[011-302]pay for the trouble and expense of the treaty, he told them if that was

[011-303]all they could offer, they might return to their homes, for the sooner

[011-304]their conference was ended the better.

[011-305]Red Jacket thereupon sprang to his feet and said, "You have now come to

[011-306]the point to which I wished to bring you. You told us in your first

[011-307]address, that even in the event of our not agreeing to sell our lands, we

[011-308]would part friends. Here then is my hand." Mr. Morris taking his hand, he

[011-309]then added; "I now cover up the [[council-fire|council fire]]."
