---
description: 'The trial of Red Jacket — Accusations and defense'
id: ch12
label: 'Chapter XII: The Trial of Red Jacket'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[012-001]Interview between [[farmer-s-brother|Farmer's Brother]] and [[thomas-morris|Thomas Morris]]—Mr. Morris addresses

[012-002]the women—Distributes [[treaty-annuities|presents]]—Negotiations continued—Treaty concluded

[012-003]with the women and warriors—Manner of payment—Inquiries about a Bank—

[012-004]Their reservations—White woman—[[young-king|Young King]]'s dissent—Charge of

[012-005]insincerity.

[012-006]The Indians appeared to regard the breaking up of the council at [[big-tree|Big Tree]],

[012-007]with great satisfaction. Their joy was unbounded; they made the forest

[012-008]ring with their wild yells, inveighing loudly and insultingly against Mr.

[012-009]Morris, and the commissioners, and assuming such menacing attitudes, as

[012-010]fairly to intimidate those unaccustomed to their rude manners.

[012-011]To all present but Mr. Morris, the prospect of accomplishing any thing

[012-012]after this seemed utterly hopeless, and it was with some difficulty the

[012-013]commissioners were persuaded to remain, for the purpose of giving him the

[012-014]opportunity of another trial. Yet his hopes of success were so sanguine,

[012-015]as to induce them to tarry a short time longer.

[012-016]The day after the breaking up of the council, Farmer's Brother called on

[012-017]Mr. Morris, expressed his regret at what had transpired, and the hope that

[012-018]it might not destroy the interest he had manifested for his nation.

[012-019]"Certainly not," said Mr. Morris,—"you had a right to refuse to sell your

[012-020]lands;" but he added, the treatment he had received from his people at the

[012-021]close of the council, especially in allowing a drunken warrior to menace

[012-022]and insult him; while they were yelling in approbation of his conduct, was

[012-023]uncalled for, and ungenerous. He had not deserved this from them. They had

[012-024]for years had food at his house in [[canandaigua|Canandaigua]], and liquor as much as was

[012-025]for their good, and whenever any of them had been at [[philadelphia|Philadelphia]], his

[012-026]father had treated them with equal kindness and hospitality.

[012-027]Farmer's Brother acknowledged that all this was true, and regretted that

[012-028]the [[council-fire|council fire]] had been extinguished so hastily, or they might have had

[012-029]a meeting, to smooth over these difficulties.

[012-030]"Yes,"—said Mr. Morris, "and here is another ground of complaint. Red

[012-031]Jacket assumed the right of covering up the fire. This did not belong to

[012-032]him. For according to your [[iroquois-tradition|custom]], he only who kindles the council fire,

[012-033]has a right to cover it up."

[012-034]"That is so,"—said Farmer's Brother.

[012-035]"Then as I did not cover it up the council fire is still burning."

[012-036]After thinking a moment he replied,—"*Yes*:"—and appeared to be

[012-037]pleased that it was so, and proposed to have the council convene again.

[012-038]Mr. Morris signified his pleasure to delay a few days, to give him time to

[012-039]look over his accounts, pay for the provisions that had been consumed,

[012-040]collect his cattle that had not been slaughtered, and arrange other

[012-041]matters preparatory to his leaving the treaty ground.

[012-042]He had become so well acquainted with Indian customs, that he had resolved

[012-043]upon another expedient, when his negotiations with the [[sachem-chieftainship|sachems]] had failed.

[012-044]It is a rule among the Indians that their sachems shall have a right to

[012-045]transact whatever business belongs to their nation, whether relating to

[012-046]their lands, or anything else. But in transactions that concern their

[012-047]lands, if their course is not satisfactory to the women and warriors, they

[012-048]have a right to arrest the proceedings, and take the management into their

[012-049]own hands. The reason they assign for this practice is,—that the land

[012-050]belongs to the warriors, because they are the defense and strength of

[012-051]their nation, and to the women, because they are mothers of the warriors.

[012-052]In their polity therefore they recognize head or chief women, whose

[012-053]privilege it is to select a speaker to represent their views.

[012-054]Mr. Morris determined as a last resort, to refer his case to the chief

[012-055]women and warriors. He accordingly sought and obtained such a meeting.

[012-056]He made known to them his business, told them of the offer he had made

[012-057]their sachems, portrayed to them in glowing colors, the advantages they

[012-058]would receive from the annuity so large a sum would bring,—how it would

[012-059]furnish them with food and clothing, without any anxiety or toil on their

[012-060]part, and that they would thus be relieved of many hardships, which they

[012-061]were now compelled to endure.—That the sachems, who were unwilling to

[012-062]sell the land, always had enough to supply their wants.—That they could

[012-063]kill game, and feast on the meat, and go to the settlements and sell the

[012-064]skins, and buy them clothing. Hence they did not care to exchange their

[012-065]land for money, that would enable the women to obtain for themselves and

[012-066]children food and clothing, whereas they were now often compelled to go

[012-067]hungry and naked. By selling such a portion of their land as they had no

[012-068]use for, they would have the means of supplying their necessary wants, and

[012-069]of making themselves comfortable. He then displayed before them a large

[012-070]supply of beads, blankets, silver brooches, and various other ornaments,

[012-071]of which the natives were particularly fond, and said he had brought these

[012-072]with the design of making them presents, in the event of a successful

[012-073]treaty. But in as much as the women were not to blame for breaking off the

[012-074]negotiations, he was determined they should have the presents he had

[012-075]intended for them. He accordingly proceeded to distribute among sparkling

[012-076]eyes, and joyous hearts, the beauties and treasures, he had brought for

[012-077]them.

[012-078]These gifts proved a most powerful addition to his argument, and were the

[012-079]means of giving a favorable turn to their counsels. For several days after

[012-080]this the chiefs, and women, and warriors, could be seen scattered about

[012-081]here and there in small parties, engaged in earnest conversation, which

[012-082]resulted in a renewal of their negotiations.

[012-083]Mr. Morris was informed that their council fire was still burning, and

[012-084]that their business might proceed,—but instead of being carried on by the

[012-085]sachems, would be conducted by the women and warriors.

[012-086][[cornplanter|Cornplanter]] being the principal war-chief, appeared on this occasion in

[012-087]their behalf.

[012-088]He said,—"They had seen with regret the misconduct of the sachems; that

[012-089]they thought also the action of Mr. Morris was too hasty; but still they

[012-090]were willing the negotiations should be renewed; and hoped they would be

[012-091]conducted with better temper on both sides."

[012-092]Mr. Morris offered a few conciliatory remarks in reply; and Farmer's

[012-093]Brother, on the part of the sachems, represented these proceedings of the

[012-094]women and warriors, as in accordance with the customs of their nation.

[012-095]The way being thus opened, the negotiations were readily carried forward

[012-096]to a successful termination.

[012-097]They consented to sell their lands for the sum proposed, which was one

[012-098]hundred thousand dollars, leaving their reservations to be settled, as

[012-099]they could agree.

[012-100]The simplicity of the Indian character was apparent, in the eagerness with

[012-101]which they desired to know about a *Bank:* the president having

[012-102]directed that the money they received for their lands, in case they were

[012-103]sold, should be invested for their benefit in stock of the United States

[012-104]Bank; in the name of the president, and his successors in office, as

[012-105]trustees of the Indians; they earnestly inquired,—*what is a Bank*?

[012-106]Several attempts were made at explanation, when finally they came to

[012-107]understand, that the United States Bank, at Philadelphia, was a large

[012-108]place where their money would be planted, and where it would grow, like

[012-109]corn in the field.

[012-110]As it was desirable also for them to understand, that the dividends from

[012-111]it might be greater some years than others, this was explained by

[012-112]referring to the idea of planting, as they could know from experience,

[012-113]that some years they would have from the same ground a better crop than

[012-114]others. Hence after this when speaking to Mr. Morris about their money,

[012-115]they would inquire *what kind of a crop they were going to have that

[012-116]year*?

[012-117]Another point of interest with them, was to ascertain *how large a pile,

[012-118]the money they were to receive, would make*?

[012-119]This was shown them by representing the number of kegs of a given size, it

[012-120]would take to hold, and the number of horses that would be necessary to

[012-121]draw it.

[012-122]These questions being settled, the next point to be agreed upon, was the

[012-123]size of their reservations. Mr. Morris had stipulated, in case their

[012-124]demands were reasonable, no deduction would be made from the price they

[012-125]were to receive. But instead of moderate, very exhorbitant claims were

[012-126]presented, growing out of a degree of rivalry between different chiefs.

[012-127]Their comparative importance would be graduated in a measure by the size

[012-128]of their domain, and the number of people they would thus be enabled to

[012-129]have about them; hence they were individually ambitious of not being outdone, in the size of their reservations.

[012-130][[red-jacket|Red Jacket]] put in a claim to about one-fourth of the entire tract

[012-131]purchased. Cornplanter desired about as much; and other chiefs were alike

[012-132]ambitious in securing extensive reservations; and they wished to have them

[012-133]marked out by natural boundaries, such as rivers, hills or the course of

[012-134]streams. To all of these demands Mr. Morris was obliged to give a stout

[012-135]and resolute denial, requiring them to fix upon a certain number of square

[012-136]miles, which, in the aggregate, should not be far from three hundred and

[012-137]fifty.

[012-138]Here also arose difficulties about the size of their respective

[012-139]allotments, which they were unable to settle, so that Mr. Morris was

[012-140]obliged to assume the office of arbiter, and decide these for them, which

[012-141]he accomplished generally to their satisfaction.

[012-142]In only one instance did he depart from his purpose of not allowing

[012-143]natural boundaries, in describing their reservations. It was in case of

[012-144][[mary-jemison|Mary Jemison]], the White Woman, who lived on the [[genesee-river|Genesee]] river, some few

[012-145]miles above Mt. Morris. Her history is one of singular interest, and as

[012-146]belonging to this region, and connected with the circumstances under

[012-147]consideration, a brief notice of this remarkable woman, will not be out of

[012-148]place.

[012-149]Hers is an instance of the entire change that may be wrought, in the taste

[012-150]and inclination, so that instead of a civilized, a person may prefer an

[012-151]uncultivated state of society. Though descended from the whites, she

[012-152]became so thoroughly Indian in her feelings and habits, that she was

[012-153]regarded as a curiosity, and called by way of distinction—the "*White

[012-154]Woman*."

[012-155]She was born on the ocean, while her parents were emigrating from Ireland

[012-156]to this country, about the year 1742 or 3. Her father and mother soon

[012-157]after landing at Philadelphia, removed to a frontier settlement of

[012-158]Pennsylvania, lying on what was called Marsh Creek. During the war between

[012-159]the French and English, she was taken captive with her parents, by a party

[012-160]of Shawnee Indians. On the way, her father and mother were killed. The

[012-161]mother anticipating, from tokens she had observed, what would be their

[012-162]fate, advised her child not to attempt an escape from the Indians, as she

[012-163]most likely would be taken again, and treated worse. But as a course

[012-164]better adapted to promote her welfare, she was told to try and please her

[012-165]captors, adding as her parting counsel,—"don't forget, my daughter, the

[012-166]prayers I have taught you,—repeat them often; be a good child, and may

[012-167]God bless you."

[012-168]After this, under various trials she went with the party, until they came

[012-169]to Fort Du Quesne. [Footnote: Afterwards called Fort Pitt, now the site of

[012-170]Pittsburg.] Here she was given to two Indian women, who were of the [[seneca-nation|Seneca]]

[012-171]nation, and lived eighty miles below, on the Ohio river, at a place called

[012-172]She-nan-jee. With the usual ceremony observed by the Indians on such

[012-173]occasions, she was adopted into their family, and called De-ha-wa-mis. At

[012-174]length under kind treatment she began to feel as one of them. In time she

[012-175]was married to a young chief of the Delaware tribe, with whom she lived

[012-176]happily for several years in the Shawnee country. She became devotedly

[012-177]attached to her Indian husband, who treated her with marked tokens of

[012-178]affection.

[012-179]After a time she welcomed with the joy of a young mother's heart, the

[012-180]appearance in her wigwam of a daughter, her first born. The bright morning

[012-181]of her domestic joy was soon overcast with sorrow; she is seen strewing

[012-182]over her little one's grave, the fallen leaves of autumn. She-nin-jee, her

[012-183]Indian husband once more became a father. Together they gladly embraced a

[012-184]son. Their lonely cabin after this was enlivened and cheered by his

[012-185]childish prattle; nothing now remained to interrupt the joy of the mother,

[012-186]but the absence of the father, whom the season of hunting, took far away

[012-187]from his cherished home. Yet with returning spring these toils are

[012-188]forgotten, as he is surrounded once more with the charms of the domestic

[012-189]fireside. But at length there came a spring whose joyful return, brought

[012-190]not the long wished for She-nin-jee, back to his lonely cabin. Many an

[012-191]evening fire blazed brightly to bid him welcome, yet he did not come.

[012-192]Choice venison had been dried and laid up for him, new skins had been

[012-193]prepared and spread for his couch, and many a silent hour whiled away with

[012-194]thoughts of the absent one, but he came not. His returning comrades

[012-195]brought back the sad news of his death. De-ha-wa-mis mourned long and

[012-196]deeply for the pride of her Indian wigwam. Her own kindred could not have

[012-197]extended to her more genuine sympathy, than did her new relatives by

[012-198]adoption. They kindly offered to take her back, if she desired to go, to

[012-199]her former friends among the whites, or if she chose to remain among them,

[012-200]they promised to give her a home of her own.

[012-201]A part of her Indian relatives lived in the valley of the Genesee, and

[012-202]this was the occasion of her removal there, from her home on the Ohio. A

[012-203]few years intervened, and she again became the wife of an Indian, the

[012-204]distinguished Seneca warrior Hio-ka-too. She resided with him until his

[012-205]death, at Gardeau, the place where she was living, at the time of her

[012-206]appearance at this treaty. The chiefs desired for her a special

[012-207]reservation. To this Mr. Morris readily assented, in case she would

[012-208]specify a certain number of acres.

[012-209]She said to him,—"I do not know any thing about acres, but I have some

[012-210]improved places;" pointing them out on the ground; "here a patch of

[012-211]potatoes, there, a few beans, and another still, where there's a little

[012-212]corn." She wished these might be embraced in her reservation, at the same

[012-213]time giving boundaries, which she thought would include them.

[012-214]Mr. Morris owing to the lateness of the hour, and the impatience of the

[012-215]commissioners, gave his consent to the boundary named, supposing it might

[012-216]include a hundred or a hundred and fifty acres. But much to his surprise,

[012-217]the tract when surveyed, was found to contain not less than seventeen

[012-218]thousand, nine hundred and twenty-seven acres. [Footnote: Indian Treaties,

[012-219]p. 39. This reservation has been variously represented to contain, four

[012-220]thousand, and by others a larger number of acres. Col. Stone makes it

[012-221]thirty thousand. The amount given in the text is that obtained by actual

[012-222]survey of the boundaries in question. They are as follows: "Beginning at

[012-223]the mouth of Steep Hill Creek, thence due east until it strikes the Old

[012-224]Path, thence south until a due west line will intersect with certain steep

[012-225]rocks on the west side of the Genesee river, thence extending due west,

[012-226]due north, and due east, until it strikes the first mentioned bound,

[012-227]enclosing as much land on the west side, as on the east side of the

[012-228]river."

[012-229]The survey by Augustus Porter, surveyor, gives it 17,927.]

[012-230]Mary Jemison, the White Woman, had thus secured to her, according to the

[012-231]pledge of the Indians to give her a home, a princely domain, where for

[012-232]years after in primitive simplicity, she planted her beans, potatoes and

[012-233]corn, and maintained, as in former years, the usages of her Indian life.

[012-234]The most of this tract she afterward sold to John Grey and Henry B. Gibson

[012-235]of Canandaigua; a deed for which was executed bearing date of September

[012-236]3d, 1823.

[012-237]She retained for her own use twelve hundred and eighty acres, and received

[012-238]for the balance, the sum of four thousand two hundred and eighty-six

[012-239]dollars, or an annuity of three hundred dollars forever.

[012-240]The Senecas became gradually dispossessed of their lands in the valley of

[012-241]the Genesee, and in the year 1825, removed to their reservation at

[012-242]Buffalo. At the time of their removal, the White Woman refused to part

[012-243]with the residue of her land, and continued to reside at the place, where

[012-244]she had passed the greater part of her long life, and which was now

[012-245]endeared to her by many associations in the past.

[012-246]But here she soon found herself surrounded by another race, and as time

[012-247]advanced, she longed to be among the people she had chosen for her

[012-248]kindred, and disposing of her possessions in the Genesee valley, removed

[012-249]to Buffalo in 1831.

[012-250]She had now upon her the infirmities of age. Long had the parting

[012-251]injunction of her christian mother passed from memory. The religion as

[012-252]well as habits of the Indian, had become hers. Ninety summers had passed

[012-253]over her head. The missionary had visited her, and had been assured that

[012-254]her faith had long been in accord with that of the red man, and she had no

[012-255]desire to change her religious views.

[012-256]But ere her last hour came a voice reached her from the distant past. It

[012-257]awakened memories long forgotten. She sent for the missionary. He came and

[012-258]stood by her. She was almost withered away. Her small, shrivelled, finely

[012-259]wrinkled face, silvery hair, toothless mouth, the nose almost touching her

[012-260]chin, and her thin, wasted form, indicated the presence of second

[012-261]childhood. The memory of that long lost mother rushed back upon her mind.

[012-262]She cried out in anguish, as well as sincerity of heart, "Oh, God! have

[012-263]mercy upon me!" The prayer of her childhood returned; she instinctively

[012-264]began to say.—"*Our Father which art in heaven.*"

[012-265]As a child she received the instructions of the missionary, and before

[012-266]departing this life, her soul was lighted up with a cheering hope, based

[012-267]upon a reception of the clear and living truths of Christianity.

[012-268]No one had sought to disturb the serenity of her advanced life, by

[012-269]intruding upon her the idea that she was a sinner. How came she to be thus

[012-270]exercised? The lessons given in childhood, availed more than sermons, and

[012-271]impressions were then made, which though apparently effaced, still

[012-272]remained to be quickened into life, and bring forth fruit, which cheered

[012-273]the closing days of her singularly eventful history.

[012-274]With the settlement of the White Woman's reservation, Mr. Morris regarded

[012-275]the business of the treaty, as about concluded. Yet a new obstacle was

[012-276]presented by the arrival of Young King, a descendant of "Old Smoke," a

[012-277]renowned chief, held in great veneration among the Senecas. None had ever

[012-278]attained a greater degree of power, or swayed a more commanding influence.

[012-279]The son though not possessing the high endowments of the father, yet when

[012-280]he chose to exert it, commanded an extensive hereditary influence, which

[012-281]carried with it great weight. Having been informed of the proceedings of

[012-282]the council thus far, he expressed his disapproval.

[012-283]Cornplanter and Farmer's Brother informed Mr. Morris that the treaty could

[012-284]not be completed contrary to the wishes of Young King; that however

[012-285]unreasonable it might appear to him, for one man to defeat the will of the

[012-286]entire nation, it was a power he received from his birth, and one of which

[012-287]he could not be deprived. Yet after much persuasion, Young King, though

[012-288]not reconciled to the idea of selling their lands, acquiesced; saying—"he

[012-289]would not stand out against the wishes of his nation."

[012-290]The signing of the treaty yet remained; and Red Jacket according to the

[012-291]testimony of Mr. Morris, though he had strenuously resisted the sale,

[012-292]desired nevertheless to have his name appear among the chiefs of his

[012-293]nation, whose signatures were appended to the deed executed on the 15th of

[012-294]September, 1797, conveying to Robert Morris of Philadelphia, the title to

[012-295]all their lands west of the Genesee river, not included in their

[012-296]reservations, or previously sold.

[012-297]From this fact the inference has been derived, that the orator was

[012-298]*insincere* in his opposition to the sales made of his people's lands.

[012-299]His sincerity though questioned now, was never after this a matter of

[012-300]doubt. If he had been insincere before, the effect of this sale on the

[012-301]destiny of his people, imposed upon him considerations of so grave a

[012-302]nature, as to render the idea of his indifference extremely improbable,

[012-303]and no one after this ever thought of imputing to him such a motive. Yet

[012-304]in all the sales the Senecas made of their land, subsequent to this

[012-305]period, Red Jacket's name, however much he may have resisted the act, was

[012-306]appended to the deed or instrument of conveyance. The reason he assigned

[012-307]for this, was his desire to have his name go, whether for better or worse,

[012-308]with the destinies of his people. Having exerted all his energies to

[012-309]prevent the sale of their lands, he felt that his duty had been

[012-310]discharged. And when his people decided against him, he regarded the

[012-311]responsibility of the transaction as resting on those who had effected it,

[012-312]and whether he gave or witheld his name, it would have no influence in

[012-313]determining the result.

[012-314]He may have had some pride also in having his name appended to a document,

[012-315]which he knew the white people regarded, as of much importance, and were

[012-316]very careful to preserve.

[012-317]It is related of him as having transpired at a later period, when Mr.

[012-318]Greig of Canandaigua, acting for the [[ogden-land-company|Ogden Company]], was holding a council

[012-319]with a view to purchase some of the smaller Indian reservations, lying

[012-320]along the Genesee river, he was opposed step by step, by the persistent

[012-321]efforts of Red Jacket. Yet notwithstanding the opposition, Mr. Greig was

[012-322]successful in securing the extinguishment of their title, to about eighty

[012-323]thousand acres of their land. When the time came for signing the deed, Mr.

[012-324]Greig said to Red Jacket,—"*As you have been opposed to the sale of the

[012-325]land, you need not have your name attached to the deed*." But he would

[012-326]hear to nothing of the kind, and insisted upon signing it, seeming to take

[012-327]pride in having his name appended to the paper. [Footnote: Conversation of

[012-328]the author with the Hon. John Greig of Canandaigua. Some years ago a story

[012-329]illustrating the [[iroquois-oratory|eloquence]] of Red Jacket went the rounds of the papers, in

[012-330]which Mr. Greig was represented as arguing a case in opposition to and as

[012-331]being defeated by Red Jacket. Not happening to see it at the time, the

[012-332]author sought for a copy, but learning that its principal statements were

[012-333]fictitious, he relinquished the undertaking. Mr. Greig never argued the

[012-334]case as represented, but took down a speech from the interpreter which he

[012-335]read to the orator, who was much pleased with its correctness and bestowed

[012-336]on him an Indian name, signifying—"*a ready writer*."]
