---
description: 'Red Jacket last years — Decline and reflection'
id: ch13
label: 'Chapter XIII: Red Jacket Last Years'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[013-001]Council at Canawangus—Interesting reminiscence of [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]]—Address of

[013-002][[farmer-s-brother|Farmer's Brother]]—Jasper Parrish—Horatio Jones—Red Jacket's visit at

[013-003]Hartford, Conn.

[013-004]A council of the Iroquois was held at Ca-na-wau-gus, near [[avon|West Avon]], in

[013-005]the autumn of 1798. Connected with it is a reminiscence of Red Jacket of

[013-006]much interest, as an item of history, and it serves well to illustrate the

[013-007]orator's mental habit.

[013-008]His conduct was such on this occasion, as to excite the observation as

[013-009]well as curiosity of Captain Parrish, who related the occurrence.

[013-010]For the first few days of the council, he uttered not a word. He appeared

[013-011]to be in deep thought, and was exceedingly reserved.—The expression of

[013-012]his countenance was severe, and there was much *hauteur* in his manner. He

[013-013]ate scarcely anything, and his appearance was so remarkable, as to excite

[013-014]the wonder of all present. At length on the third or fourth day of the

[013-015]council, he arose with great dignity, and solemnity of air, and commenced

[013-016]speaking. His exordium was for the most part a beautiful and highly

[013-017]wrought enconium on the character and history of the Indians; particularly

[013-018]of his own people, in the past. They were taken back, as by a magic spell,

[013-019]to primitive times. The days of their renown, when the name and glory of

[013-020]their nation, were the admiration of the world. When from the rising to

[013-021]the setting sun, there was no power to stand before them, or hinder the

[013-022]victorious march of their warriors through the land. As they glided over

[013-023]the waters of river or lake, as they ascended the mountain, or passed

[013-024]through the valley, they could feel that their dominion was wide, and

[013-025]undisputed. Every deer that bounded through the forest, every bird that

[013-026]winged the air, and the fish in all the waters, were theirs, and they were

[013-027]happy. Such was the glowing picture he drew, they did not realize the

[013-028]present, from the engrossing theme of the past.

[013-029]He next proceeded to sketch their history, as affected by the coming of

[013-030]the white man among them. The friendly relations, that marked their early

[013-031]intercourse. Their small beginnings, and the imperceptible manner of their

[013-032]increase. How they began to line the eastern shores,—plant themselves

[013-033]upon the borders of their rivers, and gather into neighborhoods, and

[013-034]towns, and cities. How these new and wonderful things engaged the

[013-035]attention of the Indians, and kept them spell-bound, so that they were

[013-036]insensible to what had been going on till the whites were firmly planted,

[013-037]like a tree that has taken deep root, and sends its branches out over the

[013-038]land.

[013-039]He next drew their attention to a time when the signs of a great tempest

[013-040]began to appear. When the clouds began to overspread the heavens, when the

[013-041]lightning flashed, and the thunders rolled, and the land was shaken by

[013-042]their power. A mighty whirlwind came sweeping through the land, the tall

[013-043]trees of the forest were uprooted, the branches torn off and sent flying

[013-044]through the air. So has our nation he said been uprooted,—the strong men

[013-045]torn from us, and scattered, and laid low. Thus he went on recounting as

[013-046]few could, the circumstances of their history, and as he advanced, his

[013-047]expressions matured in their intensity, his thoughts appeared to be

[013-048]winged, and came glowing, as if from some furnace in nature, where all her

[013-049]materials are wrought under intense heat, and sent forth in forms of

[013-050]highest brilliancy, and beauty. His hearers were amid the heavings of the

[013-051]earthquake,—the blackness of the storms,—the wild and irresistible sweep

[013-052]of the tornado. The heavens, the earth, the elements, seemed to be

[013-053]careering under the rapid and startling flights of his fancy.

[013-054]He next adverted with much feeling, and with evident sadness, to the

[013-055]transactions of the past year, by which they had become dispossessed of

[013-056]the largest part of their ancient inheritance: and then he drew, with a

[013-057]prophetic hand, a picture of their probable future, that brought sorrow to

[013-058]their hearts, and tears to their eyes.—He closed his harangue by

[013-059]pronouncing a most withering phillipic against the whites.—The effect of

[013-060]his speech was wonderful.—Mr. Parrish declared that it exceeded, in its

[013-061]brilliancy and force, all his former utterances, of which he had any

[013-062]knowledge; and he never heard from him afterward, anything that could

[013-063]compare with it. His auditors were mainly those of his own people. His

[013-064]flow of thought was not interrupted by the slow, and embarrassing process

[013-065]of interpretation. The full grief of his heart, in view of the

[013-066]transactions of the previous year, was poured forth, and came like the

[013-067]irresistible sweep of a whirlwind. [Footnote: Conversation of the author

[013-068]with Samuel J. Mills, Esq., formerly of Mt. [[thomas-morris|Morris]], N. Y., later of

[013-069]Nevada, Iowa. Mr. Mills heard Mr. Parrish give this description of Red

[013-070]Jacket and of his speech, while sitting at one time on the porch of one of

[013-071]the hotels at Avon Springs. Mr. Parrish pointed out the ground occupied by

[013-072]the Indians, when this speech was delivered. It was only a little distance

[013-073]from the porch where they were sitting.]

[013-074]It was some little time after the delivery of this speech, before the

[013-075]minds of the Indians were sufficiently composed to attend to the main

[013-076]business of their council, which was presented in a speech by Farmer's

[013-077]Brother, and embodied in an address to the Legislature of New York, thus:

[013-078]"The Sachems, Chiefs and Warriors of the [[seneca-nation|Seneca Nation]], to the Sachems,

[013-079]and Chiefs assembled about the great [[council-fire|Council Fire]] of the State of New

[013-080]York:

[013-081]"BROTHERS: As you are once more assembled in council for the purpose of

[013-082]doing honor to yourselves and justice to your country, we, your brothers,

[013-083]the Sachems, Chiefs and Warriors of the Seneca Nation, request you to open

[013-084]your ears, and give attention to our voice and wishes.

[013-085]"You will recollect the late contest between you and your father, the

[013-086]great king of England. This contest threw the inhabitants of this whole

[013-087]island into a great tumult and commotion, like a raging whirlwind, which

[013-088]tears up the trees, and tosses to and fro the leaves, so that no one knows

[013-089]whence they come, or where they will fall.

[013-090]"BROTHERS: This whirlwind was so directed by the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]] above, as to

[013-091]throw into our arms two of your infant children, Jasper Parrish, and

[013-092]Horatio Jones. We adopted them into our families, and made them our

[013-093]children. We loved them and nourished them. They lived with us many years.

[013-094]At length the Great Spirit spoke to the whirlwind, and it was still. A

[013-095]clear and uninterrupted sky appeared. The path of peace was opened, and

[013-096]the chain of friendship was once more made bright. Then these, our adopted

[013-097]children, left us, to seek their relations. We wished them to return among

[013-098]us, and promised if they would return, and live in our country, to give

[013-099]each of them a seat of land for them, and their children to sit down upon.

[013-100]"BROTHERS: They have returned, and have for several years past been

[013-101]serviceable to us as interpreters. We still feel our hearts beat in

[013-102]affection for them, and now wish to fulfil the promise we made them, and

[013-103]to reward them for their services. We have therefore made up our minds to

[013-104]give them a seat of two square miles of land lying on the outlet of Lake

[013-105]Erie, about three miles below [[black-rock|Black Rock]], beginning at the mouth of a

[013-106]creek known by the name of Scoy-gu-quoy-des Creek, running one mile from

[013-107]the river [[fort-niagara|Niagara]], up said creek, thence northerly as the river runs two

[013-108]miles, thence westerly one mile to the river, thence up the river as the

[013-109]river runs to the place of beginning, so as to contain two square miles.

[013-110]"BROTHERS: We have now made known to you our minds; we expect and

[013-111]earnestly request that you will permit our friends to receive this our

[013-112]gift, and will make the same good to them, according to the laws and

[013-113]customs of your nation."

[013-114]By the laws of the State, no sale or transfers of Indian lands could be

[013-115]made to private individuals, without permission from the government. Hence

[013-116]the address embodying the request as presented above, which was complied

[013-117]with, and the land secured as desired by the Indians.

[013-118]The above is certainly an able document, and has been justly admired for

[013-119]its originality, and the boldness of its figures. It is in keeping with

[013-120]the high order of mind, that has marked the history of the [[iroquois-confederacy|Six Nations]].

[013-121]One expression in it has been pointed out, as an instance of the truly

[013-122]sublime: "THE GREAT SPIRIT SPOKE TO THE WHIRLWIND, AND IT WAS STILL."

[013-123]We may observe here that in tracing the history of the Iroquois, the

[013-124]instances are not rare of a true nobility of character. Their confidence

[013-125]and esteem once secured, no slight cause would interrupt, none appreciated

[013-126]more highly the offices of kindness,—and none would go further in making

[013-127]a generous return for favors rendered.

[013-128]Jasper Parrish and Horatio Jones were favorite interpreters of Red Jacket,

[013-129]and as they passed no inconsiderable part of their lives among the

[013-130]Indians, a further notice of their history is desirable.

[013-131]The early life of Captain Jasper Parrish was marked by scenes alike trying

[013-132]and eventful. He was a native of Connecticut, from which State his family

[013-133]removed to the waters of the Delaware, in the state of Pennsylvania. In

[013-134]1778, when but eleven years old, he accompanied his father on a short

[013-135]expedition, to remove a family of backwoodsmen, to a less exposed part of

[013-136]the settlement. On their way they were attacked by a small party of

[013-137]Indians, and made captives. The father was taken to Niagara, and after a

[013-138]captivity of two years, was exchanged and enabled to return to his own

[013-139]family.

[013-140]The son was claimed by a war-chief, who treated him kindly, and after a

[013-141]time took him to the waters of the Chemung. On entering an Indian village,

[013-142]the war-party which accompanied them, sounded the war-whoop, and it was

[013-143]answered by the Indians and Indian boys who came out to meet them. They

[013-144]pulled the young prisoner from the horse he was riding, scourged him with

[013-145]whips, and beat him with the handles of their tomahawks, one of the forms

[013-146]of their gauntlet, until his master humanely rescued him. He was after

[013-147]this sold to a family of Delawares, and taken to reside with them on the

[013-148]Delaware river, where he suffered much from want of proper clothing, and

[013-149]from scanty fare. To inure him to cold, the Indians compelled him almost

[013-150]daily, to strip and plunge into the icy waters of the river.

[013-151]He was with the Indians when General Sullivan invaded their country, and

[013-152]witnessed their retreat, after the battle at Newtown, until they found

[013-153]protection from the guns of the British, at Fort Niagara. Here they

[013-154]subsisted during the winter by rations from the garrison, and to induce

[013-155]them to return again to their villages, on the [[genesee-river|Genesee]] river, the officers

[013-156]pledged them an increased bounty for American scalps.

[013-157]On one occasion, while with the Delaware family at Niagara, he came near

[013-158]being a victim of the British bounty for scalps. Left alone with some

[013-159]Indians, who were having a carousal, he overheard a proposal to kill the

[013-160]young Yankee, and take his scalp to the fort, and sell it for rum. In a

[013-161]few moments one of them took a large brand from the fire and hurled at

[013-162]him, but being on the alert he dodged it, and made his escape. The Indians

[013-163]pursued, but it was dark and they did not find him.

[013-164]From the Delaware family, he was sold to an Indian of the [[mohawk-nation|Mohawk tribe]],

[013-165]called Captain David Hill. At a council of the British and Indians, he was

[013-166]afterwards adopted with much ceremony, into the family of Captain Hill, as

[013-167]his own son. He resided with him at the Mohawk settlement near the present

[013-168]village of Lewiston, till the close of the war, and being surrendered in

[013-169]accordance with the stipulations of the treaty at [[fort-stanwix|Fort Stanwix]] in 1784, he

[013-170]returned once more to his own father's house.

[013-171]It was with some effort he recovered again the use of his own native

[013-172]tongue. During his captivity he had acquired and could speak fluently, the

[013-173]language of five different tribes, and his qualifications as an

[013-174]interpreter, together with his known faithfulness and integrity, coming to

[013-175]the knowledge of our government, he received an appointment in the Indian

[013-176]service, and during the greater part of his subsequent life, was actively

[013-177]employed in business relating to the welfare of the Indians. He died at

[013-178]his residence in [[canandaigua|Canandaigua]], July 12th, 1836, in the sixty-ninth year of

[013-179]his age.

[013-180]Captain Horatio Jones, was a native of Chester county, Pennsylvania. At

[013-181]the age of sixteen he enlisted as a volunteer, in a company commanded by

[013-182]Captain John Boyd. It was when the Indians, led by the notorious Butler,

[013-183][[joseph-brant|Brant]], and Nellis, were committing their depredations and massacres among

[013-184]the settlers of the frontier, sparing neither age nor sex, from the

[013-185]tomahawk and scalping knife. With the ardor of youth he engaged in the

[013-186]active employments of a soldier, and accompanied Captain Boyd on several

[013-187]important and dangerous expeditions, in which himself and commander had

[013-188]the good fortune to escape unhurt.

[013-189]At length in the spring of 1781, while Captain Boyd and his men, numbering

[013-190]thirty-two, were in pursuit of Nellis, they were surprised by a large

[013-191]party of Indians, who killed about half their number, and of the rest took

[013-192]eight prisoners, Jones and his commanding officer being among the number.

[013-193]The Indians conducted them to their towns on the Genesee river, where they

[013-194]had to run the gauntlet, and having passed with safety through this trying

[013-195]ordeal, they next came near losing their lives in a savage frolic. The

[013-196]warriors, on returning from their excursion, gave themselves up to

[013-197]drinking and merriment. Partaking freely of the intoxicating bowl, they

[013-198]soon became much excited, and the ferocity, which a time of war engenders,

[013-199]was thoroughly aroused among them. One of the prisoners they killed, and

[013-200]severing his head from the body, carried it about the camp, on the end of

[013-201]a pole, with wild shouts and frantic yells.

[013-202]They next meditated the death of Boyd and Jones, and while discussing the

[013-203]manner in which they would have them suffer, a few squaws conveyed them

[013-204]away and hid them. Jones was subsequently adopted into an Indian family,

[013-205]became familiar with their customs and language, and after the declaration

[013-206]of peace, was appointed by [[george-washington|President Washington]] as Indian interpreter, the

[013-207]duties of which office he discharged with fidelity, until within a year or

[013-208]two of his death.

[013-209]Mr. Jones was about the ordinary stature, firmly built, and qualified by

[013-210]nature for duties requiring activity and endurance. Possessing uncommon

[013-211]mental vigor, and quick perception, he was enabled to form a just estimate

[013-212]of character, and determine with readiness the springs of human action.

[013-213]His bravery, physical power, energy and decision of character, gave him

[013-214]great command over the Indians with whom he was associated, and having

[013-215]their entire confidence, he was enabled to render the government

[013-216]invaluable service in her treaties with the northern and north-western

[013-217]tribes. He was a favorite interpreter of Red Jacket, and his style is said

[013-218]to have been energetic, graphic, and chaste. He died at his residence near

[013-219]Genesee, on the 18th of August, 1836.

[013-220]It was not far from the time of this council at Canawangus that Red Jacket

[013-221]visited Hartford, Conn.

[013-222]In the adjustment of the land difficulties between the states of

[013-223]Connecticut and Pennsylvania, owing to the indefinite terms of their

[013-224]original charters, Connecticut obtained, as we have seen, a title to that

[013-225]part of Ohio, called Western Reserve. The Senecas laying claim to this, on

[013-226]the ground of conquest, negotiations were entered into with them for the

[013-227]extinguishment of their title. This was the occasion of the orator's

[013-228]visit, concerning which there is but a very brief record. His appearance,

[013-229]however, has been spoken of in terms of high commendation, and a single

[013-230]passage only of the speech he made on that occasion has been preserved.

[013-231]"We stand,"—said he, when representing the condition of his people,—"a

[013-232]small island in the bosom of the great waters. We are encircled,—we are

[013-233]encompassed. The evil spirit rides upon the blast, and the waters are

[013-234]disturbed. They rise, they press upon us, and the waves once settled over

[013-235]us, we disappear forever. Who then lives to mourn us? None. What marks our

[013-236]extermination? Nothing. We are mingled with the common elements."

[013-237]The entire speech was listened to with feelings of profound admiration,

[013-238]and his action elicited praise for its dignity and grace. He entered the

[013-239]august assemblage, before which he was called to appear, with a step

[013-240]measured, firm and dignified,—a countenance erect, bold and discursive,—

[013-241]without manifesting surprise, fear or curiosity; and his effort sustaining

[013-242]fully his high reputation as an orator, made the occasion one of great

[013-243]interest, to those whom it had been the means of bringing together, or who

[013-244]had been attracted by curiosity, to see one whose fame had reached the

[013-245]land of steady habits. [Footnote: Col. Stone, from collections by J. W.

[013-246]Moulton.]
