---
description: 'Personal characteristics of Red Jacket'
id: ch14
label: 'Chapter XIV: Personal Characteristics'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[014-001][[cornplanter|Cornplanter]] in disrepute—Effort to regain his standing—[[red-jacket|Red Jacket]]

[014-002]charged with [[witchcraft-accusations|witchcraft]]—His defense—Further notices of Cornplanter—

[014-003]Early recollections—At the defeat of General Braddock in 1755—With the

[014-004]English in the war of the Revolution—Takes his father a prisoner—His

[014-005]address—Releases him—Address to the Governor of Pennsylvania—Visit of

[014-006]President Alden—Close of his life.

[014-007]Not long after the large sale of their domain to Robert [[thomas-morris|Morris]], which had

[014-008]been negotiated at [[big-tree|Big Tree]], the [[seneca-nation|Senecas]] began to realize that they had

[014-009]committed a great mistake. The broad lands, mountain, hill, and valley,

[014-010]over which they had roamed, the springs and streams of water by whose side

[014-011]they had been wont to encamp, and above all the graves of their sires,

[014-012]where affection's altar had been hallowed by their sighs and tears, these

[014-013]were still in view, but they appeared not as in days gone by, to wear for

[014-014]them the smiles of old and long tried friends. They seemed to present a

[014-015]look and utter a voice of reproach, as though chiding them for having

[014-016]broken in upon the harmony of those time honored arrangements, which had

[014-017]bound them together, and the thought of this filled their minds with

[014-018]anxiety and grief. Had they been aware of the sorrow they would experience

[014-019]in looking upon these lands, as no longer their own, their consent to part

[014-020]with them would not so readily have been given.

[014-021]The reverse which thereupon took place in their minds, fell heavily on

[014-022]those who had taken the most active part of the business of selling their

[014-023]country. Cornplanter, having borne a prominent part in these proceedings,

[014-024]fell deeply under the displeasure of his people. Their displeasure was so

[014-025]marked as to lead him to cast about for some means of relief. Aware of the

[014-026]credulity and superstition of his people, he resolved to avail himself of

[014-027]these characteristics of his nation, to accomplish the end he had in view.

[014-028]For this purpose he was in consultation with his brother Ga-ne-o-di-yo,

[014-029]who on one occasion terminated a scene of great dissipation, by the

[014-030]announcement that he had been delegated by the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]], with a new

[014-031]revelation, and with supernatural gifts. A severe illness became the

[014-032]occasion during which he made a visit to the unseen world, where visions

[014-033]and revelations of a most extraordinary nature, had been made known to

[014-034]him. The happiness of the good, and the tortures of the wicked, had thus

[014-035]become matters of personal observation. The announcement of these, in

[014-036]language and gesture indicating his assurance of their reality, gained for

[014-037]him credence among the people, as well as chiefs of his nation, and he was

[014-038]received as a prophet.

[014-039]His earliest attempts were successful in accomplishing a desirable reform,

[014-040]especially among the [[onondaga-nation|Onondagas]], the most profligate of the [[iroquois-confederacy|Six Nations]],

[014-041]from the degrading vice of intemperance. His influence in this direction

[014-042]was salutary, and had he confined his efforts to the recovery of his

[014-043]people from drunkenness, his mission would truly have been one of mercy,

[014-044]and his career might have terminated with the highest usefulness and

[014-045]honor.

[014-046]But sympathizing with Cornplanter, his brother, he conceived the idea of

[014-047]instituting against their enemies, the charge of *witchcraft*. In this

[014-048]the Indians generally believed, and a charge of this nature, coming from

[014-049]such a source, was a very grave matter. Through the instrumentality of

[014-050]Congress selected by himself, the sentence of death was procured against

[014-051]certain "familiars of Satan," and this sentence would have been executed,

[014-052]had there been no interference, from the knowledge of it coming to the

[014-053]whites, living in the vicinity.

[014-054]In no way discouraged, but rather emboldened by their success, they

[014-055]proceeded so far as to bring such a charge against Red Jacket himself, who

[014-056]was thus publicly denounced, at a great council held at [[buffalo-creek|Buffalo Creek]], and

[014-057]put upon trial.

[014-058]A degree of rivalry had hitherto existed between Cornplanter and Red

[014-059]Jacket, and as the former descended in the estimation of his people, for

[014-060]the part he had taken in the sale of their lands, the latter rose for the

[014-061]same reason, so that the highest aim of Cornplanter was reached, when he

[014-062]could, by this means, affect materially the character, and influence of

[014-063]his distinguished rival.

[014-064]The orator was thus placed in circumstances the most critical and trying,

[014-065]of any that had hitherto met him in life. He perceived at a glance, that

[014-066]his entire history in the future, would depend on the decision that would

[014-067]then and there take place. He might be doomed, if his life were spared,

[014-068]and this was not altogether certain, to be the victim of surmises and

[014-069]superstitions, that would be annoying, if they did not prove to be utterly

[014-070]destructive of his happiness. He accordingly summoned himself for an

[014-071]effort as great, as his position was dangerous.

[014-072]He conducted the trial in his own defense. In this he exhibited the

[014-073]exceeding wariness, which was ever a prominent characteristic of his

[014-074]nature. The slightest circumstance affecting the character, or bearing

[014-075]suspiciously upon his adversary was not overlooked, and his history was

[014-076]scanned with the searching scrutiny of a mind, that seemed to grasp

[014-077]intuitively, the secret springs, which had influenced his conduct. One by

[014-078]one the professions that had formed his garb of sanctity, were exposed to

[014-079]the burning power of his keen satire, and step by step he advanced to a

[014-080]point, where, from the full assurance he had established this conviction

[014-081]in the minds of his people, he pronounced him AN IMPOSTER,—A CHEAT.

[014-082][Footnote: Conversation of the author with Wm. Jones, a chief among the

[014-083]Senecas, and a son-in-law of Red Jacket.]

[014-084]His speech riveted the attention of his hearers for nearly three hours. He

[014-085]prevailed. "THE IRON BROW OF SUPERSTITION RELENTED UNDER THE MAGIC POWER

[014-086]OF HIS ELOQUENCE."—The Indians divided and a majority appeared in his

[014-087]favor.

[014-088]"Perhaps,"—says the distinguished author just quoted,—"the annals of

[014-089]history cannot furnish a more conspicuous instance of the triumph and

[014-090]power of [[iroquois-oratory|oratory]], in a barbarous nation, devoted to superstition, and

[014-091]looking up to the accuser as a delegated minister of the Almighty."

[014-092][Footnote: Governor Clinton's Historical Discourse.]

[014-093]The victory which Red Jacket thus achieved recoiled heavily on

[014-094]Cornplanter, and gave him a blow, from which he never afterward fully

[014-095]recovered. He retired to his reservation, on the waters of the Alleghany

[014-096]river, within the boundaries of Pennsylvania, where he devoted himself,

[014-097]during the remainder of his long life, to the elevation and improvement of

[014-098]his people. He did not, after the example of his great rival Red Jacket,

[014-099]spurn the improvements of civilization, but engaged in agriculture after

[014-100]the example of the whites, and welcomed to his abode the teachers of

[014-101]christianity, and himself openly avowed his belief in its doctrines.

[014-102]Cornplanter was a native of Ca-na-wan-gus, on the [[genesee-river|Genesee]] river, a half

[014-103]breed, the son of an Indian trader, from the valley of the [[mohawk-nation|Mohawk]], a white

[014-104]man named John O'Bail. Of his early life little is known further than he

[014-105]himself intimated, in a letter written long afterward, to the governor of

[014-106]Pennsylvania:—In which he said,—"When I was a child I played with the

[014-107]butterfly, the grasshopper, and the frogs; and as I grew up, I began to

[014-108]pay some attention, and play with the Indian boys in the neighborhood; and

[014-109]they took notice of my skin, being a different color from theirs and spoke

[014-110]about it. I inquired of my mother the cause, and she told me that my

[014-111]father was a resident in [[albany|Albany]]. I still ate my victuals out of a bark

[014-112]dish. I grew up to be a young man, and married me a wife, and I had no

[014-113]kettle or gun. I then knew where my father lived, and went to see him, and

[014-114]found he was a white man, and spoke the English language. He gave me

[014-115]victuals, while I was at his house, but when I started to return home, he

[014-116]gave me no provision to eat on the way. He gave me neither kettle or gun."

[014-117]He was with his people when they fought in alliance with the French in the

[014-118]year 1755. The principal part of the force which met and defeated the

[014-119]English under General Braddock was Indian, and it was through their

[014-120]prowess mainly, if not entirely, that the victory was gained.

[014-121]What part Cornplanter took in that engagement is not known, but in the war

[014-122]of the Revolution, he was a war-chief, and ranked high in the estimation

[014-123]of his people.

[014-124]In a speech addressed to [[george-washington|President Washington]] in 1790, he related the

[014-125]manner in which the Indians came to be in alliance with the English.

[014-126]"Many nations inhabited this country; but they had no wisdom, therefore

[014-127]they warred together. The Six Nations were powerful and compelled them to

[014-128]peace; the lands to a great extent were given up to them; the French came

[014-129]among us and built [[fort-niagara|Niagara]]; they became our fathers and took care of us.

[014-130][[sir-william-johnson|Sir William Johnson]] came and took that fort from the French; he became our

[014-131]father and promised to take care of us, and did so until you were too

[014-132]strong for his king.

[014-133]"When you kindled your thirteen fires separately, the wise men that

[014-134]assembled at them told us that you were all brothers, the children of one

[014-135]great father, who regarded the red people also as his children. They

[014-136]called us brothers, and invited us to his protection; they told us that he

[014-137]resided beyond the great water, where the sun first rises; that he was a

[014-138]king whose power no people could resist, and that his goodness was as

[014-139]bright as that sun. What they said went to our hearts; we accepted the

[014-140]invitation, and promised to obey him. What the Seneca Nation promise, they

[014-141]faithfully perform; and when you refused obedience to that king, he

[014-142]commanded us to assist his beloved men, in making you sober. In obeying

[014-143]him we did no more than yourselves had led us to promise. The men that

[014-144]claimed this promise told us that you were children, and had no guns; that

[014-145]when they had shaken you, you would submit. We hearkened to them and were

[014-146]deceived."

[014-147]As a leader he was very active and brave, and as a partisan of the

[014-148]English, bore a prominent part in all of the principal engagements, in

[014-149]which the Indians were concerned during that war. He was on the war-path

[014-150]with [[joseph-brant|Brant]] during the campaign of General Sullivan against the Indian

[014-151]towns in the Genesee country in 1779, and also when under the command of

[014-152]Brant and Sir John Johnson, the Indians subsequently avenged the invasion

[014-153]of Sullivan, by the fearful destruction they wrought in the valley of the

[014-154]Mohawk.

[014-155]It was during this expedition that Cornplanter visited his father a second

[014-156]time. He was residing then in the vicinity of Fort Plain, and ascertaining

[014-157]where he lived, Cornplanter watched his opportunity and made his father a

[014-158]prisoner, but managed so adroitly, as to avoid recognition. He marched his

[014-159]sire ten or twelve miles up the river, and then stepped in front of him,

[014-160]faced about, and addressed him in the following manner:—

[014-161]"My name is John O'Bail, commonly called Cornplanter. I am your son! You

[014-162]are my father! You are now my prisoner, and subject to the customs of

[014-163]Indian warfare. But you shall not be harmed: you need not fear. I am a

[014-164]warrior! Many are the scalps I have taken! Many the prisoners I have

[014-165]tortured to death! I am your son! I was anxious to see you, and greet you

[014-166]in friendship. I went to your cabin, and took you by force. But your life

[014-167]shall be spared. Indians love their friends and their kindred, and treat

[014-168]them with kindness. If now you choose to follow the fortunes of your

[014-169]yellow son, and to live with our people, I will cherish your old age with

[014-170]plenty of venison, and you shall live easy. But if it is your choice to

[014-171]return to your fields, and live with your white children, I will send a

[014-172]party of my trusty young men to conduct you back in safety. I respect you,

[014-173]my father: you have been friendly to Indians, and they are your friends."

[014-174]The father preferred to return to his white children, and was therefore

[014-175]set at liberty, and escorted back in safety to his own home.

[014-176]In another address to the governor of Pennsylvania, he used this language:

[014-177]"I will now tell you, that the Great Spirit has made known to me that I

[014-178]have been wicked; and the cause was the Revolutionary war in America. The

[014-179]cause of Indians having been led into sin, at that time, was that many of

[014-180]them, were in the practice of drinking and getting intoxicated. Great

[014-181]Britain requested us to join with them in the conflict against the

[014-182]Americans, and promised the Indians land and liquor. I myself was opposed

[014-183]to joining in the conflict, as I had nothing to do with the difficulty

[014-184]between the two parties.

<!-- Source: 2386145434587187443_7339-4.txt.html -->

[014-185]"They told me they would inform me of the cause of the Revolution, which I

[014-186]requested them to do minutely. They then said it was on account of the

[014-187]heavy taxes, imposed on them by the British government, which had been for

[014-188]fifty years increasing upon them; that the Americans had grown weary

[014-189]thereof, and refused to pay, which affronted the king. There had likewise

[014-190]a difficulty taken place about some tea, which they wished me not to use,

[014-191]as it had been one of the causes that many people had lost their lives.

[014-192]And the British government now being affronted, the war commenced, and the

[014-193]cannons began to roar in our country.

[014-194]"The white people who live at Warren, called on me, some time ago to pay

[014-195]taxes for my land; which I objected to, as I had never been called upon

[014-196]for that purpose before; and having refused to pay, the white people

[014-197]became irritated, called upon me frequently, and at length brought four

[014-198]guns with them, and seized our cattle. I still refused to pay, and was not

[014-199]willing to let the cattle go. After a time of dispute, they returned home,

[014-200]and I understood the militia was ordered out to enforce the collection of

[014-201]the tax. I went to Warren, and to avert the impending difficulty, was

[014-202]obliged to give my note for the tax, the amount of which was forty-three

[014-203]dollars and seventy-nine cents. It is my desire that the governor will

[014-204]exempt me from paying taxes for my land to the white people; and also

[014-205]cause that the money I am now obliged to pay, may be refunded to me, as I

[014-206]am very poor."

[014-207]This appeal was brought before the Legislature of Pennsylvania, and an act

[014-208]was passed by which the chief was exonerated from the tax.

[014-209]One writer speaks of him as possessing uncommon genius, a strong and

[014-210]discriminating mind, and as having the power of enduring great mental

[014-211]application. He anxiously inquired into the evidences in support of the

[014-212]scripture account of creation, and of the scheme of doctrines which

[014-213]Christianity unfolded.

[014-214]President Alden of Alleghany college, speaks with delight of a visit he

[014-215]made to the old chief. He found him on the banks of the Alleghany, on a

[014-216]piece of first rate bottom land, a little within the limits of

[014-217]Pennsylvania. He was the owner of thirteen hundred acres of land, on a

[014-218]part of which stood his village, whose inhabitants gave signs of industry

[014-219]and thrift.

[014-220]He found it pleasant to behold the agricultural habits of the place as

[014-221]appeared from the numerous enclosures of buckwheat, corn and oats. He also

[014-222]speaks of seeing a number of oxen, cows and horses; and many logs designed

[014-223]for the saw mill, and the Pittsburgh market. "Cornplanter had for some

[014-224]time been very much in favor of the christian religion, and hailed with

[014-225]joy such as professed it. When apprised of Mr. Alden's arrival he hastened

[014-226]to welcome him to his village, and to wait upon him. And notwithstanding

[014-227]his high station as a chief, having many men under his command, he chose

[014-228]rather, in the ancient patriarchal style, to serve his visitors himself;

[014-229]he therefore took care of their horses, and went into the field and cut

[014-230]and brought oats for them." [Footnote: Drake's book of the Indians.]

[014-231]He died at his reservation March 7th, 1836, a hundred winters having

[014-232]passed over him, and was buried beneath the sheltering branches of a noble

[014-233]tree standing in his field. No other monument marks his grave.
