---
description: 'Anecdotes and incidents from Red Jacket''s life'
id: ch16
label: 'Chapter XVI: Anecdotes and Incidents'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[016-001]Tecumseh and Indian confederation—Aid given by Elskawata—Doings at the

[016-002]Prophet's Town—Great Indian Council at the West—[[red-jacket|Red Jacket]]'s claim for

[016-003]precedence of the [[seneca-nation|Senecas]]—His adherence to the United States—Hostilities

[016-004]encouraged by British Agents—Warriors gathered at Prophet's Town—Visited

[016-005]by Gen. Harrison at the head of his troops—Hostilities disclaimed—

[016-006]Surprised by a sudden attack—Indians defeated—War proclaimed against

[016-007]England—Indians take sides—Unfavorable commencement—Different successes

[016-008]—Part taken by Red Jacket.

[016-009]Sixteen years had intervened since the treaty of peace, concluded with the

[016-010]Indians at Greenville, by General Wayne in 1795. During this time friendly

[016-011]relations had been maintained with the various Indian tribes, who were in

[016-012]correspondence with the United States. This period had not closed,

[016-013]however, ere the ambitious designs of an active and influential chief,

[016-014]began to wear the appearance of open hostility.

[016-015]The possession of rare mental endowments, together with physical

[016-016]qualifications, that were the means of extending his renown, as an

[016-017]intrepid brave, far beyond the boundaries of his own tribe, rendered the

[016-018]name of Tecumseh, a rallying word for the dusky warriors, even among the

[016-019]remote wilds visited by the Indian. Tecumseh entertained the ambitious

[016-020]project, at various times a favorite design with the Indian, of uniting

[016-021]all their tribes at the West and South-west, in one strenuous endeavor, to

[016-022]resist the further advance of the whites into their country, and of

[016-023]forming here a confederacy, similar to that which had existed among the

[016-024]Iroquois.

[016-025]In these views he was greatly assisted and strengthened by the influence

[016-026]and efforts of his brother, Elskawata.

[016-027]Elskawata, on the death of Penagashega, an aged and revered prophet, very

[016-028]adroitly assumed the sacred office of this Indian saint, and began to

[016-029]proclaim himself, as a delegated messenger of the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]] to his

[016-030]people.

[016-031]He commenced his career among the Shawnees, the people of his tribe, as

[016-032]early as 1805. But not content with so narrow a sphere for his endeavors,

[016-033]he went from tribe to tribe, and assembled as he was able, different

[016-034]nations, that he might make known to them the important instructions, he

[016-035]had been divinely authorized to communicate.

[016-036]For a long time his efforts wore the appearance of a religious, and

[016-037]pacific character. He proclaimed the high superiority of the Indians over

[016-038]the whites, and of his own tribe among the Indian tribes. He declared it

[016-039]to be the will of the Great Spirit, that the Indians should abandon the

[016-040]use of intoxicating drinks, refrain from intermarrying with the whites,

[016-041]live at peace with each other, have their property in common, and maintain

[016-042]their customs, as they had been anciently established. At a later period

[016-043]he affirmed with much solemnity, that he had received power from the Great

[016-044]Spirit, to cure all diseases, confound his enemies, and stay the arm of

[016-045]death, in sickness, or on the field of battle.

[016-046]As time advanced, the prophet passed from nation, to nation, artfully

[016-047]sustaining his assumptions, and proclaiming his doctrines. He gathered

[016-048]around him adherents from various tribes, encouraged pilgrimages to his

[016-049]camp, became conspicuous in all their general councils, and extended his

[016-050]influence to the various Indian towns, in the vicinity of the northern

[016-051]lakes, and on the broad plains, watered by the Mississippi and its

[016-052]branches. He could now, as he did, forward very effectively the ambitious

[016-053]views of his brother Tecumseh.

[016-054]From the Prophet's town, which was established on the banks of the Wabash,

[016-055]near the mouth of its tributary the Tippecanoe, as early as 1808, a

[016-056]correspondence was kept up with the numerous tribes at the North and West,

[016-057]and means were taken also to extend the combination they were forming, to

[016-058]the Cherokees and other nations of the South. Runners were sent as far

[016-059]even as the country of the Senecas, and the Iroquois in New York and

[016-060][[canada|Canada]], were solicited to join the Great Western Confederacy.

[016-061]Connected with this movement was the holding of Indian councils, at

[016-062]different places in the West. A very large council, was held at or near

[016-063][[detroit|Detroit]], which embraced in it deputations from the most distant tribes. A

[016-064]strong deputation was sent from the Senecas, with Red Jacket at its head.

[016-065]At the opening of this council a question arose as to precedence in

[016-066]debate, which is said to have been the occasion of one of Red Jacket's

[016-067]most effective and brilliant speeches, and was the means of securing for

[016-068]himself and fellow delegates, the high position he ever claimed, as

[016-069]belonging rightfully to his nation.

[016-070]The right of precedence was claimed by the Wyandots, a large and powerful

[016-071]nation, which for a long time, had been pre-eminent among the Western

[016-072]tribes. To them had been committed for preservation and safe keeping, the

[016-073]Great Belt, the symbol of a previous union among the tribes. It had been

[016-074]used in gathering them to form their league, to resist the settlements of

[016-075]the whites north and west of the Ohio river. The concert of action among

[016-076]the Indians, in the wars at the West between 1790 and 1795, is to be

[016-077]traced to this league. To the Wyandots also had been given the original

[016-078]duplicate of the treaty of peace, concluded at Greenville in 1795.

[016-079]Hence the claim they presented to precedence at this council; a claim

[016-080]which was eloquently supported by their most able chiefs.

[016-081]This claim was denied by Red Jacket, who maintained that the place in

[016-082]question belonged rightfully to the Senecas, and sustained his position by

[016-083]a reference to facts and usages in the past, which displayed a minute and

[016-084]accurate knowledge of the history of the different Indian tribes, that

[016-085]surprised as well as delighted his hearers. His speech was characterized

[016-086]throughout by great ability, and displayed such a power of [[iroquois-oratory|oratory]],

[016-087]particularly of invective, as to excite the wonder of all present, who

[016-088]could understand his language, and comprehend the force of his allusions.

[016-089]His effort was entirely successful. No attempt was made at reply. The

[016-090]first rank after this, without further hesitation, was given to the

[016-091]Senecas.

[016-092]It is due to the memory of Red Jacket, who has been, called *double

[016-093]tongued and deceitful*, to state that from the time he fully gave his

[016-094]adherence, he never swerved from his allegiance to the United States. Ever

[016-095]afterward he was their faithful friend and ally. The impatient affirmation

[016-096]of [[joseph-brant|Brant]], that "Red Jacket had vowed fidelity to the United States, and

[016-097]sealed his promise, by kissing the likeness of [[george-washington|General Washington]]," though

[016-098]in a measure true, as expressive of his fidelity, had never any occasion

[016-099]to be qualified, by a statement to the contrary.

[016-100]During the present council, his views were in opposition to those

[016-101]generally entertained and expressed, and no consideration availed with

[016-102]him, to break faith with the United States. He had before this notified

[016-103]the Indian agent of the formation of another league, and of the avowedly

[016-104]warlike purpose of certain Indian councils, that had been held at the

[016-105]West.

[016-106]Early in the year 1810, at the head of a delegation of his people and

[016-107]accompanied by the agent, and Captain Parrish as interpreter, he visited

[016-108]the city of Washington, and informed our government of the hostilities

[016-109]that were in contemplation, and of the efforts of his people to secure

[016-110]peace.

[016-111]The pacific councils of Red Jacket were of little avail. The warlike

[016-112]agitation was continued. The retreat of the Prophet on the banks of the

[016-113]Wabash, became not less noted for warlike exercises, than for its

[016-114]religious harangues. The minds of the Indians were already ripe for an

[016-115]outbreak, whenever a sufficient pretext should offer. The visit of

[016-116]Tecumseh at Vincennes in the summer of 1810, with three hundred well armed

[016-117]warriors, and his haughty and insulting bearing toward Governor Harrison,

[016-118]indicated clearly, the hostile spirit that was rife among them.

[016-119]Not long after this, the report came that a thousand warriors awaited his

[016-120]command, in and about the Prophet's town. So large a horde of Indians

[016-121]together, without the means of support, and practicing themselves in the

[016-122]arts of war, were viewed with suspicion. Charity must have been blind, to

[016-123]have supposed they were assembled merely for the purpose of devotion.

[016-124]Frequent plundering, midnight arson, and occasional massacres in frontier

[016-125]settlements, proclaimed the fact, that hostilities had already commenced,

[016-126]and that our people in this region needed protection.

[016-127]The Indians were greatly encouraged in their warlike feeling, by the

[016-128]intercourse they constantly maintained with the [[british-indian-department|British Indian Department]].

[016-129]The British Fur Company also by her traders, had correspondence with the

[016-130]leading men of all these Western and North-western tribes, and this

[016-131]intercourse resulted in holding the Indians more firmly, in alliance with

[016-132]the English. The desire they entertained for dominion on this continent,

[016-133]led them to encourage the Indians, in their effort to hold in check the

[016-134]settlements of the United States, that were pushing their way westward.

[016-135]Thus countenanced and encouraged, the Indians became more determined and

[016-136]bold in their hostility.

[016-137]These threatening indications, coming to the knowledge of our government,

[016-138]General Harrison was directed to go with an armed force to the Prophet's

[016-139]town, and his visit resulted in the battle of Tippecanoe, fought on the

[016-140]seventh of November, 1811.

[016-141]His officers desired him to attack the town on the day before, but wishing

[016-142]to avoid fighting if possible, and having been met by several chiefs, who

[016-143]disclaimed having hostile intentions, and offered submission and peace, he

[016-144]made a careful survey of the country, and selecting an advantageous

[016-145]position, encamped for the night.

[016-146]At an early hour in the morning they were furiously assailed by the

[016-147]Indians, who had stealthily crept up very near without being observed. A

[016-148]bloody and, for a time doubtful, engagement ensued, but at length the

[016-149]Indians were repulsed and a decisive victory gained.

[016-150]The Prophet was securely stationed on an adjoining eminence during the

[016-151]battle, and the American bullets having a more powerful effect upon the

[016-152]Indians than they had been led to anticipate, a runner was sent to him

[016-153]with the intelligence. He was engaged singing very piously, one of his old

[016-154]war songs. When told what was taking place, he said, "Go,—fight on: it

[016-155]will soon be as I have said;" and commenced singing again more loudly.

[016-156][Footnote: The Prophet had assured them that the Americans would not be

[016-157]successful. That their bullets would not hurt the Indians, who would have

[016-158]light while their enemies would be in darkness.—Life and Times of Wm. H.

[016-159]Harrison.]

[016-160]Tecumseh was absent when the battle was fought, being engaged in

[016-161]forwarding his designs among the Indian tribes at the South. He was

[016-162]disappointed and grieved with the result, regarding the battle as

[016-163]premature, and tending very much to thwart the purposes he had in view.

[016-164]He awaited a more favorable turn in the wheel of fortune, and thought this

[016-165]would come with the war anticipated between England and the United States.

[016-166]Difficulties, growing out of the right assumed by the former, of boarding

[016-167]American vessels, to discover and remove any English sailors belonging to

[016-168]the crew, which frequently resulted in seizing American seamen and forcing

[016-169]them into the British navy, had now assumed so formidable an aspect, as to

[016-170]call forth from our government a proclamation of war against England,

[016-171]issued on the 19th of June, 1812.

[016-172]In anticipation of this event, as well as after it, means were employed by

[016-173]the agents of Britain, to secure the services of the Indians during this

[016-174]contest. The opportunity was gladly welcomed by the Miamis, Shawnees and

[016-175]other Indian tribes, who had recently been severely chastised by General

[016-176]Harrison. The [[mohawk-nation|Mohawks]] and other Indians in Canada were also induced to

[016-177]take up the hatchet, and efforts were made to influence such of the Six

[016-178]Nations, as resided within the state of New York, to take sides with the

[016-179]British in this war, but they were not successful.

[016-180]The United States, instead of seeking among the Indians recruits for their

[016-181]army, advised the Senecas, and other tribes of the Iroquois within their

[016-182]borders, to remain neutral. A council was convened by the Indian agent,

[016-183]Mr. Erastus Granger, for the purpose of spreading the whole matter before

[016-184]them. It resulted in securing from them a pledge of [[neutrality-policy|neutrality]]. So well

[016-185]convinced were they of the wisdom of this course, they determined to send

[016-186]a deputation of their brethren to Canada, to dissuade them if possible,

[016-187]from taking any part in the war. It was sent, but did not accomplish the

[016-188]end desired; the Mohawks had fully resolved upon engaging in the contest.

[016-189]It was difficult however, for the Senecas to enforce their decision upon

[016-190]their young braves, who were made restless by the sound of war, and were

[016-191]eager to engage in it; yet their sympathies were with the United States.

[016-192]The stirring music, martial array, noise and pomp of war, wrought so

[016-193]effectually on their minds, they would fain have persuaded their nation to

[016-194]declare war on their own account. The circulation among them of a rumor

[016-195]that the British had taken possession of Grand Island, a part of their own

[016-196]domain, led them to convene a council, which Mr. Granger was invited to

[016-197]attend, and after stating the case to him, Red Jacket declared the purpose

[016-198]of the Senecas in the following language:—

[016-199]"BROTHER: You have told us, that we have nothing to do with the war, that

[016-200]has taken place between you and the British. But we find that the war has

[016-201]come to our doors. Our property is taken possession of, by the British and

[016-202]their Indian friends. It is necessary for us now to take up the business,

[016-203]defend our property, and drive the enemy from it. If we sit still upon our

[016-204]seats, and take no means of redress, the British according to the customs

[016-205]of you white people, will hold it by conquest. And should you conquer the

[016-206]Canadas, you will claim it on the same principle, as though you had

[016-207]conquered it from the British. We therefore request permission to go with

[016-208]our warriors, and drive off those bad people, and take possession of our

[016-209]lands."

[016-210]Their request was granted, and the chiefs regarding themselves as an

[016-211]independent nation, issued a formal declaration of war, against the

[016-212]provinces of Upper and Lower Canada, and summoned their warriors to

[016-213]protect their rights and liberties, with the Americans.

[016-214]Four hundred warriors, armed and painted, and ready for the field,

[016-215]answered to this call, led by the brave though now aged [[farmer-s-brother|Farmer's Brother]],

[016-216]who was said by Colonel Worth, to have been "the noblest Indian in form

[016-217]and mould, in carriage and in soul, of that generation of his race."

[016-218][Footnote: Col. Worth as given by Col. Stone.]

[016-219]The principal scene of war at this time was on our north-western frontier.

[016-220]Its commencement had been disastrous. The capture of Mackinaw, Chicago,

[016-221]and Detroit, attended by the surrender of General Hull, commander of the

[016-222]American forces at the latter place, spread a feeling of insecurity and

[016-223]dismay all along our western frontier settlements. For an immense extent

[016-224]they were without protection. But new troops were raised and brought on to

[016-225]the field, under the wise conduct of General Harrison, and the signal

[016-226]naval victory of Commodore Perry on Lake Erie, September 10, 1813, and the

[016-227]equally decisive battle on the river Thames, in the October following,

[016-228]very materially improved the prospect of the American arms. After this

[016-229]battle, the Western Indians were disposed to entertain propositions of

[016-230]peace.

[016-231]Thus far they had proved to be efficient allies of the British, increasing

[016-232]their force by an addition of nearly eighteen hundred, commanded by the

[016-233]renowned Tecumseh, who had been called the "Indian Bonaparte." His preeminence among them was now widely acknowledged, and he swayed by his

[016-234]influence a greater number of warriors, than any Indian of his time.

[016-235]Before engaging in the Battle of the Thames, he seemed to have a

[016-236]presentiment of his death. He said to the chiefs about him, "brother

[016-237]warriors, we are about to enter into an engagement from which I shall

[016-238]never come out,—my body will remain on the field of battle." [Footnote:

[016-239]Life of Tecumseh, by Benjamin Drake.]

[016-240]His prediction was verified; as marking the field of strife where the

[016-241]Americans were victorious, the ashes of this celebrated warrior here

[016-242]repose, near the borders of a willow marsh, the willow and the wild rose

[016-243]weaving a chaplet over his grave.

[016-244]The Indians who had volunteered their services in the American army, were

[016-245]first employed in the gallant defense made at [[black-rock|Black Rock]], during the month

[016-246]of July, of this same year, 1813.

[016-247]A surprise party from the British head-quarters at Lundy's Lane, was sent

[016-248]against the American stores, collected at Black Rock and at Buffalo, and

[016-249]were not at this time strongly guarded. They were successful in their

[016-250]first attempt, but were in turn unexpectedly met by the adroit management

[016-251]of General Porter, under whose supervision the forces in this vicinity had

[016-252]been placed, who rallied volunteers at Buffalo, turned back the retreating

[016-253]garrison, and by a well planned attack, succeeded in driving the enemy

[016-254]from the post they had taken a short time before.

[016-255]The Indians were soon after in another engagement, in the vicinity of Fort

[016-256]George, and from an official report made at the time, it appears that this

[016-257]formed a part of Red Jacket's military experience. A company of volunteers

[016-258]and Indians commanded by Major Chapin, to which was added a force of about

[016-259]two hundred regulars under Major Cummings, amounting in all to about five

[016-260]hundred, the whole being under the direction of General Porter, proceeded

[016-261]to attack the British and Indian encampment, and were entirely successful.

[016-262]In an official statement of this affair given by General Boyd, then

[016-263]commanding the post at St. George, he says:—"Those who participated in

[016-264]this contest, particularly the Indians, conducted with great bravery and

[016-265]activity. General Porter volunteered in the affair, and Major Chapin

[016-266]evinced his accustomed zeal and courage. The principal chiefs who led the

[016-267]warriors this day were Farmer's Brother, Red Jacket, Little Billy,

[016-268][[captain-pollard|Pollard]], Black Smoke, [[sir-william-johnson|Johnson]], Silver Heels, Captain Half Town, Major

[016-269]Henry O'Bail, and Captain Cold, who was wounded. In a council held with

[016-270]them yesterday, they covenanted not to scalp or murder; and I am happy to

[016-271]say, that they treated the prisoners with humanity, and committed no

[016-272]wanton cruelties on the dead."
