---
description: 'The Seneca nation — Customs, beliefs, and way of life'
id: ch17
label: 'Chapter XVII: The Seneca Nation'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[017-001]Taking of Fort Erie—Battle of Chippewa—Service rendered by the Indians—

[017-002]General Porter's account of the campaign—[[red-jacket|Red Jacket]] commended—Withdrawal

[017-003]of Indian forces—Other successes—Conclusion of peace.

[017-004]Directly across from Buffalo, at the head of [[fort-niagara|Niagara]] river, on the [[canada|Canada]]

[017-005]side, stood Fort Erie. Chippewa, at that time head-quarters of the British

[017-006]army, was eighteen miles below, on the same side. Fort Erie was garrisoned

[017-007]by about one hundred and seventy men; at Chippewa and within available

[017-008]distances from it, was stationed the principal part of the British force

[017-009]in this region.

[017-010]The plan with which it was proposed to open the campaign of 1814,

[017-011]contemplated an attack on both of these places.

[017-012]The campaign of the previous year, though favorable in a good degree, did

[017-013]not close with entire success to the American arms. The idea was

[017-014]entertained of descending the St. Lawrence, with a view of capturing

[017-015]Montreal, a design which signally failed. Taking advantage of the feeble

[017-016]defense of our frontier, by the withdrawal of the regular troops for the

[017-017]purpose named, the enemy, on the 18th of December, surprised and took Fort

[017-018]Niagara, and sweeping along our frontier settlements on the Niagara river,

[017-019]ravaged the country by fire and sword, as they passed rapidly on, carrying

[017-020]the works at Lewiston, and Manchester, and laying in ashes the thriving

[017-021]villages of [[black-rock|Black Rock]] and Buffalo. They burned also without opposition, a

[017-022]village of the [[tuscarora-nation|Tuscaroras]].

[017-023]The voice of Red Jacket was thereupon heard, arousing his people again, to

[017-024]the necessity of taking up arms. And as the result, about six hundred

[017-025]warriors, mostly from the [[seneca-nation|Seneca]] nation, were in readiness to offer their

[017-026]services, at the opening of the present campaign.

[017-027]Buffalo was the appointed place of rendezvous, and on the first of July,

[017-028]General Brown, who commanded our forces, regarding them as sufficient to

[017-029]warrant the commencement of the plan of operations, began by

[017-030]reconnoitering Fort Erie. During the night of the second of July, General

[017-031]Ripley, with a part of his brigade, embarked in boats, with a view of

[017-032]landing on the opposite shore, one mile above the Fort, at about day break

[017-033]the next morning.

[017-034]General Scott with his brigade was to cross the Niagara river, through a

[017-035]difficult pass in the Black Rock Rapids, and make a simultaneous landing

[017-036]below the fort. The two brigades enclosing the fort, could prevent the

[017-037]escape of the garrison, until artillery to reduce it, should be brought

[017-038]from Buffalo.

[017-039]General Scott with his usual promptness, made good his landing, and was on

[017-040]the ground at the hour appointed, and by the aid of a few Indians and

[017-041]volunteers who accompanied him as guides, invested the fort, so as to

[017-042]secure its garrison. General Ripley though prompt in his departure, was

[017-043]delayed in reaching his position, by a dense fog which misled his pilots.

[017-044]As the sun rose the British commandant and his officers, could see the

[017-045]busy operations going on in ferrying across from Buffalo, artillery,

[017-046]Indians and soldiers, with their various preparations of war. They

[017-047]discovered also how completely they were invested. At the demand of

[017-048]General Brown, without firing a gun or making any attempt at resistance,

[017-049]the fort and garrison were surrendered.

[017-050]This part of their enterprise being accomplished, they next turned their

[017-051]thoughts toward Chippewa.

[017-052]The Chippewa or Welland river, is a considerable stream not far from one

[017-053]hundred yards wide, and from twelve to twenty feet deep, entering the

[017-054]Niagara at right angles, as it flows in from the west.

[017-055]On the north or left bank of this stream, near its mouth, the British army

[017-056]had its station and defenses, consisting of two block houses, connected

[017-057]and flanked by a parapet.

[017-058]Street's creek was two miles above, or south of this, a small sluggish

[017-059]stream, which enters the Niagara in a direction parallel with the

[017-060]Chippewa. The mouth of this creek was selected by the American commanders,

[017-061]as affording a favorable position for their army before the battle.

[017-062]On the evening of the same day of the capture of Fort Erie, General Scott

[017-063]with his brigade and Towson's artillery, proceeded down the river on his

[017-064]way toward Chippewa, and on the morning of the fourth, encamped in the

[017-065]open field, on the south side of Street's creek, having driven in some

[017-066]advanced posts of the enemy. In the evening he was joined by General

[017-067]Brown, with General Ripley's brigade, which took post in the same field,

[017-068]in rear of General Scott.

[017-069]General Porter with the Indians, and Pennsylvania volunteers, crossed the

[017-070]Niagara at Black Rock during the night of the fourth, and on the morning

[017-071]of the fifth, marched for the camp, arriving there at about noon.

[017-072]The two armies nearly equal in numbers, and well qualified by their

[017-073]thorough equipments, and the skill of their commanders, to harm each other

[017-074]effectually, were now encamped with only two miles, and the two streams,

[017-075]on whose banks they rested, between them.

[017-076]But though thus near, intervening objects prevented their seeing each

[017-077]other. Between them was a strip of woodland about one-fourth of a mile in

[017-078]width, extending from the forest on the west, near to the bank of the

[017-079]river, where it was cleared for the public highway. This effectually shut

[017-080]out from the view of the other, the manoeuvres of each army.

[017-081]The Indians and militia from the British army infested these woods, and

[017-082]became annoying to our forces. General Porter being well acquainted with

[017-083]the country, and having charge of the Indians, was requested to take them,

[017-084]and a part of his Pennsylvania volunteers, and dislodge this portion of

[017-085]the enemy; General Brown assuring him, that none of the British regulars

[017-086]would be found south of the Chippewa on that day, and promising him in

[017-087]case of so improbable a contingency, the support of General Scott's

[017-088]brigade.

[017-089]At about three o'clock of the same day of his arrival, General Porter

[017-090]formed his men, half a mile in rear of the main camp, into single or

[017-091]Indian file, placing the Indians on the left, and a part of the

[017-092]Pennsylvanians on the right.

[017-093]"Thence he marched into the woods in the same order, in a line at right

[017-094]angles to the river, until the whole Indian force was immerged in the

[017-095]forest, leaving the white troops in the open field; they had only to halt

[017-096]and face to the right, when the whole were formed in line of battle,

[017-097]three-fourths of a mile long and one man deep, looking in the direction

[017-098]of Chippewa. Red Jacket was placed on the extreme left of the line, and

[017-099]General Porter took his station on the margin of the woods between his

[017-100]white and red troops, accompanied by [[captain-pollard|Captain Pollard]], a Seneca chief, who,

[017-101]in this campaign, was considered first in command among the Indians;

[017-102]Colonel Flemming, the Quarter-master of the Indian corps, Lieutenant

[017-103]Donald Fraser his aid, and Henry [[sir-william-johnson|Johnson]] his interpreter. He was also

[017-104]accompanied by Major Jones, and Major Wood of the Engineers, as

[017-105]volunteers; and was supported by a company of regular infantry, marching

[017-106]in column in rear, as a reserve.

[017-107]"The Indians were commanded by their war-chiefs, who were indulged in

[017-108]their own mode of conducting the attack, marching about twenty yards in

[017-109]advance of the warriors of their respective tribes. General Porter having

[017-110]sent out scouts to reconnoiter the enemy, the march was commenced by

[017-111]signal, and proceeded at first with great stillness and caution. The

[017-112]chiefs have signals, by which, on the discovery of any circumstance

[017-113]requiring consultation, or change of route or action, they convey notice

[017-114]through their ranks with great celerity, on which the whole line of

[017-115]warriors drop instantly on the ground, and remain there until further

[017-116]orders. Two manoeuvres of this kind occurred on the march, the first of

[017-117]little moment, but the second communicating through the scouts, the exact

[017-118]position of the enemy, who, apprised of their assailants' approach, lay

[017-119]concealed in a thicket of bushes, along the margin of Street's creek.

[017-120]"A consultation was thereupon held, and new orders given, the purport of

[017-121]which was to change the line of march, so as to meet the enemy to more

[017-122]advantage, to increase the speed as much as was consistent with the

[017-123]preservation of order, and to receive their first fire, but not to return

[017-124]it except singly, and when it could be done with certain effect, and then

[017-125]to raise the war-whoop, pursue, capture, and slay as many as practicable,

[017-126]until they should reach the open ground in front of Chippewa, and thence

[017-127]return to camp.

[017-128]"The march was accordingly resumed, the fire of the enemy received, and a

[017-129]rush accompanied with savage yells made upon them, and continued for more

[017-130]than a mile, through scenes of frightful havoc and slaughter, few only of

[017-131]the fugitives offering to surrender as prisoners, while others, believing

[017-132]that no quarter would be given, suffered themselves to be cut down with

[017-133]the tomahawk, or turning back upon their pursuers, fought hand to hand to

[017-134]the last.

[017-135]"On reaching the open field in front of Chippewa, the assailants were met

[017-136]by a tremendous discharge of musketry, by which the warriors, who were

[017-137]principally in front, were thrown back upon the volunteers and reserve,

[017-138]who for want of equal speed were a short distance in the rear. Presuming

[017-139]that the fire had come from the enemy he had been pursuing, and who had

[017-140]rallied on reaching the open ground, General Porter made an effort, not

[017-141]without success, to reform his line with volunteers, reserve and a portion

[017-142]of the warriors; but on again advancing to the margin of the woods, found

[017-143]himself within a few yards of the whole British regular army, formed in

[017-144]line of battle, and presenting within a given space at least three men

[017-145]fresh from their camp, to a single one in his own attenuated and exhausted

[017-146]line. After receiving and returning two or three fires, the enemy rushed

[017-147]forward with charged bayonets, when hearing nothing from General Scott, he

[017-148]gave the order to retreat and form again on the left of General Scott's

[017-149]brigade, wherever it should be found.

[017-150]"It appears that the British commander had resolved on making a general

[017-151]attack, that day, on the American camp; and in execution of this purpose

[017-152]had marched his whole force across the Chippewa, a short time before

[017-153]General Porter entered the woods with the Indians; and having sent forward

[017-154]his Indians and militia, which was the British force met in the woods, to

[017-155]commence his attack on the left flank of the Americans, formed in the

[017-156]meantime his battalions of regulars on the plain, under cover of the strip

[017-157]of woodland which divided the two camps, with his artillery on his left,

[017-158]near the gorge occupied by the road along the bank of the river; ready to

[017-159]act the moment the effect of the flank attack should be developed.

[017-160]"The repulse of General Porter's command was thus effected by the main

[017-161]body of the British army, while General Scott's brigade was more than a

[017-162]mile in the rear, and had not yet crossed the bridge over Street's

[017-163]creek…. In a retreat of a mile in a diagonal direction to the right, so

[017-164]as to uncover the enemy to the fire of the American line, then just

[017-165]beginning to form, they gained but little distance on the British columns,

[017-166]who were in hot pursuit. When General Porter and his staff arrived at

[017-167]Street's creek, they were met by Major Jessup's battalion, then in the act

[017-168]of taking its position, which was on the left, and a short distance from

[017-169]the remainder of General Scott's brigade; and the volunteers fatigued as

[017-170]they were, aided Major Jessup's evolutions, which were executed with great

[017-171]order and celerity, by breaking down the fences to enable him to pass from

[017-172]the road bordering on Street's creek, to his position in the field.

[017-173]"Nothing could exceed the coolness and order with which General Scott's

[017-174]brigade crossed the bridge and formed its line, under the galling fire of

[017-175]the enemy's artillery, and the headlong approach of his infantry, who,

[017-176]when only fifty yards distant, were received by a tremendous discharge of

[017-177]musketry from the American line, which forced them to fall back for a

[017-178]considerable distance. But they speedily rallied and advanced again, when

[017-179]they were met in the same gallant manner; and they thereupon fled, with as

[017-180]much precipitation as they had entered it, not halting until they had

[017-181]recrossed the Chippewa and destroyed their bridge.

[017-182]"General Scott pursued them around the point of woods, beyond which he

[017-183]could only advance in face of their batteries, and these he could not

[017-184]reach by reason of the intervening river. He therefore deployed to the

[017-185]left, and forming a line in the open field, in front of Chippewa, directed

[017-186]his men to lie down with their heads toward the batteries, the better to

[017-187]avoid the effect of their fire.

[017-188]"The battle between the regular troops, was but of a few minutes duration,

[017-189]with the exception of the artillery, which on both sides was earliest and

[017-190]longest engaged, and served with the most destructive effect; Colonel

[017-191]Towson occupying the right of the American line, on Street's creek, and

[017-192]the British artillery the left of theirs, at the point of woods, and both

[017-193]commencing with the first movements of the regular troops.

[017-194]"Immediately after the two lines had encountered on Street's creek, a

[017-195]magnificent charger completely caparisoned, but without a rider, was seen

[017-196]prancing and curveting in the centre of the battle field, and endeavoring

[017-197]to make his escape through the American line to the rear. Presuming that

[017-198]he belonged to some officer who had fallen, he was forthwith secured by

[017-199]the servant of General Porter, and immediately mounted by the General, to

[017-200]whom he was a most acceptable acquisition, after the labors of the day,

[017-201]which he had performed on foot.

[017-202]"Riding up to General Brown, who was also in the midst of the action,

[017-203]General Porter received his orders to march with the two hundred

[017-204]Pennsylvanians, who had been left in camp, to the support of General

[017-205]Scott; which orders were promptly executed by following General Scott's

[017-206]brigade around the point of woods, receiving the fire of the British

[017-207]batteries, and taking post on his left, with the men in the same recumbent

[017-208]position. Here they awaited the arrival of General Ripley's brigade, which

[017-209]on the first discovery that the whole British army was in the field, had

[017-210]been ordered to make a detour through the woods, and attack the enemy's

[017-211]right. They soon came up, in the same muddy plight with the volunteers and

[017-212]Indians, who had previously traversed the same ground; when the whole army

[017-213]at about sundown quietly retired to their camp, on the south side of

[017-214]Street's creek.

[017-215]"And thus ended the battle of Chippewa, which probably produced more

[017-216]important results in favor of the American arms, than any other engagement

[017-217]by land in the course of that war; although there were several battles

[017-218]fought on the Niagara, if not elsewhere, during the same campaign,

[017-219]exhibiting a greater number of combatants engaged, a larger number of

[017-220]slain, and a result equally creditable to the gallantry and good conduct

[017-221]of the American soldiers.

[017-222]"The first advantage gained was in driving from the British army those

[017-223]troublesome enemies, their Indian allies, who had been the terror of our

[017-224]troops in the west, during all the preceding stages of the war, and had

[017-225]kept the camps of General Dearborn, General Lewis, and General Boyd, in a

[017-226]perpetual panic during the campaign of 1813. Terrified and disheartened by

[017-227]the reception they met with at Chippewa, they fled from the battle field

[017-228]to the head of [[lake-ontario|Lake Ontario]], a distance of thirty miles, without halting,

[017-229]and never again during the remainder of the war appeared in the British

[017-230]camp." [Footnote: Colonel Stone's Life and Times of Red Jacket. Mr. Stone

[017-231]refers to General Porter, as his authority, representing him as having

[017-232]voluntarily prepared the account given of this campaign.]

[017-233]The Indians during this engagement performed a most important service.

[017-234]Their conduct was highly commended by General Porter. Speaking of those

[017-235]under his command, General Porter says: "The great body of warriors as

[017-236]well as volunteers, engaged in the opening attack, fought with boldness,

[017-237]not to say desperation, unsurpassed by any other troops, until they were

[017-238]placed in a situation where it would have been madness not to retreat."

[017-239]The part Red Jacket took in this battle, though by no means conspicuous,

[017-240]was such as to call forth from an early biographer the affirmation, that

[017-241]"he displayed the most undaunted intrepidity, and completely redeemed his

[017-242]character from the suspicion of that unmanly weakness, with which he had

[017-243]been charged in early life; while in no instance did he exhibit the

[017-244]ferocity of the savage, or disgrace himself, by any act of outrage towards

[017-245]a prisoner, or a fallen enemy."

[017-246]The same writer adds: "His therefore was that true moral courage, which

[017-247]results from self respect, and the sense of duty, and which is more noble,

[017-248]and a more active principle, than that mere animal instinct which renders

[017-249]many men insensible to danger. Opposed to war, not ambitious of martial

[017-250]fame, and unskilled in military affairs, he went to battle from principle,

[017-251]and met its perils with the spirit of a veteran warrior, while he shrunk

[017-252]from its cruelties with the sensibility of a man and of a philosopher."

[017-253][Footnote: Life of Red Jacket. McKenny's Indian Biography.]

[017-254]Red Jacket as a civil officer was not called to take so prominent a place

[017-255]on the field of battle, as the war chiefs. Yet in all of their

[017-256]deliberations, which were frequent during the campaign, he could act as

[017-257]their counsellor, as he did on every such occasion. He was uniformly their

[017-258]principal orator, and his manner on these occasions is represented as

[017-259]being "graceful and imposing in the eye of every beholder, and his voice

[017-260]music, especially in the ears of his own people. He had the power of

[017-261]wielding them at will, and the soul stirring trumpet could not produce a

[017-262]more kindling effect in the bosoms of a disciplined army, than would his

[017-263]appeals upon the warriors of his race." [Footnote: Col. Stone's Life of

[017-264]Red Jacket.]

[017-265]That the battle of Chippewa was particularly severe to the Indian forces

[017-266]engaged in it, may be inferred from the fact that the British Indians

[017-267]retreated not only beyond the Chippewa, but stayed not until they had gone

[017-268]thirty miles further. The battle ground was strewed with many of their

[017-269]number who had been slain. Two, who had been mortally wounded, and were

[017-270]still alive, were despatched by a party of New York Indians, who were

[017-271]looking for the bodies of their fallen friends. Being reproached for their

[017-272]conduct in taking the life of an unresisting foe, one of them replied, in

[017-273]a manner that indicated evident sorrow for the deed done, "That it did

[017-274]seem hard to take the lives of these men, but they should remember that

[017-275]these were very hard times." [Footnote: Col. Stone.]

[017-276]The sight of slain warriors was far from being a pleasing object for Red

[017-277]Jacket to behold, and having ever been opposed to his people engaging in

[017-278]contests that did not really concern them, he proposed now that the

[017-279]Indians had helped chastise the British for burning one of their villages,

[017-280]and as they were no longer on Indian ground, that they should withdraw

[017-281]from a further participation in the war, in case they could prevail on

[017-282]their Canadian brethren to do the same.

[017-283]With the consent and approval of General Brown, a deputation of two brave

[017-284]and influential chiefs was sent to the Indians, who had fought with the

[017-285]British, with this in view. They were successful in persuading them to

[017-286]enter into this arrangement. The Indians therefore after this retired to

[017-287]their villages, with the exception of a few young braves, with whom the

[017-288]love of war, was a more potent influence, than the counsels of the aged

[017-289]and more considerate of their nation.

[017-290]Soon after the battle, our army forced a passage across the Chippewa, and

[017-291]after a short engagement the enemy gave way, and retired to Lake Ontario.

[017-292]Our army continued its march down the Niagara river, destroying some of

[017-293]the British works on their way.

[017-294]With new forces brought into the field, General Drummond took command of

[017-295]the British, and on the 25th of July the two armies met again, and there

[017-296]was a hard fought, but not very decisive battle, at Lundy's Lane, near

[017-297]Niagara Falls. The American army soon after fell back to Fort Erie. A

[017-298]British force of five thousand advanced and laid siege to the Fort, making

[017-299]a vigorous assault on the 15th of August. They were repulsed with a loss

[017-300]of a thousand men. Later, General Brown issued from the fort and gave them

[017-301]so stunning a blow as caused them to relinquish the siege.

[017-302]Other successful engagements during the year, ending with the signal

[017-303]victory at New Orleans under General Jackson, inspired greatly the hopes

[017-304]of the American people, and served likewise to repress the ardor of their

[017-305]opponents; which led to the return of peace with England, which was

[017-306]concluded at Ghent on the 24th of December, 1814.
