---
description: 'Later history of the Senecas after Red Jacket'
id: ch19
label: 'Chapter XIX: Later History of the Senecas'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[019-001]Witchcraft—Lease of Tom-Jemmy—Testimony of [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]]—Red Jacket's

[019-002]Philippic—Finding of the court—Remarkable interview of Dr. Breckenridge

[019-003]with Red Jacket—Further expression of views.

[019-004]In the spring of 1821, a man belonging to Red Jacket's tribe, fell into a

[019-005]languishing condition, and after lingering for some time, unable to obtain

[019-006]relief, died. The *medicine men* were unable to divine the cause of

[019-007]his malady; the circumstances of his sickness and death, were thought to

[019-008]be very peculiar, and his friends could discover no better way of

[019-009]explaining the matter, than to suppose he had been [[witchcraft-accusations|bewitched]].

[019-010]The Indians believed in sorcery, and at different times in their history

[019-011]had been known to execute summary judgment, on those whom they supposed to

[019-012]be guilty of practicing the Satanic art. In the present instance suspicion

[019-013]rested on the woman, by whom he had been attended, during his sickness. In

[019-014]pursuance of the customs of their nation she was condemned to die. The

[019-015]sentence was executed by Soo-nong-gise, a chief, commonly called TomJemmy. It took place at their reservation near Buffalo. Coming to the

[019-016]knowledge of the whites in the vicinity, it excited feelings of horror,

[019-017]mingled with indignation. The case was taken in hand by their authorities,

[019-018]who without regard to Indian jurisdiction, arrested Tom-Jemmy and threw

[019-019]him into prison.

[019-020]At his trial the plea was set up in his defense, that the Indians were a

[019-021]sovereign and independent nation, having their own laws, and their own

[019-022]mode of carrying them into execution; that the offense was within the

[019-023]acknowledged bounds of their own territory, that according to their laws,

[019-024]it was not a crime, inasmuch as the act of the prisoner was in the

[019-025]execution of a sentence, that had been passed upon the woman in question.

[019-026]The trial was conducted with reference to this issue, and numerous

[019-027]witnesses were examined to substantiate the facts having a bearing on the

[019-028]case. Red Jacket, among others, was called upon the stand, and examined

[019-029]with reference to the laws, and usages of his people.

[019-030]The counsel who conducted the prosecution, wishing to exclude his

[019-031]testimony, inquired whether he believed in the existence of a God? "*More

[019-032]truly than one who could ask me such a question*;" was his instant and

[019-033]indignant reply.

[019-034]On cross examination the inquiry was made, as to the rank he held among

[019-035]his own people? "Look at the papers, which the white men keep the most

[019-036]carefully," meaning the treaties ceding their lands, "and they will tell

[019-037]you."

[019-038]The orator's testimony, as did also that of other witnesses, who testified

[019-039]in the case, went to show that this woman, according to the judgment of

[019-040]the Indians, was a witch. That she had been regularly tried, and condemned

[019-041]by their laws; and her death was in conformity with usages, that had been

[019-042]in existence among them, from time immemorial.

[019-043]During the course of this examination, Red Jacket perceived that the

[019-044]belief of the Indians in witchcraft, was made a subject of ridicule among

[019-045]the bystanders, as well as legal gentlemen present, and he took occasion

[019-046]when an opportunity offered, to break forth in the following language:

[019-047]"What! Do you denounce us as fools and bigots, because we still believe

[019-048]that which you yourselves believed two centuries ago? Your black coats

[019-049]thundered this doctrine from the pulpit, your judges pronounced it from

[019-050]the bench, and sanctioned it with the formalities of law; and you would

[019-051]now punish our unfortunate brother, for adhering to the faith of *his*

[019-052]fathers and of *yours*! Go to Salem! Look at the records of your own

[019-053]government, and you will find that hundreds have been executed for the

[019-054]very crime, which has called forth the sentence of condemnation against

[019-055]this woman, and drawn down upon her the arms of vengeance. What have our

[019-056]brothers done, more than the rulers of your own people have done? And what

[019-057]crime has this man committed, by executing in a summary way, the laws of

[019-058]his country, and the command of the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]]?" [Footnote: Col. Stone,

[019-059]and also Drake's Book of the Indians.]

[019-060]It has been observed of Red Jacket's appearance on this occasion: "there

[019-061]is not, perhaps in nature, a more expressive eye than that of Red Jacket;

[019-062]when fired by indignation or revenge, it is terrible; and when he chooses

[019-063]to display his unrivalled talent for irony, his keen sarcastic glance, is

[019-064]irresistible." [Footnote: Drake.]

[019-065]This trial resulted in finding the allegations in the prisoner's plea to

[019-066]be true; yet the judgment being suspended, it was referred finally to the

[019-067]Supreme Court. A thorough examination of the laws, treaties and history

[019-068]relating to our correspondence with the Indian tribes, gave evidence of a

[019-069]sort of sovereignty among them, but as it was thought inexpedient to

[019-070]render a decision, that would recognize their independent jurisdiction,

[019-071]the prisoner was liberated, and the case dismissed.

[019-072]Not far from the time we are now considering, a remarkable conversation

[019-073]took place between Red Jacket and a young candidate for the clerical

[019-074]office, who afterward became an eminent divine. [Footnote: Rev. John

[019-075]Breckenridge, D. D.] It serves very much to illustrate the orator's

[019-076]character and views, and as we have permission, we give it entire, as

[019-077]follows:

[019-078]"The first-opportunity I ever enjoyed of seeing that deservedly celebrated

[019-079]Indian chief, Red Jacket, was in the year 1821, at the residence of

[019-080]General Peter B. Porter, [[black-rock|Black Rock]], New York. Being on a visit to the

[019-081]general and his family, it seemed a peculiarly fit occasion to become

[019-082]acquainted with the great [[seneca-nation|Seneca]] orator, whose tribe resided within a few

[019-083]miles of Black Rock. General Porter embraced in his command, the Indian

[019-084]warriors who fought with us on that line, during the late war, with Great

[019-085]Britain. From this cause; from his high character; his intimate

[019-086]acquaintance with the chiefs; and his known attachment to these

[019-087]interesting people, he had great influence over them; and his lamented

[019-088]lady, who it is not indelicate for me to say, was my sister, had by her

[019-089]kindness won the rugged hearts of all their leading men. So that their

[019-090]united influence, and my near relationship to them, secured to me at once

[019-091]access to the chiefs, and their entire confidence.

[019-092]"I had not only a great desire to see Red Jacket, but also to use this

[019-093]important opportunity to correct some of his false impressions, in regard

[019-094]to Christianity, and the missionaries established in his tribe. To this

[019-095]end it was agreed to invite Red Jacket and the other chiefs of the

[019-096]Senecas, to visit Co-na-shus-ta, [Footnote: Name given by Red Jacket to

[019-097]General Porter.] and meet his brother at his house. The invitation was

[019-098]accordingly given, and very promptly and respectfully accepted.

[019-099]"On the appointed day they made their appearance in due form headed by Red

[019-100]Jacket, to the number of perhaps eight or ten, besides himself. Red Jacket

[019-101]was dressed with much taste, in the Indian costume throughout. He wore a

[019-102]blue dress, the upper garment cut after the fashion of a hunting shirt,

[019-103]with blue leggings, very neat moccasins, a red jacket, and a girdle of red

[019-104]about his waist. I have seldom seen a more dignified or noble looking body

[019-105]of men than the entire group. It seems, though no such impression was

[019-106]designed to be made by the terms of the invitation, that some indefinite

[019-107]expectation had been excited in their minds, of meeting an official agent

[019-108]on important business. And they have been so unworthily tampered with, and

[019-109]so badly treated by us, as a people, and many of their most important

[019-110]treaties have been so much the result of private and corrupting appeals,

[019-111]that they very naturally look for some evil design in every approach to

[019-112]them, however open and simple it may be. So it was on this occasion. As

[019-113]soon as the ceremonies of introduction had passed, with the civilities

[019-114]growing out of it, the old orator seated himself in the midst of the

[019-115]circle of chiefs, and after a word with them, followed by a general

[019-116]assent, he proceeded in a very serious and commanding manner, always

[019-117]speaking in his own nervous tongue, through an interpreter, to address me

[019-118]as follows:

[019-119]"'We have had a call from our good friends,' (pointing to the general and

[019-120]his lady), 'to come down to Black Rock to meet their brother. We are glad

[019-121]to break bread and to drink the cup of friendship with them. They are

[019-122]great friends to our people, and we love them much. Co-na-shus-ta is a

[019-123]great man. His woman has none like her. We often come to their house. We

[019-124]thank them for telling us to come to-day. But as all the chiefs were asked

[019-125]we expected some important talk. Now, here we are: what is your business?'

[019-126]"This, as may be readily supposed, was an embarrassing position to a young

[019-127]man just out of college. I paused. Every countenance was fixed upon me,

[019-128]while Red Jacket in particular seemed to search me with his arrowy eye,

[019-129]and to feel that the private and informal nature of the meeting, and the

[019-130]extreme youth of the man, were hardly in keeping with the character and

[019-131]number of the guests invited; and his whole manner implied, that 'but for

[019-132]the sake of the general and his good viands, I should have waited for you

[019-133]to come to us.' With these impressions of his feelings, I proceeded to say

[019-134]in reply:

[019-135]"That I should have thought it very presumptuous in me to send for him

[019-136]alone, and still more for all the chiefs of his tribe, to come so far to

[019-137]see me; and that my intention had been to visit him, and the other chiefs

[019-138]at his town; but the general and his lady, could not go with me to

[019-139]introduce me. Nor were we at all certain that we should find him and the

[019-140]other chiefs at home; and at any rate the general's house was more

[019-141]convenient. He intended, when he asked them, to keep them as long as they

[019-142]could stay, and to invite them to break his bread, and drink his cup, and

[019-143]smoke his pipe; that his woman, and he as well as I, desired to see them

[019-144]at their house; that as to myself, I was a young man, and had no business

[019-145]with them, except that I had heard a great deal of Red Jacket, and wished

[019-146]to see him and hear him talk; and also that I had some things to say to

[019-147]him, when we were better acquainted, which though not *business*, were

[019-148]important to his people; and I thought it would be interesting to him, as

[019-149]I knew he loved his people much; and finally that I would return his

[019-150]visit, and show him that it was not out of disrespect, but out of regard

[019-151]for him, and great desire to see him, that we had sent for him, this being

[019-152]the way that white men honor one another.

[019-153]"Mrs. Porter immediately confirmed what I had said, and gave special point

[019-154]to the hospitality of the house, and the great desire I had to see Red

[019-155]Jacket. Her appeal, added to the reply, relaxed the rigor of his manner

[019-156]and that of the other chiefs, while it relieved our interview of all

[019-157]painful feelings.

[019-158]"After this general letting down of the scene, Red Jacket turned to me

[019-159]familiarly and asked; 'What are you? You say you are not a government

[019-160]agent, are you a gambler? [Footnote: The name given by Red Jacket to a

[019-161]land speculator.] or a black coat? or what are you?' I answered: 'I am yet

[019-162]too young a man to engage in any profession: but I hope some of these days

[019-163]to be a black coat.' He lifted up his hands accompanied by his eyes, in a

[019-164]most expressive way, and though not a word was uttered, every one fully

[019-165]understood that he very distinctly expressed the sentiment, what a fool!

[019-166]"I had too often been called to bear from those reputed great and wise

[019-167]among *white* men, the shame of the cross, to be surprised by his

[019-168]manner; and I was too anxious to conciliate his good feelings to attempt

[019-169]any retort, so that I commanded my countenance, and seeming not to have

[019-170]observed him, I proceeded to tell him something about our colleges, etc.,

[019-171]etc. That gradually led his mind away from the ideas with which it was

[019-172]filled and excited when he arrived.

[019-173]"A good deal of general conversation ensued, addressed to one and another

[019-174]of the chiefs, and we were just arriving at the hour of dinner, when our

[019-175]conference was suddenly broken up by the arrival of a breathless

[019-176]messenger, saying that an old chief, whose name I forget, had just died,

[019-177]and the other chiefs were immediately needed to attend his burial. One of

[019-178]the chiefs shed tears at the news; all seemed serious; but the others

[019-179]suppressed their feelings, and spent a few moments in very earnest

[019-180]conversation, the result of which Red Jacket announced to us. They had

[019-181]determined to return at once to their village; but consented to leave Red

[019-182]Jacket and his interpreter. In vain were they urged to wait until after

[019-183]dinner, or to refresh themselves with something eaten by the way. With

[019-184]hurried farewell and quick steps they left the house, and by the nearest

[019-185]footpath returned home.

[019-186]"This occurrence relieved me of one difficulty. It enabled me to see Red

[019-187]Jacket at leisure and alone. It seemed also to soften his feelings, and

[019-188]make him more affable and kind.

[019-189]"Soon after the departure of the chiefs, we were ushered to dinner. Red

[019-190]Jacket behaved with great propriety, in all respects; his interpreter,

[019-191]Major Berry, though half a white man and perhaps a chief, eat like a true

[019-192]savage. After a few awkward attempts at the knife and fork, he found

[019-193]himself falling behind, and repeating the old adage which is often quoted

[019-194]to cover the same style among our white urchins of picking a chicken-bone,

[019-195]'*that fingers were made before knives and forks*,' he proceeded with

[019-196]real gusto, and much good humor, to make up his lost time upon all parts

[019-197]of the dinner. It being over, I invited Red Jacket into the general's

[019-198]office, where we had, for four hours a most interesting conversation on a

[019-199]variety of topics, but chiefly connected with Christianity; the government

[019-200]of the United States; the missionaries; and his loved lands.

[019-201]"So great a length of time has passed since that interview, that there

[019-202]must be supposed a failure in the attempt perfectly to report what was

[019-203]said. I am well assured I cannot do justice to his language, even as

[019-204]diluted by the ignorant interpreter; and his manner cannot be described.

[019-205]But it was so impressive a conversation, and I have so often been called

[019-206]on to repeat it, that the substance of his remarks has been faithfully

[019-207]retained by my memory. It is only attempted here to recite a small part of

[019-208]what was then said, and that with particular reference to the illustration

[019-209]of his character, mind and opinions.

[019-210]"It has already been mentioned and is largely known, that Red Jacket

[019-211]cherished the most violent antipathy toward the American missionaries, who

[019-212]had been located among his people. This led to very strenuous resistance

[019-213]of their influence, and to hatred of their religion, but of the true

[019-214]character of which, he was totally ignorant. His deep attachment to his

[019-215]people, and his great principle that their national glory and even

[019-216]existence, depended upon keeping themselves distinct from white men, lay

[019-217]at the foundation of his aversion to Christianity. Though a pagan, yet his

[019-218]opposition was political, and he cared very little for any religion except

[019-219]so far as it seemed to advance, or endanger the glory and safety of the

[019-220]tribe.

[019-221]"He had unfortunately been led by designing and corrupt white men, who

[019-222]were interested in the result, falsely to associate the labors of the

[019-223]missionaries, with designs against his nation; and those who wished the

[019-224]Senecas removed from their lands that *they* might profit by the

[019-225]purchase, and who saw in the success of the mission the chief danger to

[019-226]*their* plans, artfully enlisted the [[pagan-christian-divide|pagan party]], of which Red Jacket

[019-227]was the leader, to oppose the missionaries, and thus effectually led to

[019-228]the final frustration of Red Jacket's policy; in and by the defeat of the

[019-229]missionary enterprise. But as this question is discussed in the sequel, I

[019-230]will not anticipate. Thus much it was necessary to premise, in order to

[019-231]explain the nature and ends of my interview with Red Jacket.

[019-232]"My object was to explain the true state of the case to him, and after

[019-233]this to recommend the doctrine of Christ to his understanding and heart.

[019-234]My first step, therefore, was to ask him why he so strongly opposed the

[019-235]settlement and labors of the missionaries? He replied, because they are

[019-236]the enemies of the Indians, and under the cloak of doing them good are

[019-237]trying to cheat them out of their lands. I asked him what proof he had of

[019-238]this. He said he had been told so by some of his wise and good friends,

[019-239]among the white men, and he observed that the missionaries were constantly

[019-240]wanting more land, and that by little and little, for themselves, or those

[019-241]who hired them to do it, they would take away all their lands, and drive

[019-242]them off.

[019-243]"I asked him if he knew there was a body of white men, who had already

[019-244]bought the exclusive right to buy their lands, from the government of New

[019-245]York, and that therefore the missionaries could not hold the lands given

[019-246]or sold them by the Indians, a moment after the latter left their lands

[019-247]and went away. He seemed to be startled by the statement, but said

[019-248]nothing. I proceeded to tell him that the true effect of the missionary

[019-249]influence on the tribe was to secure to them the possession of their

[019-250]lands, by civilizing them, and making them quit the chase, for the

[019-251]cultivation of the soil, building good houses, educating their children,

[019-252]and making them permanent citizens and good men. This was what the

[019-253]speculators did not wish. Therefore they hated the missionaries. He

[019-254]acknowledged that the Christian party among the Indians did as I said; but

[019-255]that was not the way for an Indian to do. Hunting, war and manly pursuits,

[019-256]were best fitted to them. But, said I, your reservation of land is too

[019-257]little for that purpose. It is surrounded by the white people, like a

[019-258]small island by the sea; the deer, the buffalo and bear, have all gone.

[019-259]This won't do. If you intend to live so much longer, you will have to go

[019-260]to the great western wilderness, where there is plenty of game, and no

[019-261]white men to trouble you. But he said, we wish to keep our lands and to be

[019-262]buried by our fathers. I know it, and therefore I say that the

[019-263]missionaries are your best friends; for if you follow the ways they teach,

[019-264]you can still hold your lands, though you cannot have hunting grounds, and

[019-265]therefore you must either do like white men, or remove from your lands,

[019-266]very soon. Your plan of keeping the Indians distinct from the white people

[019-267]is begun too late. If you would do it and have large grounds, and would

[019-268]let the missionaries teach you Christianity, far from the bad habits and

[019-269]big farms of the white people, it would then be well: it would keep your

[019-270]people from being corrupted, and swallowed up by our people who grow so

[019-271]fast around you, and many of whom are very bad. But it is too late to do

[019-272]it here, and you must choose between keeping the missionaries, and being

[019-273]like white men, and going to a far country: as it is, I continued, Red

[019-274]Jacket is doing more than any body else to break up and drive away his

[019-275]people.

[019-276]"This conversation had much effect upon him. He grasped my hand and said

[019-277]if that were the case it was new to him. He also said he would lay it up

[019-278]in his mind (putting his hand to his noble forehead), and talk of it to

[019-279]the chiefs, and the people.

[019-280]"It is a very striking fact that the disgraceful scenes now passing before

[019-281]the public eye over the grave of Red Jacket, so early and so sadly fulfil

[019-282]these predictions; and I cannot here forbear to add that the thanks of the

[019-283]nation are due to our present chief-magistrate, [Footnote: The President

[019-284]alluded to is Mr. Van Buren.—W. L. S.] for the firmness with which he has

[019-285]resisted the recent efforts to force a fraudulent treaty on the remnant of

[019-286]this injured people, and drive them against their will, and against law

[019-287]and treaties sacredly made, away from their lands, to satisfy the rapacity

[019-288]of unprincipled men.

[019-289]"It may be proper here to say likewise, that I do by no means intend to

[019-290]justify, all that possibly may have been done by the missionaries to the

[019-291]Senecas. It is probable the earliest efforts were badly conducted; and men

[019-292]of more ability ought to have been sent to that peculiar and difficult

[019-293]station. But it is not for a moment to be admitted, nor is it credible

[019-294]that the authors of the charge believe it, that the worthy men who at

[019-295]every sacrifice went to the mission among the Senecas, had any other than

[019-296]the purest purposes. I visited the station, and intimately knew the chief

[019-297]missionary. I marked carefully their plan and progress, and do not doubt

[019-298]their usefulness any more than their uprightness; and beyond all doubt it

[019-299]was owing chiefly to malignant influence exerted by white men, that they

[019-300]finally failed in their benevolent designs. But my business is to narrate,

[019-301]not to discuss.

[019-302]"My next object was to talk with Red Jacket about Christianity itself. He

[019-303]was prompt in his replies, and exercised and encouraged frankness, with a

[019-304]spirit becoming a great man.

[019-305]"He admitted both its truth and excellence, as adapted to white men. He

[019-306]said some keenly sarcastic things about the treatment that so good a man

[019-307]as Jesus, had received from white men. The white men, he said, ought all

[019-308]to be sent to hell for killing him; but as the Indians had no hand in that

[019-309]transaction, they were in that matter innocent. Jesus Christ was not sent

[019-310]to them; the atonement was not made for them; nor the Bible given to them;

[019-311]and therefore the Christian religion, was not meant for them. If the Great

[019-312]Spirit had intended that the Indians should be Christians, he would have

[019-313]made his revelation to them, as well as to the white men. Not having done

[019-314]so, it was clearly his will that they should continue in the faith of

[019-315]their fathers. He said that the red man was of a totally different race,

[019-316]and needed an entirely different religion, and that it was idle as well as

[019-317]unkind, to try to alter their religion, and give them ours.

[019-318]"I asked him to point out the difference of the races, contending that

[019-319]they were one, and needed but one religion, and that Christianity was that

[019-320]religion, which Christ intended for, and ordered to be preached, to all

[019-321]men. He had no distinct views of the nature of Christianity as a method of

[019-322]salvation, and denied the need of it. As to the unity of the races, I

[019-323]asked if he ever knew two distinct races, even of the lower animals to

[019-324]propagate their seed from generation to generation. But do not Indians and

[019-325]white men do so? He allowed it; but denied that it proved the matter in

[019-326]hand. I pressed the points of resemblance in every thing but color, and

[019-327]that in the case of the Christian Indians there was a common mind on

[019-328]religion. He finally waived this part of the debate, by saying that one

[019-329]thing was certain, whatever else was not, that white men had a great love

[019-330]for Indian women, and left their traces behind them wherever they could!

[019-331]"On the point of needing pardon, from being wicked, he said the Indians

[019-332]were *good* till the white man corrupted them. But did not the Indians

[019-333]have *some* wickedness *before* that? 'Not so much.' And how was

[019-334]*that* regarded by the Great Spirit?—Would he forgive it? He hoped

[019-335]so, 'did not know.' Jesus, I rejoined, came to tell us He would, and to

[019-336]get that pardon for us.

[019-337]"As to suffering and death among the Indians, did not they prove that the

[019-338]Great Spirit was angry with *them*, as well as with white men? Would

[019-339]he thus treat men that were *good*? He said they were not wicked

[019-340]before white men came to their country, and taught them to be so. But they

[019-341]*died before that*? And why did they die, if the Great Spirit was not

[019-342]angry, and they wicked? He could not say, and in reply to my explanation

[019-343]of the gospel doctrine of the entrance of death by sin, he again turned

[019-344]the subject by saying he was a 'great doctor,' and could cure any thing

[019-345]but death.

[019-346]"The interpreter had incidentally mentioned that the reason the chiefs had

[019-347]to go home so soon, was that they always *sacrificed a white dog on the

[019-348]death of a great man*. I turned this fact to the account of the

[019-349]argument, and endeavored to connect it with, and explain by it the

[019-350]doctrine of atonement, by the blood of Christ, and also pressed him on the

[019-351]questions, how can this *please* the Great Spirit on *your* plan?

[019-352]Why do you offer such a *sacrifice*, for so it is considered? And

[019-353]*where* they got such a rite from? He attempted no definite reply.

[019-354]Many other topics were talked over. But these specimens suffice to

[019-355]illustrate his views, and mode of thinking.

[019-356]"At the close of the conversation he proposed giving me a *name*, that

[019-357]henceforth I might be numbered among his friends, and admitted to the

[019-358]intercourse and regards of the nation. Supposing this not amiss, I

[019-359]consented. But before he proceeded he called for some whiskey. He was at

[019-360]this time an intemperate man, and though perfectly sober on that occasion,

[019-361]evidently displayed toward the close of the interview, the need of

[019-362]stimulus, which it is hardly necessary to say, we carefully kept from him.

[019-363]But he *insisted* now, and after some time a small portion was sent to

[019-364]him in the bottom of a decanter. He looked at it, shook it, and with a

[019-365]sneer said, 'why here is not whiskey enough for a name to float in.' But

[019-366]no movement being made to get more, he drank it off, and proceeded with a

[019-367]sort of pagan orgies, to give me a name. It seemed a semi-civil, semireligious ceremony. He walked around me again and again, muttering sounds

[019-368]which the interpreter did not venture to explain; and laying his hand on

[019-369]me pronounced me 'Con-go-gu-wah,' and instantly, with great apparent

[019-370]delight, took me by the hand as a brother. I felt badly during the scene,

[019-371]but it was beyond recall, and supposing it might be useful in a future

[019-372]day, submitted to the initiation.

[019-373]"Red Jacket was in appearance nearly sixty years old at this time. He had

[019-374]a weather-beaten look; age had done something to produce this, probably

[019-375]intemperance more. But still his general appearance was striking, and his

[019-376]face noble. His lofty and capacious forehead, his piercing black eye, his

[019-377]gently curved lips, and slightly aquiline nose, all marked a great man,

[019-378]and as sustained and expressed by his dignified air, made a deep

[019-379]impression on every one that saw him. All these features became doubly

[019-380]expressive when his mind and body were set in motion by the effort of

[019-381]speaking, if effort that may be called which flowed like a free, full

[019-382]stream from his lips. I saw him in the wane of life, and I heard him only

[019-383]in private, and through a stupid, careless interpreter. Yet

[019-384]notwithstanding these disadvantages, he was one of the greatest men and

[019-385]most eloquent orators I ever knew. His cadence was measured and yet very

[019-386]musical. In ordinary utterance it amounted to a sort of musical monotony.

[019-387]But when excited he would spring to his feet, elevate his head, expand his

[019-388]arms and utter with indescribable effect of manner and tone, some of his

[019-389]noblest thoughts.

[019-390]"After this interesting conference had closed, the old chief with his

[019-391]interpreter, bade us a very civil and kind farewell, and set forth on foot

[019-392]for his own wigwam.

[019-393]"It was four years after this before I had the pleasure of again seeing my

[019-394]old friend. I was then on a flying visit to Black Rock. At an early day I

[019-395]repaired to his village, but he was not at home. Ten days after, as we

[019-396]were just leaving the shore in the steamboat to go up the lake, he

[019-397]suddenly presented himself. It was unhappily too late to return. He hailed

[019-398]me by name, and pointed with much animation to such parts of his person as

[019-399]were decorated with some red cloth which I at parting had presented to

[019-400]him, and which, though not worn as a jacket, was with much taste

[019-401]distributed over his person. These he exhibited as proofs of his friendly

[019-402]recollection.

[019-403]"The last time I ever saw him was at the close of Mr. Adams'

[019-404]administration. He, with a new interpreter (Major Berry having been

[019-405]removed by death), had been on a visit to his old friend, Co-na-shus-tah,

[019-406]then [[war-department-indian-affairs|Secretary of War]]. After spending some time at the capital, where I

[019-407]often met him, and had the horror to see his dignity often laid in the

[019-408]dust, by excessive drunkenness, he paid me by invitation a final visit at

[019-409]Baltimore, on his way home. He took only time enough to dine. He looked

[019-410]dejected and forlorn. He and his interpreter had each a suit of common

[019-411]infantry uniform, and a sword as common, which he said had been presented

[019-412]to him at the war department. He was evidently ashamed of them. I confess

[019-413]I was too. But I forbear. He was then sober and serious. He drank hard

[019-414]cider, which was the strongest drink I could conscientiously offer him, so

[019-415]I told him. He said it was enough. I said but little to him of religion,

[019-416]urged him to prepare to meet the Great Spirit, and recommended him to go

[019-417]to Jesus for all he needed. He took it kindly, said he should see me no

[019-418]more, and was going to his people to die. So it was, not long after this,

[019-419]he was called to his last account."

[019-420]Col. Stone represents the testimony of Dr. Breckenridge as corresponding

[019-421]with hundreds of others, who confess their inability to do the orator

[019-422]justice. He laments "his inability to make even an approach to justice, as

[019-423]to the language, and figures in which Red Jacket clothed his thoughts, and

[019-424]by which he illustrated and enforced them."

[019-425]At another time the benefits of Christianity and the advantages of

[019-426]civilization, being urged by a benevolent gentleman on Red Jacket's

[019-427]attention, he made use of the following language: "As to civilization

[019-428]among the white people, I believe it is a good thing, and that it was so

[019-429]ordered they should get their living in that manner. I believe in a God,

[019-430]and that it was ordered by Him that we, the red people, should get our

[019-431]living in a different way, namely: from the wild game of the woods, and

[019-432]the fishes of the waters. I believe in the Great Spirit who created the

[019-433]heavens and the earth. He peopled the forests, and the air and the waters.

[019-434]He then created man and placed him as the superior animal of this

[019-435]creation, and designed him as governor over all other created beings on

[019-436]earth. He created man differing from all other animals. He created the red

[019-437]man, the white, the black and the yellow. All these he created for wise

[019-438]but inscrutable purposes."

[019-439]Reasoning from analogy and from the different varieties of the same

[019-440]species, and the different species under one genus, among all other

[019-441]animals, he pointed out their different modes of living, and the different

[019-442]designs of the Creator, that appeared to be evinced with respect to them.

[019-443]He then proceeded:

[019-444]"This being so, what proof have we that he did not make a similar

[019-445]arrangement with the human species, when we find so vast, so various, and

[019-446]so irreconcilable a variety among them, causing them to live differently,

[019-447]and to pursue different occupations.

[019-448]"As to religion, we all ought to have it. We should adore and worship our

[019-449]Creator, for his great favor in placing us over all his works. If we

[019-450]cannot with the same fluency of speech, and in the same flowing language,

[019-451]worship as you do, we have our mode of adoring, which we do with a sincere

[019-452]heart; then can you say that our prayers and thanksgivings, proceeding

[019-453]from grateful hearts, and sincere minds are less acceptable to the Great

[019-454]God of the heavens and the earth, though manifested either by speaking,

[019-455]dancing, or feasting, than yours, uttered in your own manner and style?"

[019-456][Footnote: As quoted by Col. Stone from MS collections of Joseph W.

[019-457]Moulton.]
