---
description: 'Red Jacket legacy — His place in American history'
id: ch20
label: 'Chapter XX: Red Jacket Legacy'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[020-001]Personal characteristics—Interview with General Lafayette—Visit of a

[020-002]French Nobleman—Col. [[timothy-pickering|Pickering]] reproved—Address on launching a schooner

[020-003]bearing his name—Anecdote of [[red-jacket|Red Jacket]] and Capt. Jones—His humor—

[020-004]Strong memory—Its cultivation—Contempt for pretension without merit—

[020-005]Love for the sublime—Portraits—Acute perception—Refined sense of

[020-006]propriety—First bridge at [[fort-niagara|Niagara Falls]]—Loss of his children—Care for

[020-007]his people.

[020-008]A prominent characteristic of Red Jacket's mind, was self esteem, which

[020-009]led him to be quite tenacious of his own opinion. He probably did not

[020-010]underrate his own ability. He felt conscious of possessing talents, which

[020-011]would enable him to act with dignity and propriety, in any emergency

[020-012]calling for their exercise. He never appeared to be intimidated or

[020-013]embarrassed at the thought of meeting with great men, but seemed always to

[020-014]be at home in their society, and to feel and act as though he regarded

[020-015]himself on an equality with them. This was evident in his interview with

[020-016]General Lafayette, in 1825.

[020-017]On being presented to the general, the orator inquired if he recollected

[020-018]being present, at the treaty of peace with the [[iroquois-confederacy|Six Nations]] at Fort

[020-019][[fort-stanwix|Stanwix]], in 1784. Lafayette replied that he remembered that great council

[020-020]very well. "And what," said he, "has become of the young chief, who

[020-021]resisted so strenuously and eloquently on that occasion, the idea of the

[020-022]Indians' burying the hatchet?"

[020-023]"*He is before you*," was the instant reply. Upon which the general

[020-024]remarked, that time had wrought very great changes upon them both since

[020-025]that memorable period. "Ah!" said Red Jacket, "time has not been so severe

[020-026]on you, as it has on me. It has left you a fresh countenance, and hair to

[020-027]cover your head; while to me,—behold!"—And taking a handkerchief from

[020-028]his head, with an air of much feeling, he disclosed the fact that he was

[020-029]nearly bald. Several persons present could not refrain from smiling at the

[020-030]simplicity of the Indian, who appeared ignorant of the way the white man,

[020-031]was wont to repair the ravages of age in this respect. His simplicity was

[020-032]enlightened by the fact, that the general was indebted to a wig, for his

[020-033]generous supply of hair. Whereupon the orator playfully remarked,

[020-034]referring to the practice of his people in war, that it had not occurred

[020-035]to him before, that he might supply the deficiency by *scalping* some of

[020-036]his neighbors. M. Lavasseur, the secretary of General Lafayette, remarks

[020-037]of the orator's appearance at that time. "This extraordinary man, although

[020-038]much worn down by time and intemperance, preserves yet in a surprising

[020-039]degree, the exercise of all his faculties. He obstinately refuses to speak

[020-040]any language, but that of his own people, and affects a great dislike to

[020-041]all others. Although it is easy to discern, that he perfectly understands

[020-042]the English. He refused nevertheless, to reply to the general before his

[020-043]interpreter had translated his questions into the [[seneca-nation|Seneca]] language."

[020-044][Footnote: See Drake, Col. Stone and others.]

[020-045]A few Indian words, which the general had picked up during his previous

[020-046]visit to this country, on being repeated by him to the orator, gratified

[020-047]him exceedingly, and appeared to increase very much his regard for

[020-048]Lafayette.

[020-049]Red Jacket appeared always to be gratified by attentions received from

[020-050]distinguished characters. Yet even to enjoy their society, he would not

[020-051]compromise his own dignity. It is said that "about the year 1820, a young

[020-052]French nobleman, who was making the tour of the United States, visited the

[020-053]town of Buffalo. Hearing of the fame of Red Jacket, and learning that his

[020-054]residence was but seven miles distant, he sent him word, that he was

[020-055]desirous to see him, adding a request that the chief would visit him in

[020-056]Buffalo the next day. Red Jacket received the message with contempt, and

[020-057]replied: 'Tell the *young man* that if he wishes to see the *old

[020-058]chief*, he may find him with his nation, where other strangers pay their

[020-059]respects to him; and Red Jacket will be glad to see him.'

[020-060]"The count sent back his mesenger to say he was fatigued with his journey,

[020-061]and could not go to the Seneca village; that he had come all the way from

[020-062]France, to see the great orator of the Senecas, and after having put

[020-063]himself to so much trouble, to see so distinguished a man, the latter

[020-064]could not refuse to meet him at Buffalo.

[020-065]"'Tell him,' said the sarcastic chief, 'It is very strange he should come

[020-066]so far to see me, and then stop within seven miles of my lodge.' The

[020-067]retort was richly merited. The count visited him at his wigwam, and then

[020-068]Red Jacket accepted an invitation to dine with him, at his lodgings at

[020-069]Buffalo.

[020-070]"The young nobleman was greatly pleased with him, declaring that he

[020-071]considered him a greater wonder than the falls of Niagara. This remark was

[020-072]the more striking as it was made within view of the great cataract. But it

[020-073]was just. He who made the world, and filled it with wonders, has declared

[020-074]man to be the crowning work of the whole Creation." [Footnote: McKenney's

[020-075]Indian Biography.]

[020-076]On one occasion at a treaty attended by Colonel Pickering, Red Jacket

[020-077]observed that the attention of the colonel, who was in the habit of taking

[020-078]down, as they were interpreted, the Indian speeches made, was withdrawn

[020-079]from himself, and his eye directed to the paper on which he was writing.

[020-080]Red Jacket paused. The colonel desired him to proceed. "No," said the

[020-081]orator, "not when you hold down your head." "Why can you not go on while I

[020-082]write?" "Because," replied the chief, "if you look me in the eye, you will

[020-083]then perceive if I tell you the truth or not." [Footnote: Col. Stone.]

[020-084]On another occasion, Colonel Pickering turned, while the orator was

[020-085]addressing him to speak to a person near. The chief thereupon rebuked him,

[020-086]saying with much emphasis, "When a Seneca speaks he ought to be listened

[020-087]to with attention, from one extremity of this great island to the other."

[020-088][Footnote: Ib.]

[020-089]Toward the close of his life he was present by invitation, at the

[020-090]launching of a schooner at [[black-rock|Black Rock]], bearing his name. He made a short

[020-091]address on the occasion which indicates the estimation in which he

[020-092]regarded his own merit. In the course of his speech, addressing himself

[020-093]directly to the vessel, he said: "You have a great name given you, strive

[020-094]to deserve it. Be brave and daring. Go boldly into the great lakes, and

[020-095]fear neither the swift winds, nor the strong waves. Be not frightened nor

[020-096]overcome by them, for it is by resisting storms and tempests, that I,

[020-097]whose name you bear, obtained my renown. Let my great example inspire you

[020-098]to courage, and lead you to glory." [Footnote: Col. Stone.]

[020-099]Also late in life, when at one of the hotels in Auburn, N. Y., observing a

[020-100]person whom he thought did not treat him with proper deference, he came

[020-101]and stood before him and stamping his foot on the floor, exclaimed with

[020-102]much emphasis, "*I am Red Jacket!*" [Footnote: Incident given to the

[020-103]author by J. C. Ivison, Esq., of Auburn.]

[020-104]He did not relish being trifled with even in playfulness.

[020-105]"At one time when visiting the house of Captain Jones, on taking his seat

[020-106]at the breakfast table with the family, Mrs. Jones, knowing his extreme

[020-107]fondness for sugar, mischieviously prepared his coffee without the

[020-108]addition of that luxury. On discovering the cheat, the chief looked at the

[020-109]captain with an offended expression, and thus rebuked him: 'My son,'

[020-110]stirring his cup with energy, 'Do you allow your squaw thus to trifle with

[020-111]your father?' Perceiving at the same time, by the giggling of the

[020-112]children, that they had entered into the joke, he continued, 'And do you

[020-113]allow your children to make sport of their chief?' Jones and his wife

[020-114]thereupon apologized, and the latter made the *amende honorable*, by

[020-115]handing him the sugar-bowl, which he took, and with half angry sarcasm

[020-116]filled the cup to the brim, with sugar. The liquid not holding so large a

[020-117]quantity in solution, he ate the whole with his spoon." [Footnote: Col.

[020-118]Stone.]

[020-119]Still he enjoyed a laugh when he was making the sport. He was very

[020-120]entertaining in conversation, and would sometimes in the presence of his

[020-121]associates, relax his dignity, and for a time, when he felt in the mood,

[020-122]keep them in a roar of laughter, by his anecdotes, or by taking off

[020-123]something ludicrous, he had observed among the whites. When he had carried

[020-124]it sufficiently far, he would draw himself up, and resume his dignity,

[020-125]when by common consent, the sport would cease. [Footnote: Wm. Jones, to

[020-126]the author.]

[020-127]He very often entertained his people also, by recounting his interviews

[020-128]with distinguished persons, or by describing what he had seen in great

[020-129]places.

[020-130]One conversant with him thus speaks of the manner in which he represented

[020-131]to his people, what he had seen during his visit at the seat of

[020-132]government. "I remember having seen him on one of those occasions, when,

[020-133]after having seated the Indians around him in a semi-circle, taking the

[020-134]cocked hat that had been presented to him by General Knox, then Secretary

[020-135]of War, in his hand, he went round bowing to the Indians, as though they

[020-136]were the company at the president's house, and himself the president. He

[020-137]would then repeat to one and another all the compliments which he chose to

[020-138]suppose the president had bestowed upon him, and which his auditors and

[020-139]admiring people, supposed had been thus bestowed." [Footnote: Thomas

[020-140][[thomas-morris|Morris]] to Col. Stone.]

[020-141]Red Jacket had a very *tenacious memory*. The Indians were noted for

[020-142]the care they bestowed on this faculty of the mind. In the absence of

[020-143]written records, they formed a device, which was quite ingenious, and

[020-144]indicated a high degree of intelligence, by which they perpetuated the

[020-145]knowledge of important events, in their history. They used belts, and

[020-146]strings of wampum.

[020-147]For instance, they are assembled to form some important treaty. This

[020-148]*treaty* would be represented by the *belt*. Each string in that

[020-149]belt would represent a distinct article, or provision in that treaty. As

[020-150]they fixed their eye upon the belt, they knew it as well as though it had

[020-151]been labelled. As they took hold of each string, they could as it were,

[020-152]read each article of the treaty. For the preservation of these belts they

[020-153]had what were termed their council-houses, where they were hung up in

[020-154]order, and preserved with great care. At times they were reviewed. The

[020-155]father would go over them, and tell the meaning of each belt and of each

[020-156]string in the belt to the son, and thus the knowledge of all their

[020-157]important events, was transmitted from one generation to another.

[020-158]Red Jacket, without any doubt excelled all of his race, in the perfection

[020-159]to which he had brought this faculty of his mind. Nothing escaped the

[020-160]tenacious grasp of his memory.

[020-161]The following is an instance in point. At a council held with the Indians

[020-162]by Gov. Tompkins of New York, a contest arose between him and Red Jacket

[020-163]in regard to a fact connected with a treaty of many years' standing. Mr.

[020-164]Tompkins stated one thing, and the Indian chief corrected him, insisting

[020-165]that the reverse of his assertion was true. "But" it was rejoined: "you

[020-166]have forgotten." We have it written down on paper. "The paper then tells a

[020-167]lie," was the confident answer; "I have it written down here;" he added,

[020-168]placing his hand with great dignity on his brow. "You Yankees are born

[020-169]with a feather between your fingers, but your paper does not speak the

[020-170]truth. The Indian keeps his knowledge here. This is the book the Great

[020-171]Spirit gave them; it does not lie." A reference was immediately made to

[020-172]the treaty in question, when to the astonishment of all present, and the

[020-173]triumph of the unlettered statesman, the document confirmed every word he

[020-174]had uttered. [Footnote: McKenney's Indian Biography.]

[020-175]He held in utter contempt *pretensions* without *merit*. "On one

[020-176]occasion not many years before his death, a gentleman from [[albany|Albany]], on a

[020-177]visit at Buffalo, being desirous of seeing the chief, sent a message to

[020-178]that effect. The gentleman was affluent in money and in words, the latter

[020-179]flowing forth with great rapidity, and in an inverse ratio to his ideas.

[020-180]He had also a habit of approaching very near to any person with whom he

[020-181]was conversing, and chattering with almost unapproachable volubility. On

[020-182]receiving the message, Red Jacket dressed himself with the utmost care,

[020-183]designing, as he ever did when sober, to make the most imposing

[020-184]impression, and came over to the village.

[020-185]"Being introduced to the stranger, he soon measured his intellectual

[020-186]capacity, and made no effort to suppress his disappointment, which was

[020-187]indeed sufficiently disclosed in his features. After listening, for a few

[020-188]moments to the chatter of the gentleman, Red Jacket with a look of mingled

[020-189]chagrin and contempt, approached close to him and exclaimed, 'cha, cha,

[020-190]cha,' as rapidly as utterance would allow. Then drawing himself to his

[020-191]full height, he turned proudly upon his heel, and walked away in the

[020-192]direction of his own domicil, *as straight as an Indian*, nor deigned to

[020-193]look behind while in sight of the tavern. The gentleman with more money

[020-194]than brains, was for once lost in astonishment, and longer motionless and

[020-195]silent than he had ever been before." [Footnote: Col. Stone.]

[020-196]He held the mere sensualist in equal contempt. "Many years ago, before the

[020-197]Indian towns were broken up along the valley of the [[genesee-river|Genesee]], a clan of the

[020-198]Senecas resided at Canawangus, in the vicinity of the present town of

[020-199][[avon|Avon]]. The chief of the clan was a good, easy man, named Hot Bread. He was

[020-200]a hereditary sachem, not having risen by merit, was weak and inefficient,

[020-201]and of gluttonous habits. On a certain occasion, when Mr. George Hosmer

[020-202]was accompanying Red Jacket to an Indian council, in the course of general

[020-203]conversation he inquired the chief's opinion of Hot Bread. 'Waugh!'

[020-204]exclaimed Red Jacket: 'He has a little place at Canawangus, big enough for

[020-205]him. *Big man here*,' laying his left hand on his abdomen, '*But very

[020-206]small here*,' bringing the palm of his right hand *with significant*

[020-207]emphasis to his forehead." [Footnote: Ib.]

[020-208]He loved to hold communion with the sublime and grand in nature. He never

[020-209]wearied when viewing the falls of Niagara, and their roar, the baritone of

[020-210]nature's anthem, stirred within, depths that other harmonies failed to

[020-211]reach. When Mr. Catlin, the celebrated Indian portrait painter, desired to

[020-212]obtain the orator's picture, his consent was given, but he must be

[020-213]represented as standing on Table Rock, "for," said he, "when I pass to the

[020-214]other world, my spirit will come back, and that is the place around which

[020-215]it will linger." [Footnote: Catim's North American Indians.]

[020-216]The artist gratified the orator, and represents him as standing there in

[020-217]the attitude of deep thought, dressed with much care in complete Indian

[020-218]costume, a very interesting memorial, presenting evident marks of being

[020-219]one of nature's noblemen.

[020-220]Since then Red Jacket has gone to his grave, and this rock where he often

[020-221]stood and feasted his soul on sublimities unrivalled in nature, has

[020-222]likewise fallen, while the world, like the impetuous flood, rolls on

[020-223]unconscious of both.

[020-224]Of the various paintings of Red Jacket, Col. Stone remarks, "The picture

[020-225]by Mr. Robert W. Weir, taken in 1828, at the request of Doctor John W.

[020-226]Francis of New York, is of far the highest order of merit, and has become

[020-227]the standard likeness of the last of the Seneca orators." To this is

[020-228]subjoined the following description from the pen of Doctor Francis, of the

[020-229]orator's appearance on the occasion,

[020-230]"For this purpose he dressed himself in the costume which he deemed most

[020-231]appropriate to his character, decorated with his brilliant overcovering

[020-232]and belt, his tomahawk, and [[george-washington|Washington]] medal.

[020-233]"For the whole period of nearly two hours, on four or five successive

[020-234]days, he was as punctual to the arrangements of the artist, as any

[020-235]individual could be. He chose a large arm chair for his convenience, while

[020-236]his interpreter, as well as himself, was occupied for the most part in

[020-237]surveying the various objects, which decorated the artist's room. He had a

[020-238]party of several Senecas with him, who, adopting the horizontal position,

[020-239]in different parts of the room, regaled themselves with the fumes of

[020-240]tobacco, to their utmost gratification. Red Jacket occasionally united in

[020-241]this relaxation; but was so deeply absorbed in attention to the work of

[020-242]the painter, as to think, perhaps, of no other subject. At times he

[020-243]manifested extreme pleasure, as the outlines of the picture were filled

[020-244]up. The drawing of his costume, which he seemed to prize, as peculiarly

[020-245]appropriate, and the falls of Niagara, scenery at no great distance from

[020-246]his residence at the reservation, forced him to an indistinct utterance of

[020-247]satisfaction. When his medal appeared complete in the picture, he

[020-248]addressed his interpreter, accompanied by striking gestures; and when his

[020-249]noble front was finished, he sprang upon his feet with great alacrity, and

[020-250]seizing the artist by the hand, exclaimed with great energy, 'Good! Good!'

[020-251]The painting being finished, he parted with Mr. Weir with a satisfaction

[020-252]apparently equal to that which he doubtless, on some occasions had felt,

[020-253]on effecting an Indian treaty. Red Jacket must have been beyond his

[020-254]seventieth year when the painting was made. He exhibited in his

[020-255]countenance, somewhat of the traces of time and trial, on his

[020-256]constitution. Nevertheless he was of a tall, erect form, and walked with a

[020-257]firm gait. His characteristics are preserved by the artist to admiration;

[020-258]and his majestic front exhibits an attitude surpassing every other, that I

[020-259]have ever seen of the human skull. As a specimen for the craniologist, Red

[020-260]Jacket need not yield his pretensions to those of the most astute

[020-261]philosopher. He will long live by the painting of Weir, the poetry of

[020-262]Halleck, and the fame of his own deeds."

[020-263]Red Jacket had a quick and acute perception, he was very adroit. He at one

[020-264]time exposed the false pretenses of Jemima Wilkinson by arranging it with

[020-265]a few Indians to converse in her presence, in a manner that excited her

[020-266]curiosity. The ruse was successful, she anxiously inquired what they were

[020-267]talking about? Turning upon her a searching glance, he exclaimed, "What!

[020-268]Are you Jesus Christ? and not know Indian?"

[020-269]Though unacquainted with the usages of society, in the refined circles

[020-270]where he often appeared, he readily adapted himself to the new position,

[020-271]and conducted with propriety and ease, careful to conceal his ignorance at

[020-272]the time. Mr. Thomas Morris in a letter to Colonel Stone, observes: "He

[020-273]once on his return from [[philadelphia|Philadelphia]], told me that when there he perceived

[020-274]many things, the meaning of which he did not understand, but he would not

[020-275]make inquiry concerning them there, because they would be imputed to his

[020-276]ignorance. He therefore determined on his return to ask me.

[020-277]"He said when he dined at General Washington's, a man stood all the time

[020-278]behind his chair, and would, every now and then run off with his plate,

[020-279]and knife and fork, which he would immediately replace by others. 'Now,'

[020-280]said Red Jacket, 'what was this for?' I replied that he must have observed

[020-281]on the president's table a variety of dishes, that each dish was cooked in

[020-282]a different manner, and that the plates and knives and forks of the

[020-283]guests, were changed as often as they were helped from a different dish.

[020-284]'Ah!' said he, 'is that it?' I replied in the affirmative. 'You must then

[020-285]suppose,' he continued, 'that the plates, and knives, and forks, retain

[020-286]the taste of the cookery?' Yes, I replied. 'Have you then,' he added, 'any

[020-287]method by which you can change your palates every time you change your

[020-288]plates? For I should suppose that the taste would remain on the palate

[020-289]longer than on the plate?' I replied that we were in the habit of washing

[020-290]that away by drinking wine. 'Ah!' said he, 'now I understand it. I was

[020-291]persuaded that so general a [[iroquois-tradition|custom]] among you was founded in reason, and I

[020-292]only regret that when I was in Philadelphia I did not understand it; when

[020-293]dining with General Washington and your father. The moment the man went

[020-294]off with my plate I would have drunk wine until he brought me another; for

[020-295]although I am fond of eating, I am more so of drinking.'" [Footnote: Col.

[020-296]Stone's Life of Red Jacket.]

[020-297]It has been well observed of him, "He had an innate refinement and grace

[020-298]of manner, that stamped him the true gentleman, because with him these

[020-299]virtues were inborn, and not simulated or acquired." [Footnote: W. C.

[020-300]Bryant's Memorial Address.]

[020-301]On one occasion when Mr. George Hosmer of Avon, and several others of his

[020-302]tribe, were on their way to attend a certain treaty, the Indians one

[020-303]evening after the fatigues of the day, were unusually mirthful. Red Jacket

[020-304]conceiving the idea that Mr. Hosmer, who was unacquainted with their

[020-305]language might suppose he was the subject of their mirth, caused them to

[020-306]be silent, and through his interpreter, Captain Parrish, thus addressed

[020-307]him.

[020-308]"We have been made uncomfortable by the storm; we are now warm and

[020-309]comfortable, it has caused us to feel cheerful and merry. But I hope our

[020-310]friend who is traveling with us will not feel hurt at this merriment, or

[020-311]suppose that we are taking advantage of his ignorance of our language, to

[020-312]make him in any manner the subject of our mirth."

[020-313]To which Mr. Hosmer replied, that knowing himself to be in the company of

[020-314]brave and honorable men, he could not allow himself to entertain such an

[020-315]impression. After which they resumed their merriment, and Red Jacket his

[020-316]gravity. [Footnote: Col. Stone.]

[020-317]The first efforts to construct a bridge at Niagara Falls was unsuccessful.

[020-318]It was supposed the force of the water where it flowed smoothly, would not

[020-319]be as great as where it dashed against the rocks and appeared more

[020-320]boisterous. This was a mistake. Every endeavor to fix a bent where the

[020-321]water was smooth, proved utterly abortive. At length an architect

[020-322]conceived the idea of placing the bridge, down where the water began to be

[020-323]broken in its descent, and of obtaining a foot-hold for his bent, behind

[020-324]some rock against which the water dashed. This resulted in the successful

[020-325]completion of a bridge, leading to Goat Island. After its completion, Red

[020-326]Jacket, in company with General Porter, was passing over it one day, when

[020-327]the chief, whose curiosity was excited, examined minutely every part of

[020-328]its construction, evidently regarding it, as a great wonder. At length

[020-329]discovering the secret, he exclaimed, "*Ugh! still water*!" and

[020-330]immediately added, "*d—n Yankee*." [Footnote: Given to the author by T.

[020-331]M. Howell, Esq., of [[canandaigua|Canandaigua]], N. Y.]

[020-332]Red Jacket was not a stranger to *tender and refined sensibilities*.

[020-333]William Savary in his Journal, while attending the Indian treaty held at

[020-334]Canandaigua in 1794, speaks of the children of Red Jacket in terms of high

[020-335]commendation. Most of them died of consumption, "in the dew of their

[020-336]youth."

[020-337]On one occasion, when visiting an aged lady of his acquaintance near Avon,

[020-338]who from early life had been more or less familiar with his history, she

[020-339]inquired of him, if any of his children were still living? Fixing his eyes

[020-340]upon her, with a sorrowful expression, he replied:

[020-341]"Red Jacket was once a great man, and in favor with the [[great-spirit|Great Spirit]]. He

[020-342]was a lofty pine among the smaller trees of the forest. But after years of

[020-343]glory he degraded himself, by drinking the firewater of the white man. The

[020-344]Great Spirit has looked upon him in anger, and his lightning has stripped

[020-345]the pine of its branches." [Footnote: Related to Col. Stone by Mrs. George

[020-346]Hosmer of Avon.]

[020-347]Some four or five years before his death, three brothers, named Thayer,

[020-348]were executed at Buffalo for the crime of murder. The occasion was

[020-349]unusual, and multitudes of both sexes, from the surrounding region,

[020-350]flocked to witness the unhappy spectacle.

[020-351]On the day of the execution, Red Jacket was met by Judge Walden, of

[020-352]Buffalo, wending his way from the town to his home. The judge inquired

[020-353]where he was going? At the same time expressing his surprise that he did

[020-354]not go with the multitudes, flocking to witness the spectacle. His answer

[020-355]was brief; "Fools enough there already. Battle, is the place to see men

[020-356]die."

[020-357]The reply was a merited rebuke to the desire so prevalent, to witness

[020-358]these awful sights. [Footnote: Mrs. George Hosmer to Col. Stone.]

[020-359]Red Jacket ever cherished a watchful regard over the interests of his

[020-360]people, and was always ready to speak in their behalf.

[020-361]At the trial of an Indian for burglary, himself and other chiefs were

[020-362]present to render any aid in their power, to their brother in bonds. The

[020-363]prisoner was found guilty of having broken into a house and stolen a few

[020-364]silver spoons. The crime of petit larceny, was thus merged in the greater

[020-365]one of burglary.

[020-366]At a fitting opportunity Red Jacket arose and spoke eloquently in his

[020-367]brother's defense; urging the independence of his nation, the existence

[020-368]among them of laws for the punishment of theft, and boldly demanding the

[020-369]surrender of the prisoner, assuring the court that the prisoner should be

[020-370]tried by these laws, and suffer the penalty they demanded. His effort

[020-371]though regarded as able and brilliant, did not avail to rescue the

[020-372]prisoner from the white man, whose sentence in the case being for burglary

[020-373]instead of theft, Red Jacket regarded as unnecessarily severe.

[020-374]When the proceedings were over, Red Jacket, who happened to be standing

[020-375]with a group of lawyers, took the following method of expressing his

[020-376]dissatisfaction.

[020-377]Beholding on the sign of a printing office near by, an emblematic

[020-378]representation in large figures and characters, of Liberty and Justice; he

[020-379]asked in broken English, pointing to one of them, "*What-him-call?*"

[020-380]It was answered, *Liberty*. "Ugh!" was his significant and truly

[020-381]aboriginal response. Pointing then to the other figure, he inquired,

[020-382]"*What*-HIM-call?" It was answered, JUSTICE. Whereupon his eye

[020-383]kindling with animation, he asked with evident emotion, "WHERE-HIM-LIVENOW?" [Footnote: Geo. Hosmer, Esq., to Col. Stone.]

[020-384]If the sincerity of Red Jacket's regard for the welfare of his people was

[020-385]ever questioned, it was by those who knew not his inner self. In guarding

[020-386]the interests of his people, he was in the habit of closely watching

[020-387]strangers, not only, but even his own friends.

[020-388]Owing to slanderous reports that had been circulated, he at one time began

[020-389]to suspect that his friend Captain Jones, was actuated by motives of selfinterest, and did not property regard the interest of the Indians.

[020-390]Jones soon after met Red Jacket with his usual cordiality of manner, but

[020-391]was received with evident marks of coldness and distrust. "After the lapse

[020-392]of a few minutes, during which time the questions of Jones were answered

[020-393]in monosylables, the captain asked an explanation of the orator's conduct.

[020-394]Fixing his searching glance upon him, as if reading the secrets of his

[020-395]soul, Red Jacket told him of the rumor circulated, in reference to his

[020-396]fidelity to the Indians, and concluded by saying with a saddened

[020-397]expression, 'And have *you* at last deserted us?' The look, the tone, the

[020-398]attitude of the orator, were so touching, so despairing, that Jones,

[020-399]though made of stern materials, wept like a child; at the same time

[020-400]refuting the calumny in the most energetic terms. Convinced that Jones was

[020-401]still true, the chief, forgetful of the stoicism of his race, mingled his

[020-402]tears with those of Jones, and embracing him with the cordiality of old,

[020-403]the reconciled parties renewed old friendship over a social glass."

[020-404][Footnote: W. H. C. Hosmer to Col. Stone.]

<!-- Source: 2386145434587187443_7339-6.txt.html -->
