---
description: §59 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-59
label: '§ 59: Of Beauty as the symbol of Morality'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[059-001]Intuitions are always required to establish the reality of our concepts. If the concepts are empirical, the intuitions are calledexamples. If they are pure concepts of Understanding, the intuitions are calledschemata. If we desire to establish the objective reality of rational concepts,i.e.of Ideas, on behalf of theoretical cognition, then we are asking for something impossible, because absolutely no intuition can be given which shall be adequate to them.

[059-002]Allhypotyposis(presentation,subjectio sub adspectum), or sensible illustration, is twofold. It is eitherschematical, when to a concept comprehended by the Understanding the corresponding intuition is givena priori; or it issymbolical. In the latter case to a concept only thinkable by the Reason, to which no sensible intuition can be adequate, an intuition is supplied with which accords a procedure of the Judgement analogous to what it observes in schematism: it accords with it, that is, in respect of the rule of this procedure merely, not of the intuition itself; consequently in respect of the form of reflection merely, and not of its content.

[059-003]There is a use of the wordsymbolicalthat has been adopted by modern logicians, which is misleading and incorrect,i.e.to speak of thesymbolicalmode of representation as if it were opposed to theintuitive; for the symbolical is only a mode of the intuitive. The latter (the intuitive), that is, may be divided into theschematicaland thesymbolicalmodes of representation. Both are hypotyposes,i.e.presentations (exhibitiones); not merecharacterisations, or designations of concepts by accompanying sensible signs which contain nothing belonging to the intuition of the Object, and only serve as a means for reproducing the concepts, according to the law of association of the Imagination, and consequently in a subjective point of view. These are either words, or visible (algebraical, even mimetical) signs, as mere expressions for concepts.103

[059-004]All intuitions, which we supply to conceptsa priori, are therefore eitherschemataorsymbols, of which the former contain direct, the latter indirect, presentations of the concept. The former do this demonstratively; the latter by means of an analogy (for which we avail ourselves even of empirical intuitions) in which the Judgement exercises a double function; first applying the concept to the object of a sensible intuition, and then applying the mere rule of the reflection made upon that intuition to a quite different object of which the first is only the symbol. Thus a monarchical state is represented by a living body, if it is governed by national laws, and by a mere machine (like a hand-mill) if governed by an individual absolute will; but in both cases onlysymbolically. For between a despotic state and a hand-mill there is, to be sure, no similarity; but there is a similarity in the rules according to which we reflect upon these two things and theircausality. This matter has not been sufficiently analysed hitherto, for it deserves a deeper investigation; but this is not the place to linger over it. Our language [i.e.German] is full of indirect presentations of this sort, in which the expression does not contain the proper schema for the concept, but merely a symbol for reflection. Thus the wordsground(support, basis),to depend(to be held up from above), toflowfrom something (instead of, to follow),substance(asLockeexpresses it, the support of accidents), and countless others, are not schematical but symbolical hypotyposes and expressions for concepts, not by means of a direct intuition, but only by analogy with it,i.e.by the transference of reflection upon an object of intuition to a quite different concept to which perhaps an intuition can never directly correspond. If we are to give the name of cognition to a mere mode of representation (which is quite permissible if the latter is not a principle of the theoretical determination of what an object is in itself, but of the practical determination of what the Idea of it should be for us and for its purposive use), then all our knowledge of God is merely symbolical; and he who regards it as schematical, along with the properties of Understanding, Will, etc., which only establish their objective reality in beings of this world, falls into Anthropomorphism, just as he who gives up every intuitive element falls into Deism, by which nothing at all is cognised, not even in a practical point of view.

[059-005]Now I say the Beautiful is the symbol of the morally Good, and that it is only in this respect (a reference which is natural to every man and which every man postulates in others as a duty) that it gives pleasure with a claim for the agreement ofevery one else. By this the mind is made conscious of a certain ennoblement and elevation above the mere sensibility to pleasure received through sense, and the worth of others is estimated in accordance with a like maxim of their Judgement. That is theintelligible, to which, as pointed out in the preceding paragraph, [[taste|Taste]] looks; with which our higher cognitive faculties are in accord; and without which a downright contradiction would arise between their nature and the claims made by taste. In this faculty the Judgement does not see itself, as in empirical judging, subjected to a heteronomy of empirical laws; it gives the law to itself in respect of the objects of so pure a satisfaction, just as the Reason does in respect of the faculty of desire. Hence, both on account of this inner possibility in the subject and of the external possibility of a nature that agrees with it, it finds itself to be referred to something within the subject as well as without him, something which is neither nature nor freedom, but which yet is connected with the supersensible ground of the latter. In this supersensible ground, therefore, the theoretical faculty is bound together in unity with the practical, in a way which though common is yet unknown. We shall indicate some points of this analogy, while at the same time we shall note the differences.

[059-006](1) The beautiful pleasesimmediately(but only in reflective intuition, not, like morality, in its concept). (2) It pleasesapart from any interest(the morally good is indeed necessarily bound up with an interest, though not with one which precedes the judgement upon the satisfaction, but with one which is first of all produced by it). (3) Thefreedomof the Imagination (and therefore of thesensibility of our faculty) is represented in judging the beautiful as harmonious with the conformity to law of the Understanding (in the moral judgement the freedom of the will is thought as the harmony of the latter with itself according to universal laws of Reason). (4) The subjective principle in judging the beautiful is represented asuniversal,i.e.as valid for every man, though not cognisable through any universal concept. (The objective principle of morality is also expounded as universal,i.e.for every subject and for every action of the same subject, and thus as cognisable by means of a universal concept).

[059-007]Hence the moral judgement is not only susceptible of definite constitutive principles, but is possibleonlyby grounding its maxims on these in their universality.

[059-008]A reference to this analogy is usual even with the common Understanding [of men], and we often describe beautiful objects of nature or art by names that seem to put a moral appreciation at their basis.

[059-009]We call buildings or trees majestic and magnificent, landscapes laughing and gay; even colours are called innocent, modest, tender, because they excite sensations which have something analogous to the consciousness of the state of mind brought about by moral judgements. Taste makes possible the transition, without any violent leap, from the charm of Sense to habitual moral interest; for it represents the Imagination in its freedom as capable of purposive determination for the Understanding, and so teaches us to find even in objects of sense a free satisfaction apart from any charm of sense.

---
