---
description: §91 from Part II of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-91
label: '§ 91: Of the kind of belief produced by a practical'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[091-001]faith

[091-002]If we look merely to the way in which anything can befor us(according to the subjective constitution of our representative powers) an Object of knowledge (res cognoscibilis), then our concepts will not cohere with Objects, but merely with our cognitive faculties and the use which they can make of a given representation (in a theoretical or practical point of view). Thus the question whether anything is or is not a cognisable being is not a question concerning the possibility of things but of our knowledge of them.

[091-003]Cognisablethings are of three kinds:things of opinion(opinabile);things of fact(scibile); andthings of faith(mere credibile).

[091-004](1.) Objects of mere rational Ideas, which for theoretical knowledge cannot be presented in any possible experience, are so far notcognisablethings, and consequently in respect of them we can form noopinion; for to form an opiniona prioriis absurdin itself and the straight road to mere chimeras.

[091-005]Either then our proposition is certaina priorior it contains nothing for belief. Thereforethings of opinionare always Objects of an empirical cognition at least possible in itself (objects of the world of sense); but, which, on account merely of the [low] degree of this faculty that we possess, isfor usimpossible. Thus the ether of the new physicists,144an elastic fluid pervading all other matter (mingled intimately with it) is a mere thing of opinion, yet is such that, if our external senses were sharpened to the highest degree, it could be perceived; though it can never be presented in any observation or experiment.

[091-006]To assume [the existence of] rational inhabitants of other planets is a thing of opinion; for if we could come closer to them, which is in itself possible, we should decide by experience whether they did or did not exist; but as we shall never come so near, it remains in the region of opinion. But to hold the opinion that there are in the material universe pure thinking spirits without bodies (viz. if we dismiss as unworthy of our notice certain phenomena which have been published as actual145) is to be called poetic fiction. This is no thing of opinion, but a mere Idea which remainsover, when we remove from a thinking being everything material, and only leave thought to it.

[091-007]Whether then the latter (which we know only in man, that is, in combination with a body) does survive, we cannot decide. Such a thing is asophistical being(ens rationis ratiocinantis), not arational being(ens rationis ratiocinatae)146; of which latter it is possible to show conclusively, the objective reality of its concept; at least for the practical use of Reason, because this which has its peculiar and apodictically certain principlesa priori, demands (postulates) it.

[091-008](2.) Objects for concepts, whose objective reality can be proved (whether through pure Reason or through experience, and, in the first case, from its theoretical or practical data, in all cases by means of a corresponding intuition) arethings of fact(res facti).147Of this kind are the mathematical properties of magnitudes (in geometry), because they are susceptible of apresentation a priorifor the theoretical use of Reason. Further, things or their characteristics, which can be exhibited in experience (either our own or that of others through the medium of testimony) are likewise things of fact.—And, what is very remarkable, there is one rational Idea (susceptible in itself of no presentationin intuition, and consequently, of no theoretical proof of its possibility) which also comes under things of fact. This is the Idea offreedom, whose reality, regarded as that of a particular kind of causality (of which the concept, theoretically considered, would be transcendent), may be exhibited by means of practical laws of pure Reason, and conformably to this, in actual actions, and, consequently, in experience.—This is the only one of all the Ideas of pure Reason, whose object is a thing of fact, and to be reckoned under thescibilia.

[091-009](3.) Objects, which in reference to the use of pure practical Reason that is in conformity with duty must be thoughta priori(whether as consequences or as grounds), but which are transcendent for its theoretical use, are merethings of faith. Of this kind is thehighest goodin the world, to be brought about by freedom.148The concept of this cannot be established as regards its objective reality in any experience possible for us and thus adequately for the theoretical use of Reason; but its use is commanded by practical pure Reason [in reference to the best possible working out of that purpose],149and it consequently must be assumed possible. This commanded effect,together with the only conditions of its possibility thinkable by us, viz. the Being of God and the immortality of the soul, arethings of faith(res fidei), and of all objects are the only ones which can be so called.150For though what we learnbytestimonyfrom the experience of others must be believed by us, yet it is not therefore a thing of faith; for it was the proper experience of someonewitness and so a thing of fact, or is presupposed as such. Again it must be possible by this path (that of historical faith) to arrive at knowledge; and the Objects of history and geography, like everything in general which it is at least possible to know by the constitution of our cognitive faculties, belong not to things of faith but to things of fact. It is only objects of pure Reason which can be things of faith at all, though not as objects of the mere pure speculative Reason: for then they could not be reckoned with certainty among things,i.e.Objects of that cognition which is possible for us. They are Ideas,i.e.concepts of the objective reality of which we cannot theoretically be certain. On the other hand, the highest final purpose to be worked out by us, by which alone we can become worthy of being ourselves the final purpose of creation, is an Idea which has in a practical reference objective reality for us, and is also a thing. But because we cannot furnish such reality to this concept in a theoretical point of view, it is a mere thing of faith of the pure Reason, along with God and Immortality, as the conditions under which alone we, in accordance with the constitution of our (human) Reason, can conceive the possibility of that effect of the use of our freedom in conformity with law. But belief in things of faith is a belief in a pure practical point of view,i.e.a moral faith, which proves nothing for theoretical pure rational cognition, but only for that which is practical and directed to the fulfilment of its duties; it in no way extends speculation or the practical rules of prudence in accordance with the principle of self-love.

[091-010]If the supreme principle of all moral laws is a postulate, so is also the possibility of its highest Object; and consequently, too, the condition under which we can think this possibility is postulated along with it and by it. Thus the cognition of the latter is neither knowledge nor opinion of the being and character of these conditions, regarded as theoretical cognition; but is a mere assumption in a reference which is practical and commanded for the moral use of our Reason.

[091-011]If we were able also plausibly to base upon the purposes of nature, which physical Teleology presents to us in such rich abundance, adeterminateconcept of an intelligent World-Cause, then the existence [Dasein] of this Being would not be a thing of faith. For since this would not be assumed on behalf of the performance of my duty, but only in reference to the explanation of nature, it would be merely the opinion and hypothesis most conformable to our Reason. Now such Teleology leads in no way to a determinate concept of God; on the contrary, this can only be found in the concept of a moral Author of the World, because this alone furnishes the final purpose to which we can only reckon ourselves [as attached] if we behave conformably to what the moral law prescribes as final purpose and consequently obliges us [to do]. Hence it is only by its reference to the Object of our duty, as the condition of the possibility of attaining the final purpose of the same, that the concept of God attains the privilege of counting as a thing of faith, in our belief; but on the other hand, this same concept cannot make its Object valid as a thing of fact.

[091-012]For, although the necessity of duty is very plain for practical Reason, yet the attainment of its finalpurpose, so far as it is not altogether in our own power, is only assumed on behalf of the practical use of Reason, and therefore is not so practically necessary as duty itself.151

[091-013]Faith(ashabitus, not asactus) is the moral attitude of Reason as to belief in that which is unattainable by theoretical cognition. It is therefore the constant principle of the mind, to assume as true, on account of the obligation in reference to it, that which it is necessary to presuppose as condition of the possibility of the highest moral final purpose152;although its possibility or impossibility be alike impossible for us to see into. Faith (absolutely so called) is trust in the attainment of a design, the promotion of which is a duty, but the possibility of the fulfilment of which (and consequently also that of the only conditions of it thinkable by us) is not to becomprehendedby us. Faith, then, that refers to particular objects, which are not objects of possible knowledge or opinion (in which latter case it ought to be called, especially in historical matters, credulity and not faith), is quite moral. It is a free belief, not in that for which dogmatical proofs for the theoretically determinant Judgement are to be found, or in that to which we hold ourselves bound, but in that which we assume on behalf of a design in accordance with laws of freedom. This, however, is not, like opinion, without any adequate ground; but, is grounded as in Reason (although only in respect of its practical employment), andadequately for its design. For without this, the moral attitude of thought in its repudiation of the claim of the theoretical Reason for proofs (of the possibility of the Objects of morality) has no permanence; but wavers between practical commands and theoreticaldoubts. To beincredulousmeans to cling to maxims, and not to believe testimony in general; but he isunbelieving, who denies all validity to rational Ideas, because there is wanting atheoreticalground of their reality.154He judges therefore dogmatically.

[091-014]A dogmaticalunbeliefcannot subsist together with a moral maxim dominant in the mental attitude (for Reason cannot command one to follow a purpose, which is cognised as nothing more than a chimera); but adoubtful faithcan. To this the absence of conviction by grounds of speculative Reason is only a hindrance, the influence of which upon conduct a critical insight into the limits of this faculty can remove, while it substitutes by way of compensation a paramount practical belief.

[091-015]If, in place of certain mistaken attempts, we wish to introduce a different principle into philosophy and to promote its influence, it makes us highly contented to see how and why those attempts must have disappointed us.

[091-016]God,freedom, andimmortality, are the problems at the solution of which all the equipments of Metaphysic aim, as their ultimate and unique purpose.

[091-017]Now it was believed that the doctrine of freedom is needed for practical philosophy only as its negative condition; but that on the other hand the doctrine of God and of the constitution of the soul, as belonging to theoretical philosophy, must be established for themselves and separately, in order afterwards to unite both with that which the moral law (possible only under the condition of freedom) commands,and so to constitute a religion. But we can easily see that these attempts must fail. For from mere ontological concepts of things in general, or of the existence of a necessary Being, it is possible to form absolutely no determinate concept of an original Being by means of predicates which can be given in experience and can therefore serve for cognition. Again a concept based on experience of the physical purposiveness of nature could furnish no adequate proof for morality, or consequently for cognition of a Deity. Just as little could the cognition of the soul by means of experience (which we only apply in this life) supply us with a concept of its spiritual immortal nature, a concept which would be adequate for morality.TheologyandPneumatology, regarded as problems of the sciences of a speculative Reason, can be established by no empirical data and predicates, because the concept of them is transcendent for our whole cognitive faculty.—The determination of both concepts, God and the soul (in respect of its immortality) alike, can only take place by means of predicates, which, although they are only possible from a supersensible ground, must yet prove their reality in experience; for thus alone can they make possible a cognition of a quite supersensible Being.—The only concept of this kind to be met with in human Reason is that of the freedom of men under moral laws, along with the final purpose which Reason prescribes by these laws. Of these two [the moral laws and the final purpose] the first are useful for ascribing to the Author of Nature, the second for ascribing to man, those properties which contain the necessary condition of the possibility of both [God and the soul]; so that from this Idea a conclusioncan be drawn as to the existence and constitution of these beings which are otherwise quite hidden from us.

[091-018]Thus the ground of the failure of the attempt to prove God and immortality by the merely theoretical path lies in this, that no cognition whatever is possible of the supersensible in this way (of natural concepts). The ground of its success by the moral way (of the concept of freedom) is as follows. Here the supersensible (freedom), which in this case is fundamental, by a determinate law of causality that springs from it, not only supplies material for cognition of other supersensibles (the moral final purpose and the conditions of its attainability), but also establishes its reality in actions as a fact; though at the same time it can furnish a valid ground of proof in no other than a practical point of view (the only one, however, of which Religion has need).

[091-019]It is thus very remarkable that of the three pure rational Ideas,God,freedom, andimmortality, that of freedom is the only concept of the supersensible which (by means of the causality that is thought in it) proves its objective reality in nature by means of the effects it can produce there; and thus renders possible the connexion of both the others with nature, and of all three together with Religion.

[091-020]We have therefore in us a principle capable of determining the Idea of the supersensible within us, and thus also that of the supersensible without us, for knowledge, although only in a practical point of view; a principle this of which mere speculative philosophy (which could give a merely negative concept of freedom) must despair. Consequently the concept of freedom (as fundamentalconcept of all unconditioned practical laws) can extend Reason beyond those bounds, within which every natural (theoretical) concept must remain hopelessly limited.

#### General remark on Teleology

[091-021]If the question is, what rank the moral argument, which proves the Being of God only as a thing of faith for the practical pure Reason, maintains among the other arguments in philosophy, it is easy to set aside the whole achievement of this last; by which it appears that there is no choice, but that our theoretical faculty must give up all its pretensions before an impartial criticism.

[091-022]All belief must in the first place be grounded upon facts, if it is not to be completely groundless; and therefore the only distinction in proofs that there can be is that belief in the consequence derived therefrom can either be grounded on this fact asknowledgefor theoretical cognition, or merely asfaithfor practical. All facts belong either to thenatural conceptwhich proves its reality in the objects of sense, given (or which may possibly be given) before all natural concepts; or to theconcept of freedom, which sufficiently establishes its reality through the causality of Reason in regard of certain effects in the world of sense, possible through it, which it incontrovertibly postulates in the moral law.

[091-023]The natural concept (merely belonging to theoretical cognition) is now either metaphysical and thinkable completelya priori, or physical,i.e.thinkablea posterioriand as necessary only through determinate experience. The metaphysical natural concept(which presupposes no determinate experience) is therefore ontological.

[091-024]Theontologicalproof of the being of God from the concept of an original Being is either that which from ontological predicates, by which alone it can be thought as completely determined, infers absolutely necessary being; or that which, from the absolute necessity of the being somewhere of some thing, whatever it be, infers the predicates of the original Being. For there belongs to the concept of an original Being, inasmuch as it is not derived from anything, the unconditioned necessity of its presence, and (in order to represent this) its complete determination by its [mere]155concept. It was believed that both requirements were found in the concept of the ontological Idea of aBeing the most real of all; and thus two metaphysical proofs originated.

[091-025]The proof (properly called ontological) resting upon a merely metaphysical natural concept concludes from the concept of the Being the most real of all, its absolutely necessary existence; for (it is said), if it did not exist, a reality would be wanting to it, viz. existence.—The other (which is also called the metaphysico-cosmologicalproof) concludes from the necessity of the existence somewhere of a thing (which must be conceded, for a being is given to us in self-consciousness), its complete determination as that of a Being the most real of all; for everything existing must be completely determined, but the absolutely necessary (i.e.that whichweought to cognise as such and consequentlya priori) must be completely determinedby means of its own concept. But this is only the casewith the concept of a thing the most real of all.

[091-026]It is not needful to expose here the sophistry in both arguments, which has been already done elsewhere;156it is only needful to remark that neither proof, even if they could be defended by all manner of dialectical subtlety, could ever pass from the schools into the world, or have the slightest influence on the mere sound Understanding.

[091-027]The proof, which rests on a natural concept that can only be empirical and yet is to lead us beyond the bounds of nature regarded as the complex of the objects of sense, can be no other than that derived from thepurposesof nature. The concept of these cannot, it is true, be givena prioribut only through experience; but yet it promises such a concept of the original ground of nature as alone, among all those which we can conceive, is suited to the supersensible, viz. that of a highest Understanding as Cause of the world. This, in fact, it completely performs in accordance with principles of the reflective Judgement,i.e.in accordance with the constitution of our (human) faculty of cognition.—But whether or not it is in a position to supply from the same data this concept of asupreme,i.e.independent intelligent Being, in short of a God or Author of a world under moral laws, and consequently as sufficiently determined for the Idea of a final purpose of the being of the world—this is the question upon which everything depends, whether we desire a theoretically adequate concept of the Original Being on behalf of our whole knowledge of nature, or a practical concept for religion.

[091-028]This argument derived from physical Teleology is worthy of respect. It produces a similar effectin the way of conviction upon the common Understanding as upon the subtlest thinker; and aReimarus157has acquired immortal honour in his work (not yet superseded), in which he abundantly develops this ground of proof with his peculiar thoroughness and lucidity.—But how does this proof acquire such mighty influence upon the mind?

[091-029]How does a judgement by cold reason (for we might refer to persuasion the emotion and elevation of reason produced by the wonders of nature) issue thus in a calm and unreserved assent? It is not the physical purposes, which all indicate in the World Cause an unfathomable intelligence; these are inadequate thereto, because they do not satisfy the need of the inquiring Reason. For, wherefore (it asks) are all those natural things that exhibit art?

[091-030]Wherefore is man himself, whom we must regard as the ultimate purpose of nature thinkable by us?

[091-031]Wherefore is this collective Nature here, and what is the final purpose of such great and manifold art?

[091-032]Reason cannot be contented with enjoyment or with contemplation, observation, and admiration (which, if it stops there, is only enjoyment of a particular kind) as the ultimate final purpose for the creation of the world and of man himself; for this presupposes a personal worth, which man alone can give himself, as the condition under which alone he and his being can be the final purpose. Failing this (which alone is susceptible of a definite concept), the purposes of nature do not satisfactorily answer our questions; especially because they cannot furnish anydeterminateconcept of the highest Being as an all-sufficient (and therefore unique and so properly calledhighest) being, and of the laws according to which an Understanding is Cause of the world.

[091-033]Hence that the physico-teleological proof convinces, just as if it were a theological proof, does not arise from our availing ourselves of the Ideas of purposes of nature as so many empirical grounds of proof of ahighestUnderstanding. But it mingles itself unnoticed with that moral ground of proof, which dwells in every man and influences him secretly, in the conclusion by which we ascribe to the Being, which manifests itself with such incomprehensible art in the purposes of nature, a final purpose and consequently wisdom (without however being justified in doing so by the perception of the former); and by which therefore we arbitrarily fill up the lacunas of the [design] argument. In fact it is only the moral ground of proof which produces conviction, and that only in a moral reference with which every man feels inwardly his agreement.

[091-034]But the physico-teleological proof has only the merit of leading the mind, in its consideration of the world, by the way of purposes and through them to anintelligentAuthor of the world. The moral reference to purposes and the Idea of a moral legislator and Author of the world, as a theological concept, seem to be developed of themselves out of that ground of proof, although they are in truth pure additions.

[091-035]Henceforward we may allow the customary statement to stand. For it is generally difficult (if the distinction requires much reflection) for ordinary sound Understanding to distinguish from one another as heterogeneous the different principleswhich it confuses, and from one of which alone it actually draws conclusions with correctness. The moral ground of proof of the Being of God, properly speaking, does not merelycompleteand render perfect the physico-teleological proof; but it is a special proof thatsuppliesthe conviction which is wanting in the latter. This latter in fact can do nothing more than guide Reason, in its judgements upon the ground of nature and that contingent but admirable order of nature only known to us by experience, to the causality of a Cause containing the ground of the same in accordance with purposes (which we by the constitution of our cognitive faculties must think as an intelligent cause); and thus by arresting the attention of Reason it makes it more susceptible of the moral proof. For what is requisite to the latter concept is so essentially different from everything which natural concepts contain and can teach, that there is need of a particular ground of proof quite independent of the former, in order to supply the concept of the original Being adequately for Theology and to infer its existence.—The moral proof (which it is true only proves the Being of God in a practical though indispensable aspect of Reason) would preserve all its force, if we found in the world no material, or only that which is doubtful, for physical Teleology. It is possible to conceive rational beings surrounded by a nature which displayed no clear trace of organisation but only the effects of a mere mechanism of crude matter; on behalf of which and amid the changeability of some merely contingent purposive forms and relations there would appear to be no ground for inferring an intelligent Author.

[091-036]In such case there would be no occasion for aphysical Teleology; and yet Reason, which here gets no guidance from natural concepts, would find in the concept of freedom and in the moral Ideas founded thereon a practically sufficient ground for postulating the concept of the original Being in conformity with these,i.e.as a Deity, and for postulating nature (even the nature of our own being) as a final purpose in accordance with freedom and its laws—and all this in reference to the indispensable command of practical Reason.—However the fact that there is in the actual world for the rational beings in it abundant material for physical Teleology (even though this is not necessary) serves as a desirable confirmation of the moral argument, as far as nature can exhibit anything analogous to the (moral) rational Ideas. For the concept of a supreme Cause possessing intelligence (though not reaching far enough for a Theology) thus acquires sufficient reality for the reflective Judgement, but it is not required as the basis of the moral proof; nor does this latter serve to complete as a proof the former, which does not by itself point to morality at all, by means of an argument developed according to a single principle.

[091-037]Two such heterogeneous principles as nature and freedom can only furnish two different kinds of proof; and the attempt to derive one from the other is found unavailing as regards that which is to be proved.

[091-038]If the physico-teleological ground of proof sufficed for the proof which is sought, it would be very satisfactory for the speculative Reason; for it would furnish the hope of founding a Theosophy (for so we must call the theoretical cognition of the divine nature and its existence which wouldsuffice at once for the explanation of the constitution of the world and for the determination of moral laws).

[091-039]In the same way if Psychology enabled us to arrive at a cognition of the immortality of the soul it would make Pneumatology possible, which would be just as welcome to the speculative Reason. But neither, agreeable as they would be to the arrogance of our curiosity, would satisfy the wish of Reason in respect of a theory which must be based on a cognition of the nature of things. Whether the first, as Theology, and the second, as Anthropology, when founded on the moral principle,i.e.the principle of freedom, and consequently in accordance with the practical use [of Reason] do not better fulfil their objective final design, is another question which we need not here pursue.

[091-040]The physico-teleological ground of proof does not reach to Theology, because it does not and cannot give any determinate concept, sufficient for this design, of the original Being; but we must derive this from quite another quarter, or must supply its lacuna by an arbitrary addition. You infer, from the great purposiveness of natural forms and their relations, a world-cause endowed with Understanding; but what is the degree of this Understanding? Without doubt you cannot assume that it is the highest possible Understanding; because for that it would be requisite that you should see that a greater Understanding than that of which you perceive proofs in the world, is not thinkable; and this would be to ascribe Omniscience to yourself.158In the same way, if you infer from the magnitude of the world the very great might of its Author,you must be content with this having only a comparative significance for your faculty of comprehension; for since you do not know all that is possible, so as to compare it with the magnitude of the world as far as you know it, you cannot infer the Almightiness of its Author from so small a standard, and so on.

[091-041]Now you arrive in this way at no definite concept of an original Being available for a Theology; for this can only be found in the concept of the totality of perfections compatible with intelligence, and you cannot help yourself to this by merelyempiricaldata.

[091-042]But without such a definite concept you cannot infer auniqueintelligent original Being; you can only assume it (with whatever motive).—Now it may certainly be conceded that you should arbitrarily add (for Reason has nothing fundamental to say to the contrary): Where so much perfection is found, we may well assume that all perfection is united in a unique Cause of the world, because Reason succeeds better both theoretically and practically with a principle thus definite. But then you cannot regard this concept of the original Being as proved by you, for you have only assumed it on behalf of a better employment of Reason. Hence all lamentation or impotent anger on account of the alleged mischief of rendering doubtful the coherency of your chain of reasoning, is vain pretentiousness, which would fain have us believe that the doubt here freely expressed as to your argument is a doubting of sacred truth, in order that under this cover the shallowness of your argument may pass unnoticed.

[091-043]Moral Teleology, on the other hand, which is not less firmly based than physical,—which, indeed, rather deserves the preference because it restsa priorion principles inseparable from our Reason—leads to that which is requisite for the possibility of a Theology, viz. to a determinateconceptof the supreme Cause, as Cause of the world according to moral laws, and, consequently, to the concept of such a cause as satisfies our moral final purpose.

[091-044]For this are required, as natural properties belonging to it, nothing less than Omniscience, Omnipotence, Omnipresence, and the like, which must be thought as bound up with the moral final purpose which is infinite and thus as adequate to it. Hence moral Teleology alone can furnish the concept of auniqueAuthor of the world, which is available for a Theology.

[091-045]In this way Theology leads immediately toReligion,i.e.the recognition of our duties as divine commands159; because it is only the recognition of our duty and of the final purpose enjoined upon us by Reason which brings out with definiteness the concept of God. This concept, therefore, is inseparable in its origin from obligation to that Being. On the other hand, even if the concept of the original Being could be also found determinately by the merely theoretical path (viz. the concept of it as mere Cause of nature), it would afterwards be very difficult—perhaps impossible without arbitrary interpolation [of elements]—to ascribe to this Being by well-grounded proofs a causality in accordance with moral laws; and yet without this that quasi-theological concept could furnish no foundation for religion. Even if a religion could be established by this theoretical path, it would actually, as regards sentiment (wherein its essence lies) be different from that inwhich the concept of God and the (practical) conviction of His Being originate from the fundamental Ideas of morality. For if we must suppose the Omnipotence, Omniscience, etc., of an Author of the world as concepts given to us from another quarter, in order afterwards only to apply our concepts of duties to our relation to Him, then these latter concepts must bear very markedly the appearance of compulsion and forced submission.

[091-046]If, instead of this, the respect for the moral law, quite freely, in virtue of the precept of our own Reason, represents to us the final purpose of our destination, we admit among our moral views a Cause harmonising with this and with its accomplishment, with the sincerest reverence, which is quite distinct from pathological fear; and we willingly submit ourselves thereto.160

[091-047]If it be asked why it is incumbent upon us to have any Theology at all, it appears clear that it is not needed for the extension or correction of our cognition of nature or in general for any theory, but simply in a subjective point of view for Religion,i.e.the practical or moral use of our Reason. If it is found that the only argument which leads to a definite concept of the object of Theology is itself moral, it is not only not strange, but we miss nothing in respect of its final purpose as regardsthe sufficiency of belief from this ground of proof, provided that it be admitted that such an argument only establishes the Being of God sufficiently for our moral destination,i.e.in a practical point of view, and that here speculation neither shows its strength in any way, nor extends by means of it the sphere of its domain. Our surprise and the alleged contradiction between the possibility of a Theology asserted here and that which the Critique of speculative Reason said of the Categories—viz. that they can only produce knowledge when applied to objects of sense, but in no way when applied to the supersensible—vanish, if we see that they are here used for a cognition of God not in a theoretical point of view (in accordance with what His own nature, inscrutable to us, may be) but simply in a practical.—In order then at this opportunity to make an end of the misinterpretation of that very necessary doctrine of the Critique, which, to the chagrin of the blind dogmatist, refers Reason to its bounds, I add here the following elucidation.

[091-048]If I ascribe to a bodymotive forceand thus think it by means of the category ofcausality, then I at the same timecogniseit by that [category];i.e.I determine the concept of it, as of an Object in general, by means of what belongs to it by itself (as the condition of the possibility of that relation) as an object of sense. If the motive force ascribed to it is repulsive, then there belongs to it (although I do not place near it any other body upon which it may exert force) a place in space, and moreover extension,i.e.space in itself, besides the filling up of this by means of the repulsive forces of its parts. In addition there is the law of thisfilling up (that the ground of the repulsion of the parts must decrease in the same proportion as the extension of the body increases, and as the space, which it fills with the same parts by means of this force, is augmented).—On the contrary, if I think a supersensible Being as the firstmover, and thus by the category of causality as regards its determination of the world (motion of matter), I must not think it as existing in any place in space nor as extended; I must not even think it as existing in time or simultaneously with other beings. Hence I have no determinations whatever, which could make intelligible to me the condition of the possibility of motion by means of this Being as its ground. Consequently, I do not in the very least cognise it by means of the predicate of Cause (as first mover), for itself; but I have only the representation of a something containing the ground of the motions in the world; and the relation of the latter to it as their cause, since it does not besides furnish me with anything belonging to the constitution of the thing which is cause, leaves its concept quite empty. The reason of this is, that by predicates which only find their Object in the world of sense I can indeed proceed to the being of something which must contain their ground, but not to the determination of its concept as a supersensible being, which excludes all these predicates. By the category of causality, then, if I determine it by the concept of afirst mover, I do not in the very least cognise what God is. Perhaps, however, I shall have better success if I start from the order of the world, not merely tothinkits causality as that of a supremeUnderstanding, but tocogniseit by means of this determination of the said concept;because here the troublesome condition of space and of extension disappears.—At all events the great purposiveness in the world compels us tothinka supreme cause of it, and tothinkits causality as that of an Understanding; but we are not therefore entitled toascribethis to it. (E.g.we think of the eternity of God as presence in all time, because we can form no other concept of mere being as a quantum,i.e.as duration; or we think of the divine Omnipresence as presence in all places in order to make comprehensible to ourselves His immediate presence in things which are external to one another; without daring to ascribe to God any of these determinations, as something cognised in Him.) If I determine the causality of a man, in respect of certain products which are only explicable by designed purposiveness, by thinking it as that of Understanding, I need not stop here, but I can ascribe to him this predicate as a well-known property and cognise him accordingly.

[091-049]For I know that intuitions are given to the senses of men and are brought by the Understanding under a concept and thus under a rule; that this concept only contains the common characteristic (with omission of the particular ones) and is thus discursive; and that the rules for bringing given representations under a consciousness in general are given by Understanding before those intuitions, etc. I therefore ascribe this property to man as a property by means of which Icognisehim. However, if I wish tothinka supersensible Being (God) as an intelligence, this is not only permissible in a certain aspect of my employment of Reason—it is unavoidable; but to ascribe to Him Understanding and to flatter ourselves that we cancogniseHim bymeans of it as a property of His, is in no way permissible.

[091-050]For I must omit all those conditions under which alone I know an Understanding, and thus the predicate which only serves for determining man cannot be applied at all to a supersensible Object; and therefore by a causality thus determined, I cannot cognise what God is. And so it is with all Categories, which can have no significance for cognition in a theoretical aspect, if they are not applied to objects of possible experience.—However, according to the analogy of an Understanding I can in a certain other aspect think a supersensible being, without at the same time meaning thereby to cognise it theoretically; viz. if this determination of its causality concerns an effect in the world, which contains a design morally necessary but unattainable by a sensible being. For then a cognition of God and of His Being (Theology) is possible by means of properties and determinations of His causality merely thought in Him according to analogy, which has all requisite reality in a practical reference thoughonly in respect of this(as moral).—An Ethical Theology is therefore possible; for though morality can subsist without theology as regards its rule, it cannot do so as regards the final design which this proposes, unless Reason in respect of it is to be renounced. But a Theological Ethic (of pure Reason) is impossible; for laws which Reason itself does not give and whose observance it does not bring about as a pure practical faculty, can not be moral. In the same way a Theological Physic would be a nonentity, for it would propose no laws of nature but ordinances of a Highest Will; while on the other hand a physical (properly speaking a physico-teleological) Theology can serve atleast as a propaedeutic to Theology proper, by giving occasion for the Idea of a final purpose which nature cannot present by the observation of natural purposes of which it offers abundant material. It thus makes felt the need of a Theology which shall determine the concept of God adequately for the highest practical use of Reason, but it cannot develop this and base it satisfactorily on its proofs.

[091-051]THE END

[091-052]Printed byR. & R. CLARK, LIMITED,Edinburgh.

[091-053]WORKS ON PHILOSOPHYBy IMMANUEL KANTKANT’S CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY FOR ENGLISH READERS. ByJ. P. Mahaffy, D.D., and The Right Rev. J.H. Bernard, D.D. Two vols. Crown 8vo.Vol. I.The Kritik of the Pure Reason Explained And Defended.7s. 6d.Vol. II.Prolegomena.Translated, with Notes and Appendices. 6s.CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON. Translated byF. Max Müller. Second Edition, Revised. Extra Crown 8vo. 15s. net.CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON. Translated byF. Max Müller. Vol. 1. Containing Translator’s Preface; Historical Introduction byLudwig Noiré; and Additions made byKantin the Second Edition of the Critique. 8vo. 16s.By Professor HENRI BERGSONCREATIVE EVOLUTION. Translated byArthur Mitchell, Ph.D. 8vo. 10s. net.LAUGHTER: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic.

[091-054]Authorised Translation from the Sixth Edition byCloudesley Brereton, L. ès L. (Paris), M.A. (Cantab.); andFred Rothwell, B.A. (London). Extra Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS. Translated byT. E. Hulme. Crown 8vo. 2s. net.A CRITICAL EXPOSITION OF BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHY.

[091-055]ByJ. McKellar Stewart, B.A., D.Phil. 8vo. 5s. net.By BENEDETTO CROCEPHILOSOPHY OF THE PRACTICAL. Economic and Ethic. Translated byDouglas Ainslie, B.A. 8vo. 12s. net.ÆSTHETIC AS SCIENCE OF EXPRESSION AND GENERAL LINGUISTIC. Translated byDouglas Ainslie, B.A. 8vo. 10s. net.ENCYCLOPÆDIA OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES. Edited byWilhelm WindelbandandArnold Ruge. English Edition under the Editorship of SirHenry Jones. 8vo.Vol. I. LOGIC. ByArnold Ruge,Wilhelm Windelband,Josiah Royce,Louis Couturat,Benedetto Croce,Federigo Enriques, andNicolaj Losskij. 7s. 6d. net.LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO.,Ltd.WORKS ON PHILOSOPHYTHE SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHYA HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OFPHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHTBY VARIOUS WRITERSEDITED BYSir HENRY JONESPROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOWTHE EVOLUTION OF EDUCATIONAL THEORY.

[091-056]By ProfessorJohn Adams, M.A., B.Sc., LL.D. 8vo. 10s. net.THE HISTORY OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY. By ProfessorJohn Burnet, LL.D. Vol. I. From Thales to Plato.[In the Press.THE HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY FROM HOBBES TO REID. By ProfessorG. F. Stout.[In preparation.Other volumes to follow.*****THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY AND VALUE.

[091-057]The Gifford Lectures for 1911. ByBernard Bosanquet, LL.D., D.C.L. 8vo. 10s. net.THE VALUE AND DESTINY OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

[091-058]The Gifford Lectures for 1912 ByBernard Bosanquet, LL.D., D.C.L. 8vo. 10s. net.THE CROWNING PHASE OF THE CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY.

[091-059]A Study in Kant’s Critique of Judgment. ByR. A. C.

[091-060]Macmillan, M.A., D.Phil. 8vo. 10s. net.THE HISTORY AND THEORY OF VITALISM. By Prof.Hans Driesch, Ph.D. Translated byC. K. Ogden, B.A. Revised throughout and in part rewritten by the Author for the English Edition.

[091-061]Crown 8vo.[In the Press.THE PROBLEM OF INDIVIDUALITY. Lectures. By Prof.Hans Driesch, Ph.D. 8vo.[In the Press.THE FOUNDATIONS OF CHARACTER. Being a Study of the Emotions and Sentiments. ByAlexander F. Shand, M.A. 8vo.[In the Press.THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY. ByL. Silberstein, Ph.D. 8vo.[In the Press.MODERN PHILOSOPHERS. Lectures. ByHarald Höffding.

[091-062]Translated byAlfred C. Mason, M.A. Crown 8vo.[In the Press.LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO.,Ltd.

[091-063]FOOTNOTES:1Dr. Caird (Critical Philosophy of Kant, vol. ii. p. 406) has given an instructive account of the gradual development in Kant’s mind of the main idea of the Critique of Judgement.2Natural Theology and Modern Thought, p. 158.3I reproduce here in part a paper read before the Victoria Institute in April 1892.4Critique of Pure Reason.Dialectic, Bk. ii. chap. i. near the end.5Cf. Kuno Fischer,A Critique of Kant, p. 142.6Quoted by Caird,Critical Philosophy of Kant, vol. ii. p. 507, who reiterates this criticism all through his account of Kant’s teaching.7Natural Theology and Modern Thought, p. 241.8[Reading, with Windelband,in sicheren alleinigen Besitz.]9If we have cause for supposing that concepts which we use as empirical principles stand in relationship with the pure cognitive facultya priori, it is profitable, because of this reference, to seek for them a transcendental definition;i.e.a definition through pure categories, so far as these by themselves adequately furnish the distinction of the concept in question from others. We here follow the example of the mathematician who leaves undetermined the empirical data of his problem, and only brings their relation in their pure synthesis under the concepts of pure Arithmetic, and thus generalises the solution.

[091-064]Objection has been brought against a similar procedure of mine (cf. the Preface to the Critique of Practical Reason,Abbott’s Translation, p. 94), and my definition of the faculty of desire has been found fault with, viz. that it is [the being’s]faculty of becoming by means of its representations the cause of the actuality of the objects of these representations; for the desires might be merecravings, and by means of these alone every one is convinced the Object cannot be produced.—But this proves nothing more than that there are desires in man, by which he is in contradiction with himself. For here he strives for the production of the Object by means of the representationalone, from which he can expect no result, because he is conscious that his mechanical powers (if I may so call those which are not psychological) which must be determined by that representation to bring about the Object (mediately) are either not competent, or even tend towards what is impossible; e.g. to reverse the past (O mihi praeteritos... etc.), or to annihilate in the impatience of expectation the interval before the wished for moment.—Although in such fantastic desires we are conscious of the inadequacy (or even the unsuitability) of our representations for beingcausesof their objects, yet their reference as causes, and consequently the representation of theircausality, is contained in everywish; and this is specially evident if the wish is an affection orlonging. For these [longings] by their dilatation and contraction of the heart and consequent exhaustion of its powers, prove that these powers are continually kept on the stretch by representations, but that they perpetually let the mind, having regard to the impossibility [of the desire], fall back in exhaustion.

[091-065]Even prayers for the aversion of great and (as far as one can see) unavoidable evils, and many superstitious means for attaining in a natural way impossible purposes, point to the causal reference of representations to their Objects; a reference which cannot at all be checked by the consciousness of the inadequacy of the effort to produce the effect.—As to why there should be in our nature this propensity to desires which are consciously vain, that is an anthropologico-teleological problem. It seems that if we were not determined to the application of our powers before we were assured of the adequacy of our faculties to produce an Object, these powers would remain in great part unused. For we commonly learn to know our powers only by first making trial of them. This deception in the case of vain wishes is then only the consequence of a benevolent ordinance in our nature. [This note was added by Kant in the Second Edition.]10One of the various pretended contradictions in this whole distinction of the causality of nature from that of freedom is this.

[091-066]It is objected that if I speak ofobstacleswhich nature opposes to causality according to (moral) laws of freedom or of theassistanceit affords, I am admitting aninfluenceof the former upon the latter.

[091-067]But if we try to understand what has been said, this misinterpretation is very easy to avoid. The opposition or assistance is not between nature and freedom, but between the former as phenomenon and theeffectsof the latter as phenomena in the world of sense.

[091-068]The causality of freedom itself (of pure and practical Reason) is the causality of a natural cause subordinated to freedom (i.e.of the subject considered as man and therefore as phenomenon). The intelligible, which is thought under freedom, contains the ground of thedeterminationof this [natural cause] in a way not explicable any further (just as that intelligible does which constitutes the supersensible substrate of nature).11It has been thought a doubtful point that my divisions in pure Philosophy should always be threefold. But that lies in the nature of the thing. If there is to be ana prioridivision it must be eitheranalytical, according to the law of contradiction, which is always twofold (quodlibet ens est aut A aut non A); or it issynthetical.

[091-069]And if in this latter case it is to be derived froma priori concepts(not as in Mathematic from the intuition corresponding to the concept), the division must necessarily be trichotomy. For according to what is requisite for synthetical unity in general there must be (1) a condition, (2) a conditioned, and (3) the concept which arises from the union of the conditioned with its condition.12The definition of taste which is laid down here is that it is the faculty of judging of the beautiful. But the analysis of judgements of taste must show what is required in order to call an object beautiful.

[091-070]The moments, to which this Judgement has regard in its reflection, I have sought in accordance with the guidance of the logical functions of judgement (for in a judgement of taste a reference to the Understanding is always involved). I have considered the moment of quality first, because the aesthetical judgement upon the beautiful first pays attention to it.13A judgement upon an object of satisfaction may be quitedisinterested, but yet veryinteresting,i.e.not based upon an interest, but bringing an interest with it; of this kind are all pure moral judgements.

[091-071]Judgements of taste, however, do not in themselves establish any interest. Only in society is itinterestingto have taste: the reason of this will be shown in the sequel.14[Second Edition.]15An obligation to enjoyment is a manifest absurdity. Thus the obligation to all actions which have merely enjoyment for their aim can only be a pretended one; however spiritually it may be conceived (or decked out), even if it is a mystical, or so-called heavenly, enjoyment.16[Second Edition.]17[Second Edition.]18[Ueberweg points out (Hist. of Phil., ii. 528, Eng. Trans.) that Mendelssohn had already called attention to the disinterestedness of our satisfaction in the Beautiful. “It appears,” says Mendelssohn, “to be a particular mark of the beautiful, that it is contemplated with quiet satisfaction, that it pleases, even though it be not in our possession, and even though we be never so far removed from the desire to put it to our use.” But, of course, as Ueberweg remarks, Kant’s conception of disinterestedness extends far beyond the absence of a desire to possess the object.]19[Readingbesonderewith Windelband; Hartenstein readsbestimmte.]20[I.e.The Critique of Pure Reason, Analytic, bk. ii. c. i.]21[Second Edition. Spencer expresses much more concisely what Kant has in his mind here. “[[pleasure|Pleasure]] ... is a feeling which we seek to bring into consciousness and retain there; pain is ... a feeling which we seek to get out of consciousness and to keep out.”Principles of Psychology, § 125.]22[The editions of Hartenstein and Kirchmann omitohnebeforezweck, which makes havoc of the sentence. It is correctly printed by Rosenkranz and Windelband.]23[First Edition.]24[Cf.Metaphysic of Morals, Introd. I. “The pleasure which is necessarily bound up with the desire (of the object whose representation affects feeling) may be calledpracticalpleasure, whether it be cause or effect of the desire. On the contrary, the pleasure which is not necessarily bound up with the desire of the object, and which, therefore, is at bottom not a pleasure in the existence of the Object of the representation, but clings to the representation only, may be called mere contemplative pleasure orpassive satisfaction.

[091-072]The feeling of the latter kind of pleasure we calltaste.”]25[Second Edition.]26[First Edition hasgleiche; Second Edition hassolche.]27[First and Second Editions havesehr zweifle; but this was corrected tonicht zweiflein the Third Edition of 1799.]28[Belebt machen; First Edition hadbeliebt.]29[Second Edition.]30[Kant probably alludes here to Baumgarten (1714–1762), who was the first writer to give the name of Aesthetics to the Philosophy of [[taste|Taste]]. He defined beauty as “perfection apprehended through the senses.” Kant is said to have used as a text-book at lectures a work by Meier, a pupil of Baumgarten’s, on this subject.]31[Cf. Preface to theMetaphysical Elements of Ethics, v.: “The wordperfectionis liable to many misconceptions. It is sometimes understood as a concept belonging to Transcendental Philosophy; viz. the concept of thetotalityof the manifold, which, taken together, constitutes a Thing; sometimes, again, it is understood as belonging toTeleology, so that it signifies the agreement of the characteristics of a thing with apurpose. Perfection in the former sense might be calledquantitative(material), in the latterqualitative(formal) perfection.”]32[The wordseven if ... generalwere added in the Second Edition.]33[Second Edition.]34Models of taste as regards the arts of speech must be composed in a dead and learned language. The first, in order that they may not suffer that change which inevitably comes over living languages, in which noble expressions become flat, common ones antiquated, and newly created ones have only a short currency.

[091-073]The second, because learned languages have a grammar which is subject to no wanton change of fashion, but the rules of which are preserved unchanged.35[This distinction between anIdeaand anIdeal, as also the further contrast between Ideals of the Reason and Ideals of the Imagination, had already been given by Kant in theCritique of Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. ii. c. iii. § 1.]36[Polycletus of Argos flourished about 430B.C.His statue of theSpearbearer(Doryphorus), afterwards became known as theCanon; because in it the artist was supposed to have embodied a perfect representation of the ideal of the human figure.]37[This was a celebrated statue executed by Myron, a Greek sculptor, contemporary with Polycletus. It is frequently mentioned in the Greek Anthology.]38It will be found that a perfectly regular countenance, such as a painter might wish to have for a model, ordinarily tells us nothing; because it contains nothing characteristic, and therefore rather expresses the Idea of the race than the specific [traits] of a person.

[091-074]The exaggeration of a characteristic of this kind,i.e.such as does violence to the normal Idea (the purposiveness of the race) is calledcaricature. Experience also shows that these quite regular countenances commonly indicate internally only a mediocre man; presumably (if it may be assumed that external nature expresses the proportions of internal) because, if no mental disposition exceeds that proportion which is requisite in order to constitute a man free from faults, nothing can be expected of what is calledgenius, in which nature seems to depart from the ordinary relations of the mental powers on behalf of some special one.39It might be objected to this explanation that there are things, in which we see a purposive form without cognising any [definite] purpose in them, like the stone implements often got from old sepulchral tumuli with a hole in them as if for a handle. These, although they plainly indicate by their shape a purposiveness of which we do not know the purpose, are nevertheless not described as beautiful. But if we regard a thing as a work of art, that is enough to make us admit that its shape has reference to some design and definite purpose.

[091-075]And hence there is no immediate satisfaction in the contemplation of it. On the other hand a flower,e.g.a tulip, is regarded as beautiful; because in perceiving it we find a certain purposiveness which, in our judgement, is referred to no purpose at all.40[Cp. p. 170,infra.]41[SeeThe History of Sumatra, by W. Marsden (London, 1783), p. 113.]42[Cf. § 42,infra.]43[Second Edition.]44[Second Edition.]45[Lettres sur l’Égypte, par M. Savary, Amsterdam, 1787.]46[Second Edition.]47[With this should be compared the similar discussion in theCritique of Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. ii. c. ii. § 1,On the System of Cosmological Ideas.]48[Second Edition.]49[Cf. § 83,infra.]50[In thePhilosophical Theory of Religion, pt. i.sub fin.(Abbott’s Translation, p. 360), Kant, as here, divides “all religions into two classes—favour-seekingreligion (mere worship) andmoralreligion, that is, the religionof a good life;” and he concludes that “amongst all the public religions that have ever existed the Christian alone is moral.”]51[Voyages dans les Alpes, par H. B. de Saussure; vol. i. was published at Neuchatel in 1779; vol. ii. at Geneva in 1786.]52[Second Edition.]53[Als Vermögen der Independenz der absoluten Totalität, a curious phrase.]54[Second Edition.]55Affectionsare specifically different frompassions. The former are related merely to feeling; the latter belong to the faculty of desire, and are inclinations which render difficult or impossible all determination of the [elective] will by principles. The former are stormy and unpremeditated; the latter are steady and deliberate; thus indignation in the form of wrath is an affection, but in the form of hatred (revenge) is a passion. The latter can never and in no reference be called sublime; because while in an affection the freedom of the mind ishindered, in a passion it is abolished. [Cf.

[091-076]Preface to theMetaphysical Elements of Ethics, § xvi., where this distinction is more fully drawn out. Affection is described ashasty; and passion is defined as the sensibleappetitegrown into a permanent inclination.]56[In the Preface to theMetaphysical Elements of Ethics, § xvii., Kant gives the termmoral apathyto that freedom from the sway of the affections, which is distinguished from indifference to them.]57[Readingweichewith Rosenkranz and Windelband; Hartenstein and Kirchmann haveweise, which yields no sense.]58[Cf. p. 129,supra.]59[Kirchmann haspositiv; but this is probably a mere misprint.]60[L.c. vol. ii. p. 181.]61[See [[edmund-burke|Burke]],On the Sublime and Beautiful, Part IV., Sect. vii. “If the pain and terror are so modified as not to be actually noxious; if the pain is not carried to violence, and the terror is not conversant about the present destruction of the person, as these emotions clear the parts, whether fine or gross, of a dangerous and troublesome incumbrance, they are capable of producing delight; not pleasure, but a sort of delightful horror, a sort of tranquillity tinged with terror; which, as it belongs to self-preservation, is one of the strongest of all the passions.” Kant quotes from the German version published at Riga in 1773. This was a free translation made from Burke’s fifth edition.]62[See Burke, l.c., Part IV., Sect. xix. “[[beauty|Beauty]] acts by relaxing the solids of the whole system. There are all the appearances of such a relaxation; and a relaxation somewhat below the natural tone seems to me to be the cause of all positive pleasure.

[091-077]Who is a stranger to that manner of expression so common in all times and in all countries, of being softened, relaxed, enervated, dissolved, melted away by pleasure?”]63[ReadingGebot; Kirchmann hasGesetz.]64[Second Edition.]65[Second Edition.]66[Cf.Critique of Pure Reason, Methodology, c. 1, § 1. “The construction of a concept is thea prioripresentation of the corresponding intuition.”]67[Charles Batteux (1713–1780), author ofLes Beaux Arts reduits à un même principe.]68[Essay XVIII,The Sceptic. “Critics can reason and dispute more plausibly than cooks or perfumers. We may observe, however, that this uniformity among human kind, hinders not, but that there is a considerable diversity in the sentiments of beauty and worth, and that education, custom, prejudice, caprice, and humour, frequently vary our taste of this kind.... Beauty and worth are merely of a relative nature, and consist in an agreeable sentiment, produced by an object in a particular mind, according to the peculiar structure and constitution of that mind.”]69[For the distinction, an important one in Kant, between judgements of experience and judgements of perception, see hisProlegomena, § 18. Cf.Kant’s Critical Philosophy for English Readers, vol. i. p. 116.]70[First Edition has “limited.”]71In order to be justified in claiming universal assent for an aesthetical judgement that rests merely on subjective grounds, it is sufficient to assume, (1) that the subjective conditions of the Judgement, as regards the relation of the cognitive powers thus put into activity to a cognition in general, are the same in all men.

[091-078]This must be true, because otherwise men would not be able to communicate their representations or even their knowledge. (2) The judgement must merely have reference to this relation (consequently to theformal conditionof the Judgement) and be pure,i.e.not mingled either with concepts of the Object or with sensations, as determining grounds. If there has been any mistake as regards this latter condition, then there is only an inaccurate application of the privilege, which a law gives us, to a particular case; but that does not destroy the privilege itself in general.72[Kant lays down these three maxims in hisIntroduction to Logic, § vii., as “general rules and conditions of the avoidance of error.”]73We soon see that although enlightenment is easyin thesi, yetin hypothesiit is difficult and slow of accomplishment. For not to be passive as regards Reason, but to be always self-legislative, is indeed quite easy for the man who wishes only to be in accordance with his essential purpose, and does not desire to know what is beyond his Understanding. But since we can hardly avoid seeking this, and there are never wanting others who promise with much confidence that they are able to satisfy our curiosity, it must be very hard to maintain in or restore to the mind (especially the mind of the public) that bare negative which properly constitutes enlightenment.74We may designate Taste assensus communis aestheticus, common Understanding assensus communis logicus.75[Peter Camper (1722–1789), a celebrated naturalist and comparative anatomist; for some years professor at Groningen.]76In my country a common man, if you propose to him such a problem as that of Columbus with his egg, says,that is not art, it is only science.I.e.if weknowhow, we candoit; and he says the same of all the pretended arts of jugglers. On the other hand, he will not refuse to apply the term art to the performance of a rope-dancer.77[Kant was accustomed to say that the talk at a dinner table should always pass through these three stages—narrative, discussion, and jest; and punctilious in this, as in all else, he is said to have directed the conversation at his own table accordingly (Wallace’sKant, p. 39).]78[Second Edition.]79[Cf. Aristotle’sPoetics, c. iv. p. 1448 b:ἃ γὰρ αὐτὰ λυπηρῶς ὁρῶμεν, τούτων τὰς εἰκόνας τὰς μάλιστα ἠκριβωμένας χαίρομεν θεωροῦντες οἷον θηρίων τε μορφὰς τῶν ἀτιμοτάτων καὶ νεκρῶν. Cf. alsoRhetoric, I. 11, p. 1371 b; and Burke on theSublime and Beautiful, Part I. § 16. Boileau (L’art poétique, chant 3), makes a similar observation:“Il n’est point de serpent ni de monstre odieuxQui, par l’art imité, ne puisse plaire aux yeux.D’un pinceau délicat l’artifice agréableDu plus affreux objet fait un objet aimable.”]80[Second Edition.]81[Cf. p. 199,infra.]82[In English we would rather say “withoutsoul”; but I prefer to translateGeistconsistently byspirit, to avoid the confusion of it withSeele.]83[These lines occur in one of Frederick the Great’s French poems: Épître au maréchal Keith XVIII., “sur les vaines terreurs de la mort et les frayeurs d’une autre vie.” Kant here translates them into German.]84[Withof, whose “Moral Poems” appeared in 1755. This reference was supplied by H. Krebs inNotes and Queries5th January 1895.]85Perhaps nothing more sublime was ever said and no sublimer thought ever expressed than the famous inscription on the Temple ofIsis(MotherNature): “I am all that is and that was and that shall be, and no mortal hath lifted my veil.”Segneravailed himself of this Idea in asuggestivevignette prefixed to his Natural Philosophy, in order to inspire beforehand the pupil whom he was about to lead into that temple with a holy awe, which should dispose his mind to serious attention. [J. A. de Segner (1704–1777) was Professor of Natural Philosophy at Göttingen, and the author of several scientific works of repute.]86[Second Edition.]87The three former faculties areunitedin the first instance by means of the fourth. [[david-hume|Hume]] gives us to understand in hisHistory of Englandthat although the English are inferior in their productions to no people in the world as regards the evidences they display of the three former properties,separatelyconsidered, yet they must be put after their neighbours the French as regards that which unites these properties. [In hisObservations on the Beautiful and Sublime, § iv.sub init., Kant remarks that the English have the keener sense of thesublime, the French of thebeautiful.]88The reader is not to judge this scheme for a possible division of the beautiful arts as a deliberate theory. It is only one of various attempts which we may and ought to devise.89[Second Edition.]90[I.e.the case of Plastic art, with its subdivisions of Architecture and Sculpture, as is explained in the next paragraph.]91That landscape gardening may be regarded as a species of the art of painting, although it presents its forms corporeally, seems strange. But since it actually takes its forms from nature (trees, shrubs, grasses, and flowers from forest and field—at least in the first instance), and so far is not an art like Plastic; and since it also has no concept of the object and its purpose (as in Architecture) conditioning its arrangements, but involves merely the free play of the Imagination in contemplation, it so far agrees with mere aesthetical painting which has no definite theme (which arranges sky, land, and water, so as to entertain us by means of light and shade only).—In general the reader is only to judge of this as an attempt to combine the beautiful arts under one principle, viz. that of the expression of aesthetical Ideas (according to the analogy of speech), and not to regard it as a definitive analysis of them.92I must admit that a beautiful poem has always given me a pure gratification; whilst the reading of the best discourse, whether of a Roman orator or of a modern parliamentary speaker or of a preacher, has always been mingled with an unpleasant feeling of disapprobation of a treacherous art, which means to move men in important matters like machines to a judgement that must lose all weight for them on quiet reflection. Readiness and accuracy in speaking (which taken together constitute Rhetoric) belong to beautiful art; but the art of the orator (ars oratoria), the art of availing oneself of the weaknesses of men for one’s own designs (whether these be well meant or even actually good does not matter) is worthy of norespect. Again, this art only reached its highest point, both at Athens and at Rome, at a time when the state was hastening to its ruin and true patriotic sentiment had disappeared.

[091-079]The man who along with a clear insight into things has in his power a wealth of pure speech, and who with a fruitful Imagination capable of presenting his Ideas unites a lively sympathy with what is truly good, is thevir bonus discendi peritus, the orator without art but of great impressiveness, asCicerohas it; though he may not always remain true to this ideal.93[From this to the end of the paragraph, and the next note, were added in the Second Edition.]94Those who recommend the singing of spiritual songs at family prayers do not consider that they inflict a great hardship upon the public by suchnoisy(and therefore in general pharisaical) devotions; for they force the neighbours either to sing with them or to abandon their meditations. [Kant suffered himself from such annoyances, which may account for the asperity of this note. At one period he was disturbed by the devotional exercises of the prisoners in the adjoining jail. In a letter to the burgomaster “he suggested the advantage of closing the windows during these hymn-singings, and added that the warders of the prison might probably be directed to accept less sonorous and neighbour-annoying chants as evidence of the penitent spirit of their captives” (Wallace’sKant, p. 42).]95[Cf. “Parturiunt montes, nasciturridiculusmus.”]96[The First Edition adds “as in the case of a man who gets the news of a great commercial success.”]97[The jest may have been taken from Steele’s play, “The Funeral or Griefà la mode,” where it occurs verbatim. This play was published in 1702.]98[Henriade,Chant 7, sub init.“Du Dieu qui nous créa la clémence infinie,Pour adoucir les maux de cette courte vie,A placé parmi nous deux êtres bienfaisants,De la terre à jamais aimables habitants,Soutiens dans les travaux, trésors dans l’indigence:L’un est le doux sommeil, et l’autre est l’espérance.”]99We may describe as a rationalising judgement (judicium ratiocinans) one which proclaims itself as universal, for as such it can serve as the major premise of a syllogism. On the other hand, we can only speak of a judgement as rational (judicium ratiocinatum) which is thought as the conclusion of a syllogism, and consequently as groundeda priori.100[Cf. p. 241,infra.]101[Second Edition.]102[Antiparos is a small island in the Cyclades, remarkable for a splendid stalactite cavern near the southern coast.]103The intuitive in cognition must be opposed to the discursive (not to the symbolical). The former is eitherschematical, bydemonstration; orsymbolicalas a representation in accordance with a mereanalogy.104[I readGeselligkeitwith Rosenkranz and Windelband; Hartenstein and Kirchmann haveGlückseligkeit.]105As in pure mathematics we can never talk of the existence, but only of the possibility of things, viz. of an intuition corresponding to a concept, and so never of cause and effect, it follows that all purposiveness observed there must be considered merely as formal and never as a natural purpose.106[The allusion is toVitruvius de Architectura, Bk. vi. Praef. “Aristippus philosophus Socraticus, naufragio cum eiectus ad Rhodiensium litus animadvertisset geometrica schemata descripta, exclamavisse ad comites ita dicitur, Bene speremus, hominum enim vestigia video.”]107[Second Edition.]108We can conversely throw light upon a certain combination, much more often met with in Idea than in actuality, by means of an analogy to the so-called immediate natural purposes. In a recent complete transformation of a great people into a state the wordorganisationfor the regulation of magistracies, etc., and even of the whole body politic, has often been fitly used. For in such a whole every member should surely be purpose as well as means, and, whilst all work together towards the possibility of the whole, each should be determined as regards place and function by means of the Idea of the whole. [Kant probably alludes here to the organisation of the United States of America.]109[These words are inserted by Rosenkranz and Windelband, but omitted by Hartenstein and Kirchmann.]110In the aesthetical part [§ 58, p. 247] it was said:We view beautiful nature with favour, whilst we have a quite free (disinterested) satisfaction in its form. For in this mere judgement of taste no consideration is given to the purpose for which these natural beauties exist; whether to excite pleasure in us, or as purposes without any reference to us at all. But in a teleological judgement we pay attention to this reference, and here we canregard it as a favour of naturethat it has been willing to minister to our culture by the exhibition of so many beautiful figures.111The German wordvermessenis a good word and full of meaning. A judgement in which we forget to consider the extent of our powers (our Understanding) may sometimes sound very humble, and yet make great pretensions, and so be very presumptuous. Of this kind are most of those by which we pretend to extol the divine wisdom by ascribing to it designs in the works of creation and preservation which are really meant to do honour to the private wisdom of the reasoner.112We thus see that in most speculative things of pure Reason, as regards dogmatic assertions, the philosophical schools have commonly tried all possible solutions of a given question. To explain the purposiveness of nature men have tried eitherlifeless matteror alifeless God, or again,living matteror aliving God.

[091-080]It only remains for us, if the need should arise, to abandon all these objectiveassertionsand to examine critically our judgement merely in reference to our cognitive faculties, in order to supply to their principle a validity which, if not dogmatic, shall at least be that of a maxim sufficient for the sure employment of Reason.113[That is, the wider concept serves as a universal, under which the particular may be brought; cognition from principles, in Kant’s phrase, is the process of knowing the particular in the universal by means of concepts.]114[This distinction will be familiar to the student of theCritique of Pure Reason. See Dialectic, bk. i.,Of the Concepts of Pure Reason.]115[Second Edition.]116[This principle, that for our intellect, the conception of an organised body is impossible except by the aid of the Idea of design, is frequently insisted on by Kant. Professor Wallace points out (Kant, p. 110) that as far back as 1755, in hisGeneral Physiogony and Theory of the Heavens, Kant classed the origin of animals and plants with the secrets of Providence and the mystical number 666 “as one of the topics on which ingenuity and thought are occasionally wasted.”]117[Second Edition.]118[Second Edition.]119[This is marked as anAppendixin the Second Edition.]120We may call a hypothesis of this kind a daring venture of reason, and there may be few even of the most acute naturalists through whose head it has not sometimes passed. For it is not absurd, like thatgeneratio aequivocaby which is understood the production of an organised being through the mechanics of crude unorganised matter. It would always remaingeneratio univocain the most universal sense of the word, for it only considers one organic being as derived from another organic being, although from one which is specifically different;e.g.certain water-animals transform themselves gradually into marsh-animals and from these, after some generations, into land-animals.A priori, in the judgement of Reason alone, there is no contradiction here. Only experience gives no example of it; according to experience all generation that we know isgeneratio homonyma. This is not merelyunivocain contrast to the generation out of unorganised material, but in the organisation the product is of like kind to that which produced it; andgeneration heteronyma, so far as our empirical knowledge of nature extends, is nowhere found.121[It is probable that Kant alludes here to Hume’s EssayOn a Providence and a Future State, § xi of theInquiry. Hume argues that though the inference from an effect to an intelligent cause may be valid in the case of human contrivance, it is not legitimate to rise by a like argument to Supreme Intelligence. “In human nature there is a certain experienced coherence of designs and inclinations; so that when from any fact we have discovered one intention of any man, it may often be reasonable from experience to infer another, and draw a long chain of conclusions concerning his past or future conduct. But this method of reasoning can never have place with regard to a being so remote and incomprehensible, who bears much less analogy to any other being in the universe than the sun to a waxen taper, and who discovers himself only by some faint traces or outlines, beyond which we have no authority to ascribe to him any attribute or perfection.”]122[J. F. Blumenbach (1752–1840), a German naturalist and professor at Göttingen; the author ofInstitutiones Physiologicae(1787) and other works. An interesting account of him is given in Lever’s novelAdventures of Arthur O’Leary, ch. xix.]123[Carl von Linné (1707–1778), Knight of the Polar Star, the celebrated Swedish botanist.]124If the once adopted nameNatural historyis to continue for the description of nature, we may in contrast with art, give the title ofArchaeology of natureto that which the former literally indicates, viz. a representation of theoldcondition of the earth, about which, although we cannot hope for certainty, we have good ground for conjecture. As sculptured stones, etc., belong to the province of art, so petrefactions belong to the archaeology of nature. And since work is actually being done in this [science] (under the name of the Theory of the Earth), constantly, although of course slowly, this name is not given to a merely imaginary investigation of nature, but to one to which nature itself leads and invites us.125[See p.184above.]126[First Edition hasfreedom.]127[These views are set forth by Kant more fully in the essayZum ewigen Frieden(1795).]128[Second Edition.]129[Cf.The Philosophical Theory of Religion, Part i.,On the bad principle in Human Nature, III., where Kant remarks that although war “is not so incurably bad as the deadness of a universal monarchy ... yet, as an ancient observed, it makes more bad men than it takes away.”]130The value of life for us, if it is estimated by thatwhich we enjoy(by the natural purpose of the sum of all inclinations,i.e.happiness), is easy to decide. It sinks below zero; for who would be willing to enter upon life anew under the same conditions? who would do so even according to a new, self-chosen plan (yet in conformity with the course of nature), if it were merely directed to enjoyment?

[091-081]We have shown above what value life has in virtue of what it contains in itself, when lived in accordance with the purpose that nature has along with us, and which consists in what we do (not merely what we enjoy), in which, however, we are always but means towards an undetermined final purpose. There remains then nothing but the value which we ourselves give our life, through what we can not only do, but do purposively in such independence of nature that the existence of nature itself can only be a purpose under this condition.131It would be possible that the happiness of rational beings in the world should be a purpose of nature, and then also this would be itsultimatepurpose. At least we cannot seea prioriwhy nature should not be so ordered, because by means of its mechanism this effect would be certainly possible, at least so far as we see. But morality, with a causality according to purposes subordinated thereto, is absolutely impossible by means of natural causes; for the principle by which it determines to action is supersensible, and is therefore the only possible principle in the order of purposes that in respect of nature is absolutely unconditioned. Its subject consequently alone is qualified to be thefinal purposeof creation to which the whole of nature is subordinated.—Happiness, on the contrary, as has been shown in the preceding paragraphs by the testimony of experience, is not even apurpose of naturein respect of man in preference to other creatures; much less afinal purpose of creation. Men may of course make it their ultimate subjective purpose. But if I ask, in reference to the final purpose of creation, why must men exist? then we are speaking of an objective supreme purpose, such as the highest Reason would require for creation. If we answer: These beings exist to afford objects for the benevolence of that Supreme Cause; then we contradict the condition to which the Reason of man subjects even his inmost wish for happiness (viz. the harmony with his own internal moral legislation). This proves that happiness can only be a conditioned purpose, and that it is only as a moral being that man can be the final purpose of creation; but that as concerns his state happiness is only connected with it as a consequence, according to the measure of his harmony with that purpose regarded as the purpose of his being.132[Second Edition.]133I say deliberately under moral laws. It is not manin accordance withmoral laws,i.e.a being who behaves himself in conformity with them, who is the final purpose of creation. For by using the latter expression we should be asserting more than we know; viz. that it is in the power of an Author of the world to cause man always to behave himself in accordance with moral laws. But this presupposes a concept of freedom and of nature (of which latter we can only think an external author), which would imply an insight into the supersensible substrate of nature and its identity with that which causality through freedom makes possible in the world. And this far surpasses the insight of our Reason.

[091-082]Only ofman under moral lawscan we say, without transgressing the limits of our insight: his being constitutes the final purpose of the world. This harmonises completely with the judgement of human Reason reflecting morally upon the course of the world.

[091-083]We believe that we perceive in the case of the wicked the traces of a wise purposive reference, if we only see that the wanton criminal does not die before he has undergone the deserved punishment of his misdeeds. According to our concepts of free causality, our good or bad behaviour depends on ourselves; we regard it the highest wisdom in the government of the world to ordain for the first, opportunity, and for both, their consequence, in accordance with moral laws. In the latter properly consists the glory of God, which is hence not unsuitably described by theologians as the ultimate purpose of creation.— It is further to be remarked that when we use the word creation, we understand nothing more than we have said here, viz. the cause of thebeingof the world or of the things in it (substances). This is what the concept properly belonging to this word involves (actuatio substantiae est creatio); and consequently there is not implied in it the supposition of a freely working, and therefore intelligent, cause (whose being we first of all want to prove).134[Note added in Second Edition.] This moral argument does not supply anyobjectively-validproof of the Being of God; it does not prove to the sceptic that there is a God, but proves that if he wishes to think in a way consonant with morality, he must admit theassumptionof this proposition under the maxims of his practical Reason.— We should therefore not say: it is necessaryfor morals[Sittlichkeit], to assume the happiness of all rational beings of the world in proportion to their morality [Moralität]; but rather, this is necessitatedbymorality. Accordingly, this is asubjectiveargument sufficient for moral beings.135[Second Edition.]136[Second Edition.]137In a practical sense that religion is always idolatry which conceives the Supreme Being with properties, according to which something else besides morality can be a fit condition for that which man can do being in accordance with His Will. For however pure and free from sensible images the concept that we have formed may be in a theoretical point of view, yet it will be in a practical point of view still represented as anidol,i.e.in regard to the character of His Will, anthropomorphically.138[Cf.Introd. to Logic, ix. p. 63, “Conviction is opposed to Persuasion, which is a belief from inadequate reasons, of which we do not know whether they are only subjective or are also objective.”]139[Second Edition.]140[I.e.Urtheils. First Edition hadUrtheilens, the judging subject.]141Analogy(in a qualitative signification) is the identity of the relation between reasons and consequences (causes and effects), so far as it is to be found, notwithstanding the specific difference of the things or those properties in them which contain the reason for like consequences (i.e.considered apart from this relation). Thus we conceive of the artificial constructions of beasts by comparing them with those of men; by comparing the ground of those effects brought about by the former, which we do not know, with the ground of similar effects brought about by men (reason), which we do know;i.e.we regard the ground of the former as an analogon of reason.

[091-084]We then try at the same time to show that the ground of the artisan faculty of beasts, which we call instinct, specifically different as it is in fact from reason, has yet a similar relation to its effect (the buildings of the beaver as compared with those of men).—But then I cannot therefore conclude that because man usesreasonfor his building, the beaver must have the like, and call this aconclusionaccording to analogy. But from the similarity of the mode of operation of beasts (of which we cannot immediately perceive the ground) to that of men (of which we are immediately conscious), we can quite rightly concludeaccording to analogy, that beasts too act in accordance withrepresentations(not asDescarteshas it, that they are machines), and that despite their specific distinction they are yet (as living beings) of the same genus as man. The principle of our right so to conclude consists in the sameness of the ground for reckoning beasts in respect of the said determination in the same genus with men, regarded as men, so far as we can externally compare them with one another in accordance with their actions. There ispar ratio. Just so I can conceive, according to the analogy of an Understanding, the causality of the supreme World-Cause, by comparing its purposive products in the world with the artificial works of men; but I cannot conclude according to analogy to those properties in it [which are in man], because here the principle of the possibility of such a method of reasoning entirely fails, viz. theparitas rationisfor counting the Supreme Being in one and the same genus with man (in respect of the causality of both). The causality of the beings of the world, which is always sensibly conditioned (as is causality through Understanding) cannot be transferred to a Being which has in common with them no generic concept save that of Thing in general.142We thus miss nothing in the representation of the relations of this Being to the world, as far as the consequences, theoretical or practical, of this concept are concerned. To wish to investigate what it is in itself, is a curiosity as purposeless as it is vain.143[Cf.Introd. to Logic, p. 76, where the conditions of a legitimate hypothesis are laid down. See alsoCritique of Pure Reason, Methodology, c. i. § 3.]144[This illustration is also given in theLogic(p. 57); where the threemodiof belief, Opinion, Faith, and Knowledge, are distinguished from each other. Cf.Critique of Pure Reason, Methodology, c. ii. § 3.]145[The speculations of Swedenborg seem to have always had a strange fascination for Kant. He says of two reported cases of Swedenborg’s clairvoyance that he knows not how to disprove them (Rosenkranz vii. 5); but in hisAnthropology§§ 35, 37, he attacks Swedenborgianism as folly. So in an early essay,Dreams of a Visionary explained by Dreams of Metaphysics, he avows his scepticism as to the value of the information which “psychical research” can supply about the spirit-world, though he is careful not to commit himself to any dogmatic statement on the subject of ghosts. In theCritique of Pure Reason(when discussing the Postulates of Empirical Thought) he gives, as an instance of a concept inconsistent with the canons of possibility, “a power of being in a community of thought with other men, however distant from us.”]146[Cf.supra, p. 229.]147I here extend, correctly as it seems to me, the concept of a thing of fact beyond the usual signification of this word. For it is not needful, not even feasible, to limit this expression merely to actual experience, if we are talking of the relation of things to our cognitive faculties; for an experience merely possible is quite sufficient in order that we may speak of them merely as objects of a definite kind of cognition.148[Cf.introduction to Logic, p. 59 note.]149[Second Edition.]150Things of faith are not thereforearticles of faith; if we understand by the latter things of faith to theconfessionof which (internal or external) we can be bound. Natural theology contains nothing like this. For since they, as things of faith (like things of fact) cannot be based on theoretical proofs, [they are accepted by] a belief which is free and which only as such is compatible with the morality of the subject.151The final purpose which the moral law enjoins upon us to further, is not the ground of duty; since this lies in the moral law, which, as formal practical principle, leads categorically, independently of the Objects of the faculty of desire (the material of the will) and consequently of any purpose whatever. This formal characteristic of my actions (their subordination under the principle of universal validity), wherein alone consists their inner moral worth, is quite in our power; and I can quite well abstract from the possibility or the unattainableness of purposes which I am obliged to promote in conformity with that law (because in them consists only the external worth of my actions) as something which is never completely in my power, in order only to look to that which is of my doing. But then the design of promoting the final purpose of all rational beings (happiness so far as it is possible for it to be accordant with duty) is even yet prescribed by the law of duty. The speculative Reason, however, does not see at all the attainableness of this (neither on the side of our own physical faculty nor on that of the co-operation of nature). It must rather, so far as we can judge in a rational way, hold the derivation, by the aid of such causes, of such a consequence of our good conduct from mere nature (internal and external) without God and immortality, to be an ungrounded and vain, though well-meant, expectation; and if it could have complete certainty of this judgement, it would regard the moral law itself as the mere deception of our Reason in a practical aspect. But since the speculative Reason fully convinces itself that the latter can never take place, but that on the other hand those Ideas whose object lies outside nature can be thought without contradiction, it must for its own practical law and the problem prescribed thereby, and therefore in a moral aspect, recognise those Ideas as real in order not to come into contradiction with itself.152It is a trust in the promise of the moral law; [not however such as is contained in it, but such as I put into it and that on morally adequate grounds.153For a final purpose cannot be commanded by any law of Reason without this latter at the same time promising, however uncertainly, its attainableness; and thus justifying our belief in the special conditions under which alone our Reason can think it as attainable. The wordfidesexpresses this; and it can only appear doubtful, how this expression and this particular Idea came into moral philosophy, since it first was introduced with Christianity, and the adoption of it perhaps might seem to be only a flattering imitation of Christian terminology. But this is not the only case in which this wonderful religion with its great simplicity of statement has enriched philosophy with far more definite and purer concepts of morality, than it had been able to furnish before; but which, once they are there, arefreelyassented to by Reason and are assumed as concepts to which it could well have come of itself and which it could and should have introduced.]153[Second Edition.]154[Cf.Introd. to Logic, ix. p. 60, “That man is morallyunbelievingwho does not accept that which thoughimpossibleto know ismorally necessaryto suppose.”]155[First Edition.]156[In theCritique of Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. II. c. iii. §§ 4, 5.]157[H. S. Reimarus (1694–1768), the author of the famousWolfenbüttel Fragments, published after the death of Reimarus by Lessing. The book alluded to by Kant is probably theAbhandlungen von den vornehmsten Wahrheiten der natürlichen Religion(1754), which had great popularity in its day.]158[These arguments are advanced by Hume,Inquiry, § vii. Cf. alsoPure Reason, Dialectic, bk. II. c. iii. § 6, andPractical Reason, Dialectic, c. ii. § vii.]159[Cf.Practical Reason, Dialectic, c. ii. § v.]160The admiration for beauty, and also the emotion aroused by the manifold purposes of nature, which a reflective mind is able to feel even prior to a clear representation of a rational Author of the world, have something in themselves likereligiousfeeling. They seem in the first place by a method of judging analogous to moral to produce an effect upon the moral feeling (gratitude to, and veneration for, the unknown cause); and thus by exciting moral Ideas to produce an effect upon the mind, when they inspire that admiration which is bound up with far more interest than mere theoretical observation can bring about.

[091-085]Transcriber’s NotesPunctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a predominant preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not changed.Simple typographical errors were corrected.Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines were retained.Text has three occcurrences of “casuality”, which have been retained, but which may be misprints for “causality”.These are transliterations of the Greek text for use on devices that cannot display such text:Pagexvii: kosmos.Pagexxii: kalo.Pagexxiv: sôphrosynê.Pagexxxiii: nous.Page397: kat’ alêtheian (or) kat’ anthrôpon.Footnote79(originally on page195): ha gar auta lypêrôs horômen, toutôn tas eikonas tas malista êkribômenas chairomen theôrountes hoion thêriôn te morphas tôn atimotatôn kai nekrôn.
