---
description: §44 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-44
label: '§ 44: Of beautiful Art'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[044-001]There is no Science of the Beautiful, but only a Critique of it; and there is no such thing as beautiful Science, but only beautiful Art. For as regards the first point, if it could be decided scientifically,i.e.by proofs, whether a thing was to be regarded as beautiful or not, the judgement upon beauty would belong to science and would not be a judgement of taste. And as far as the second point is concerned, a science which should be beautiful as such is a nonentity. For if in such a science we were to ask for grounds and proofs, we would be put off with tasteful phrases (bon-mots).—The source of the common expression,beautiful science, is without doubt nothing else than this, as it has been rightly remarked, that for beautiful art in its entire completeness much science is requisite;e.g.a knowledge of ancient languages, a learned familiarity with classical authors, history, a knowledge of antiquities, etc. And hence these historical sciences, because they form the necessary preparation and basis for beautiful art, and also partly because under them is included the knowledge of the products of beautiful art (rhetoric and poetry),have come to be called beautiful sciences by a confusion of words.

[044-002]If art which is adequate to thecognitionof a possible object performs the actions requisite therefore merely in order to make it actual, it ismechanicalart; but if it has for its immediate design the feeling of pleasure, it is calledaestheticalart. This is again eitherpleasantorbeautiful. It is the first, if its purpose is that the pleasure should accompany the representations [of the object] regarded as meresensations; it is the second if they are regarded asmodes of cognition.

[044-003]Pleasant arts are those that are directed merely to enjoyment. Of this class are all those charming arts that can gratify a company at table;e.g.the art of telling stories in an entertaining way, of starting the company in frank and lively conversation, of raising them by jest and laugh to a certain pitch of merriment;77when, as people say, there may be a great deal of gossip at the feast, but no one will be answerable for what he says, because they are only concerned with momentary entertainment, and not with any permanent material for reflection or subsequent discussion. (Among these are also to be reckoned the way of arranging the table for enjoyment, and, at great feasts, the management of the music. This latter is a wonderful thing. It is meant to dispose to gaiety the minds of the guests, regarded solely as a pleasant noise, without any one paying the least attention to its composition; and it favours the free conversation of each with hisneighbour.) Again, to this class belong all games which bring with them no further interest than that of making the time pass imperceptibly.

[044-004]On the other hand, beautiful art is a mode of representation which is purposive for itself, and which, although devoid of [definite] purpose, yet furthers the culture of the mental powers in reference to social communication.

[044-005]The universal communicability of a pleasure carries with it in its very concept that the pleasure is not one of enjoyment, from mere sensation, but must be derived from reflection; and thus aesthetical art, as the art of beauty, has for standard the reflective Judgement and not sensation.
