---
description: §41 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-41
label: '§ 41: Of the empirical interest in the Beautiful'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[041-001]That the judgement of taste by which something is declared beautiful must have no interestas its determining groundhas been sufficiently established above. But it does not follow that after it has beengiven as a pure aesthetical judgement, no interest can be combined with it. This combination, however, can only be indirect,i.e.taste must first of all be represented as combined with something else, in order that we may unite with the satisfaction of mere reflection upon an object apleasure in its existence(as that wherein all interest consists). For here also in aesthetical judgements what we say in cognitive judgements (of things in general) is valid;a posse ad esse non valet consequentia. This something else may be empirical, viz. an inclination proper to human nature, or intellectual, as the property of the Will of being capable ofa prioridetermination by Reason. Both these involve a satisfaction in the presence of an Object, and so can lay the foundation for an interest in what has by itself pleased without reference to any interest whatever.

[041-002]Empirically the Beautiful interests only insociety. If we admit the impulse to society as natural to man, and his fitness for it, and his propension towards it,i.e.sociability, as a requisite for man as a being destined for society, and so as a property belonging tohumanity, we cannot escape from regarding taste as a faculty for judging everything in respect of which we can communicate ourfeelingto all other men, and so as a means of furthering that which every one’s natural inclination desires.

[041-003]A man abandoned by himself on a desert island would adorn neither his hut nor his person; nor would he seek for flowers, still less would he plant them, in order to adorn himself therewith. It is only in society that it occurs to him to be not merely a man, but a refined man after his kind (the beginningof civilisation). For such do we judge him to be who is both inclined and apt to communicate his pleasure to others, and who is not contented with an Object if he cannot feel satisfaction in it in common with others. Again, every one expects and requires from every one else this reference to universal communication [of pleasure], as it were from an original compact dictated by humanity itself. Thus, doubtless, in the beginning only those things which attracted the senses,e.g.colours for painting oneself (roucou among the Carabs and cinnabar among the Iroquois), flowers, mussel shells, beautiful feathers, etc.,—but in time beautiful forms also (e.g.in their canoes, and clothes, etc.), which bring with them no gratification, or satisfaction of enjoyment—were important in society, and were combined with great interest. Until at last civilisation, having reached its highest point, makes out of this almost the main business of refined inclination; and sensations are only regarded as of worth in so far as they can be universally communicated.

[041-004]Here, although the pleasure which every one has in such an object is inconsiderable and in itself without any marked interest, yet the Idea of its universal communicability increases its worth in an almost infinite degree.

[041-005]But this interest that indirectly attaches to the Beautiful through our inclination to society, and consequently is empirical, is of no importance for us here; because we have only to look to what may have a reference, although only indirectly, to the judgement of tastea priori. For if even in this form an interest bound up therewith should discover itself, taste would discover a transition of our judging faculty from sense-enjoyment to moral feeling;and so not only would we be the better guided in employing taste purposively, but there would be thus presented a link in the chain of the human facultiesa priori, on which all legislation must depend. We can only say thus much about the empirical interest in objects of taste and in taste itself. Since it is subservient to inclination, however refined the latter may be, it may easily be confounded with all the inclinations and passions, which attain their greatest variety and highest degree in society; and the interest in the Beautiful, if it is grounded thereon, can only furnish a very ambiguous transition from the Pleasant to the Good.

[041-006]But whether this can or cannot be furthered by taste, taken in its purity, is what we now have to investigate.
