---
description: §12 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-12
label: '§ 12: The judgement of taste rests ona priorigrounds'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[012-001]To establisha priorithe connexion of the feeling of a pleasure or pain as an effect, with any representation whatever (sensation or concept) as its cause, is absolutely impossible; for that would be a [particular]23causal relation which (with objects of experience) can always only be cogniseda posteriori, and through the medium of experience itself. We actually have, indeed, in the Critique of practical Reason, derived from universal moral conceptsa priorithe feeling of respect (as a special and peculiar modification of feeling which will not strictly correspond either to the pleasure or the pain that we get from empirical objects). But there we could go beyond the bounds of experience and call in a causality which rested on a supersensible attribute of the subject, viz. freedom. And even there, properly speaking, it was not thisfeelingwhich we derived from the Idea of the moral as cause, but merely the determination of the will.

[012-002]But the state of mind which accompanies any determination of the will is in itself a feeling of pleasure and identical with it, and therefore does not follow from it as its effect. This last must only be assumed if the concept of the moral as a goodprecede the determination of the will by the law; for in that case the pleasure that is bound up with the concept could not be derived from it as from a mere cognition.

[012-003]Now the case is similar with the pleasure in aesthetical judgements, only that here it is merely contemplative and does not bring about an interest in the Object, which on the other hand in the moral judgement it is practical.24The consciousness of the mere formal purposiveness in the play of the subject’s cognitive powers, in a representation through which an object is given, is the pleasure itself; because it contains a determining ground of the activity of the subject in respect of the excitement of its cognitive powers, and therefore an inner causality (which is purposive) in respect of cognition in general without however being limited to any definite cognition; and consequently contains a mere form of the subjective purposiveness of a representation in an aesthetical judgement. This pleasure is in no way practical, neither like that arising from the pathological ground of pleasantness, nor that from the intellectual ground of the represented good. But yet it involves causality, viz. ofmaintainingthe state of the representation itself, and the exercise of the cognitive powers without further design. Welingerover the contemplation of the beautiful, because this contemplation strengthens and reproduces itself, whichis analogous to (though not of the same kind as) that lingering which takes place when a [physical] charm in the representation of the object repeatedly arouses the attention, the mind being passive.
