---
description: §57 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-57
label: '§ 57: Solution of the antinomy of Taste'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[057-001]There is no possibility of removing the conflict between these principles that underlie every judgement of taste (which are nothing else than the two peculiarities of the judgement of taste exhibited above in the Analytic), except by showing that the concept to which we refer the Object in this kind of judgement is not taken in the same sense in both maxims of the aesthetical Judgement. This twofold sense or twofold point of view is necessary to our transcendental Judgement; but also the illusionwhich arises from the confusion of one with the other is natural and unavoidable.

[057-002]The judgement of taste must refer to some concept; otherwise it could make absolutely no claim to be necessarily valid for every one. But it is not therefore capable of being provedfroma concept; because a concept may be either determinable or in itself undetermined and undeterminable. The concepts of the Understanding are of the former kind; they are determinable through predicates of sensible intuition which can correspond to them. But the transcendental rational concept of the supersensible, which lies at the basis of all sensible intuition, is of the latter kind, and therefore cannot be theoretically determined further.

[057-003]Now the judgement of taste is applied to objects of Sense, but not with a view of determining aconceptof them for the Understanding; for it is not a cognitive judgement. It is thus only a private judgement, in which a singular representation intuitively perceived is referred to the feeling of pleasure; and so far would be limited as regards its validity to the individual judging. The object isfor mean object of satisfaction; by others it may be regarded quite differently—every one has his own taste.

[057-004]Nevertheless there is undoubtedly contained in the judgement of taste a wider reference of the representation of the Object (as well as of the subject), whereon we base an extension of judgements of this kind as necessary for every one. At the basis of this there must necessarily be a concept somewhere; though a concept which cannot be determined through intuition. But through a concept of this sort we know nothing, and consequently it cansupply no prooffor the judgement of taste.Such a concept is the mere pure rational concept of the supersensible which underlies the object (and also the subject judging it), regarded as an Object of sense and thus as phenomenon.100For if we do not admit such a reference, the claim of the judgement of taste to universal validity would not hold good. If the concept on which it is based were only a mere confused concept of the Understanding, like that of perfection, with which we could bring the sensible intuition of the Beautiful into correspondence, it would be at least possible in itself to base the judgement of taste on proofs; which contradicts the thesis.

[057-005]But all contradiction disappears if I say: the judgement of taste is based on a concept (viz. the concept of the general ground of the subjective purposiveness of nature for the Judgement); from which, however, nothing can be known and proved in respect of the Object, because it is in itself undeterminable and useless for knowledge. Yet at the same time and on that very account the judgement has validity for every one (though of course for each only as a singular judgement immediately accompanying his intuition); because its determining ground lies perhaps in the concept of that which may be regarded as the supersensible substrate of humanity.

[057-006]The solution of an antinomy only depends on the possibility of showing that two apparently contradictory propositions do not contradict one another in fact, but that they may be consistent; although the explanation of the possibility of their concept may transcend our cognitive faculties. That this illusion is natural and unavoidable by human Reason, andalso why it is so, and remains so, although it ceases to deceive after the analysis of the apparent contradiction, may be thus explained.

[057-007]In the two contradictory judgements we take the concept, on which the universal validity of a judgement must be based, in the same sense; and yet we apply to it two opposite predicates. In the Thesis we mean that the judgement of taste is not based upondeterminateconcepts; and in the Antithesis that the judgement of taste is based upon a concept, but anindeterminateone (viz. of the supersensible substrate of phenomena). Between these two there is no contradiction.

[057-008]We can do nothing more than remove this conflict between the claims and counter-claims of taste. It is absolutely impossible to give a definite objective principle of taste, in accordance with which its judgements could be derived, examined, and established; for then the judgement would not be one of taste at all. The subjective principle, viz. the indefinite Idea of the supersensible in us, can only be put forward as the sole key to the puzzle of this faculty whose sources are hidden from us: it can be made no further intelligible.

[057-009]The proper concept of taste, that is of a merely reflective aesthetical Judgement, lies at the basis of the antinomy here exhibited and adjusted. Thus the two apparently contradictory principles are reconciled—both can be true; which is sufficient.

[057-010]If, on the other hand, we assume, as some do,pleasantnessas the determining ground of taste (on account of the singularity of the representation which lies at the basis of the judgement of taste), or, as others will have it, the principle of perfection (on account of the universality of the same), and settlethe definition of taste accordingly; then there arises an antinomy which it is absolutely impossible to adjust except by showing thatboththe contrary (though not contradictory)propositions are false.

[057-011]And this would prove that the concept on which they are based is self-contradictory. Hence we see that the removal of the antinomy of the aesthetical Judgement takes a course similar to that pursued by the Critique in the solution of the antinomies of pure theoretical Reason. And thus here, as also in the Critique of practical Reason, the antinomies force us against our will to look beyond the sensible and to seek in the supersensible the point of union for all oura priorifaculties; because no other expedient is left to make our Reason harmonious with itself.

###### Remark I.

[057-012]As we so often find occasion in Transcendental Philosophy for distinguishing Ideas from concepts of the Understanding, it may be of use to introduce technical terms to correspond to this distinction. I believe that no one will object if I propose some.—In the most universal signification of the word, Ideas are representations referred to an object, according to a certain (subjective or objective) principle, but so that they can never become a cognition of it. They are either referred to an intuition, according to a merely subjective principle of the mutual harmony of the cognitive powers (the Imagination and the Understanding), and they are then calledaesthetical; or they are referred to a concept according to an objective principle, although they can never furnish a cognition of the object and are calledrational Ideas. In the lattercase the concept is atranscendentone, which is different from a concept of the Understanding, to which an adequately corresponding experience can always be supplied, and which therefore is calledimmanent.

[057-013]Anaesthetical Ideacannot become a cognition, because it is anintuition(of the Imagination) for which an adequate concept can never be found.

[057-014]Arational Ideacan never become a cognition, because it involves a concept (of the supersensible), corresponding to which an intuition can never be given.

[057-015]Now I believe we might call the aesthetical Idea aninexponiblerepresentation of the Imagination, and a rational Idea anindemonstrableconcept of Reason. It is assumed of both that they are not generated without grounds, but (according to the above explanation of an Idea in general) in conformity with certain principles of the cognitive faculties to which they belong (subjective principles in the one case, objective in the other).

[057-016]Concepts of the Understandingmust, as such, always be demonstrable [if by demonstration we understand, as in anatomy, merelypresentation];101i.e.the object corresponding to them must always be capable of being given in intuition (pure or empirical); for thus alone could they become cognitions. The concept ofmagnitudecan be givena prioriin the intuition of space,e.g.of a right line, etc.; the concept ofcausein impenetrability, in the collision of bodies, etc. Consequently both can be authenticated by means of an empirical intuition,i.e.the thought of them can be proved (demonstrated, verified) by an example; and this must be possible,for otherwise we should not be certain that the concept was not empty,i.e.devoid of anyObject.

[057-017]In Logic we ordinarily use the expressions demonstrable or indemonstrable only in respect ofpropositions, but these might be better designated by the titles respectively ofmediately and immediately certainpropositions; for pure Philosophy has also propositions of both kinds,i.e.true propositions, some of which are susceptible of proof and others not. It can, as philosophy, prove them ona priorigrounds, but it cannot demonstrate them; unless we wish to depart entirely from the proper meaning of this word, according to whichto demonstrate(ostendere,exhibere) is equivalent to presenting a concept in intuition (whether in proof or merely in definition). If the intuition isa priorithis is called construction; but if it is empirical, then the Object is displayed by means of which objective reality is assured to the concept. Thus we say of an anatomist that he demonstrates the human eye, if by a dissection of this organ he makes intuitively evident the concept which he has previously treated discursively.

[057-018]It hence follows that the rational concept of the supersensible substrate of all phenomena in general, or even of that which must be placed at the basis of our arbitrary will in respect of the moral law, viz. of transcendental freedom, is already, in kind, an indemonstrable concept and a rational Idea; while virtue is so, in degree. For there can be given in experience, as regards its quality, absolutely nothing corresponding to the former; whereas in the latter case no empirical product attains to the degree of that causality, which the rational Idea prescribes as the rule.

[057-019]As in a rational Idea theImaginationwith its intuitions does not attain to the given concept, so in an aesthetical Idea theUnderstandingby its concepts never attains completely to that internal intuition which the Imagination binds up with a given representation. Since, now, to reduce a representation of the Imagination to concepts is the same thing as toexpoundit, the aesthetical Idea may be called aninexponiblerepresentation of the Imagination (in its free play). I shall have occasion in the sequel to say something more of Ideas of this kind; now I only note that both kinds of Ideas, rational and aesthetical, must have their principles; and must have them in Reason—the one in the objective, the other in the subjective principles of its employment.

[057-020]We can consequently explaingeniusas the faculty ofaesthetical Ideas; by which at the same time is shown the reason why in the products of genius it is the nature (of the subject) and not a premeditated purpose that gives the rule to the art (of the production of the beautiful). For since the beautiful must not be judged by concepts, but by the purposive attuning of the Imagination to agreement with the faculty of concepts in general, it cannot be rule and precept which can serve as the subjective standard of that aesthetical but unconditioned purposiveness in beautiful art, that can rightly claim to please every one. It can only be that in the subject which is nature and cannot be brought under rules or concepts,i.e.the supersensible substrate of all his faculties (to which no concept of the Understanding extends), and consequently that with respect to which it is the final purpose given by the intelligible [part] of ournature to harmonise all our cognitive faculties.

[057-021]Thus alone is it possible that there should bea prioriat the basis of this purposiveness, for which we can prescribe no objective principle, a principle subjective and yet of universal validity.

###### Remark II.

[057-022]The following important remark occurs here: There arethree kinds of Antinomiesof pure Reason, which, however, all agree in this, that they compel us to give up the otherwise very natural hypothesis that objects of sense are things in themselves, and force us to regard them merely as phenomena, and to supply to them an intelligible substrate (something supersensible of which the concept is only an Idea, and supplies no proper knowledge). Without such antinomies Reason could never decide upon accepting a principle narrowing so much the field of its speculation, and could never bring itself to sacrifices by which so many otherwise brilliant hopes must disappear.

[057-023]For even now when, by way of compensation for these losses, a greater field in a practical aspect opens out before it, it appears not to be able without grief to part from those hopes, and disengage itself from its old attachment.

[057-024]That there are three kinds of antinomies has its ground in this, that there are three cognitive faculties,—Understanding, Judgement, and Reason; of which each (as a superior cognitive faculty) must have itsa prioriprinciples. For Reason, in so far as it judges of these principles and their use, inexorably requires, in respect of them all, the unconditioned for the given conditioned; and this can never be found if we consider the sensible asbelonging to things in themselves, and do not rather supply to it, as mere phenomenon, something supersensible (the intelligible substrate of nature both external and internal) as the reality in itself [Sache an sich selbst]. There are then: (1)For the cognitive facultyan antinomy of Reason in respect of the theoretical employment of the Understanding extended to the unconditioned; (2)for the feeling of pleasure and painan antinomy of Reason in respect of the aesthetical employment of the Judgement; and (3)for the faculty of desirean antinomy in respect of the practical employment of the self-legislative Reason; so far as all these faculties have their superior principlesa priori, and, in conformity with an inevitable requirement of Reason, must judge and be able to determine their Object,unconditionallyaccording to those principles.

[057-025]As for the two antinomies of the theoretical and practical employment of the superior cognitive faculties, we have already shown theirunavoidableness, if judgements of this kind are not referred to a supersensible substrate of the given Objects, as phenomena; and also thepossibility of their solution, as soon as this is done. And as for the antinomies in the employment of the Judgement, in conformity with the requirements of Reason, and their solution which is here given, there are only two ways of avoiding them.Either: we must deny that anya prioriprinciple lies at the basis of the aesthetical judgement of taste; we must maintain that all claim to necessary universal agreement is a groundless and vain fancy, and that a judgement of taste only deserves to be regarded as correct becauseit happensthat many people agree about it; and this, not because weassumeana prioriprinciple behindthis agreement, but because (as in the taste of the palate) of the contingent similar organisation of the different subjects.Or: we must assume that the judgement of taste is really a disguised judgement of Reason upon the perfection discovered in a thing and the reference of the manifold in it to a purpose, and is consequently only called aesthetical on account of the confusion here attaching to our reflection, although it is at bottom teleological. In the latter case we could declare the solution of the antinomies by means of transcendental Ideas to be needless and without point, and thus could harmonise these laws of taste with Objects of sense, not as mere phenomena but as things in themselves.

[057-026]But we have shown in several places in the exposition of judgements of taste how little either of these expedients will satisfy.

[057-027]However, if it be granted that our deduction at least proceeds by the right method, although it be not yet plain enough in all its parts, three Ideas manifest themselves.First, there is the Idea of the supersensible in general, without any further determination of it, as the substrate of nature.Secondly, there is the Idea of the same as the principle of the subjective purposiveness of nature for our cognitive faculty. Andthirdly, there is the Idea of the same as the principle of the purposes of freedom, and of the agreement of freedom with its purposes in the moral sphere.
