---
description: §40 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-40
label: '§ 40: Of Taste as a kind ofsensus communis'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[040-001]We often give to the Judgement, if we are considering the result rather than the act of its reflection, the name of a sense, and we speak of a sense of truth, or of a sense of decorum, of justice, etc. And yet we know, or at least we ought to know, that these concepts cannot have their place in Sense, andfurther, that Sense has not the least capacity for expressing universal rules; but that no representation of truth, fitness, beauty, or justice, and so forth, could come into our thoughts if we could not rise beyond Sense to higher faculties of cognition.The common Understanding of men, which, as the mere sound (not yet cultivated) Understanding, we regard as the least to be expected from any one claiming the name of man, has therefore the doubtful honour of being given the name of common sense (sensus communis); and in such a way that by the namecommon(not merely in our language, where the word actually has a double signification, but in many others) we understandvulgar, that which is everywhere met with, the possession of which indicates absolutely no merit or superiority.

[040-002]But under thesensus communiswe must include the Idea of acommunalsense,i.e.of a faculty of judgement, which in its reflection takes account (a priori) of the mode of representation of all other men in thought; in orderas it wereto compare its judgement with the collective Reason of humanity, and thus to escape the illusion arising from the private conditions that could be so easily taken for objective, which would injuriously affect the judgement.

[040-003]This is done by comparing our judgement with the possible rather than the actual judgements of others, and by putting ourselves in the place of any other man, by abstracting from the limitations which contingently attach to our own judgement.

[040-004]This, again, is brought about by leaving aside as much as possible the matter of our representative state,i.e.sensation, and simply having respect to the formal peculiarities of our representation or representative state. Now this operation of reflectionseems perhaps too artificial to be attributed to the faculty calledcommonsense; but it only appears so, when expressed in abstract formulae.

[040-005]In itself there is nothing more natural than to abstract from charm or emotion if we are seeking a judgement that is to serve as a universal rule.

[040-006]The following Maxims of common human Understanding do not properly come in here, as parts of the Critique of [[taste|Taste]]; but yet they may serve to elucidate its fundamental propositions. They are: 1° to think for oneself; 2° to put ourselves in thought in the place of every one else; 3° always to think consistently. The first is the maxim ofunprejudicedthought; the second ofenlargedthought; the third ofconsecutivethought.72The first is the maxim of a Reason neverpassive. The tendency to such passivity, and therefore to heteronomy of the Reason, is calledprejudice; and the greatest prejudice of all is to represent nature as not subject to the rules that the Understanding places at its basis by means of its own essential law,i.e.issuperstition. Deliverance from superstition is calledenlightenment;73because although this name belongs to deliverance from prejudices in general, yet superstition specially (in sensu eminenti) deserves to be called a prejudice. For the blindnessin which superstition places us, which it even imposes on us as an obligation, makes the need of being guided by others, and the consequent passive state of our Reason, peculiarly noticeable. As regards the second maxim of the mind, we are otherwise wont to call him limited (borné, the opposite ofenlarged) whose talents attain to no great use (especially as regards intensity). But here we are not speaking of the faculty of cognition, but of themode of thoughtwhich makes a purposive use thereof. However small may be the area or the degree to which a man’s natural gifts reach, yet it indicates a man ofenlarged thoughtif he disregards the subjective private conditions of his own judgement, by which so many others are confined, and reflects upon it from auniversal standpoint(which he can only determine by placing himself at the standpoint of others). The third maxim, viz. that ofconsecutivethought, is the most difficult to attain, and can only be attained by the combination of both the former, and after the constant observance of them has grown into a habit. We may say that the first of these maxims is the maxim of Understanding, the second of Judgement, and the third of Reason.

[040-007]I take up again the threads interrupted by this digression, and I say that Taste can be calledsensus communiswith more justice than sound Understanding can; and that the aesthetical Judgement rather than the intellectual may bear the name of a communal sense,74if we are willing to use the word “sense” of an effect of mere reflection upon the mind: for then we understand by sense the feelingof pleasure. We could even define Taste as the faculty of judging of that which makesuniversally communicable, without the mediation of a concept, our feeling in a given representation.

[040-008]The skill that men have in communicating their thoughts requires also a relation between the Imagination and the Understanding in order to associate intuitions with concepts, and concepts again with those concepts, which then combine in a cognition.

[040-009]But in that case the agreement of the two mental powers isaccording to law, under the constraint of definite concepts. Only where the Imagination in its freedom awakens the Understanding, and is put by it into regular play without the aid of concepts, does the representation communicate itself not as a thought but as an internal feeling of a purposive state of the mind.

[040-010]Taste is then the faculty of judginga prioriof the communicability of feelings that are bound up with a given representation (without the mediation of a concept).

[040-011]If we could assume that the mere universal communicability of a feeling must carry in itself an interest for us with it (which, however, we are not justified in concluding from the character of a merely reflective Judgement), we should be able to explain why the feeling in the judgement of taste comes to be imputed to every one, so to speak, as a duty.
