---
description: §51 from Part I of Critique of Judgment.
id: section-51
label: '§ 51: Of the division of the beautiful arts'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[051-001]We may describe beauty in general (whether natural or artificial) as theexpressionof aesthetical Ideas; only that in beautiful Art this Idea must be occasioned by a concept of the Object; whilst in beautiful Nature the mere reflection upon a given intuition, without any concept of what the object is to be, is sufficient for the awakening andcommunicating of the Idea of which that Object is regarded as theexpression.

[051-002]If, then, we wish to make a division of the beautiful arts, we cannot choose a more convenient principle, at least tentatively, than the analogy of art with the mode of expression of which men avail themselves in speech, in order to communicate to one another as perfectly as possible not merely their concepts but also their sensations.88—This is done byword,deportment, andtone(articulation, gesticulation, and modulation). It is only by the combination of these three kinds of expression that communication between the speaker [and his hearers] can be complete. For thus thought, intuition, and sensation are transmitted to others simultaneously and conjointly.

[051-003]There are, therefore, only three kinds of beautiful arts; the arts ofspeech, theformativearts, and the art of theplay of sensations(as external sensible impressions). We may also arrange a division by dichotomy; thus beautiful art may be divided into the art of expression of thoughts and of intuitions; and these further subdivided in accordance with their form or their matter (sensation). But this would appear to be too abstract, and not so accordant with ordinary concepts.

[051-004](1) The arts ofSPEECHarerhetoricandpoetry.Rhetoricis the art of carrying on a serious business of the Understanding as if it were a free play of the Imagination;poetry, the art of conducting a free play of the Imagination as if it were a serious business of the Understanding.

[051-005]Theorator, then, promises a serious business, and in order to entertain his audience conducts it as if it were a mereplaywith Ideas. Thepoetmerely promises an entertaining play with Ideas, and yet it has the same effect upon the Understanding as if he had only intended to carry on its business. The combination and harmony of both cognitive faculties, Sensibility and Understanding, which cannot dispense with one another, but which yet cannot well be united without constraint and mutual prejudice, must appear to be undesigned and so to be brought about by themselves: otherwise it is notbeautifulart. Hence, all that is studied and anxious must be avoided in it, for beautiful art must be free art in a double sense.

[051-006]It is not a work like that of a tradesman, the magnitude of which can be judged, exacted, or paid for, according to a definite standard; and again, though the mind is occupied, still it feels itself contented and stimulated, without looking to any other purpose (independently of reward.)

[051-007]The orator therefore gives something which he does not promise, viz. an entertaining play of the Imagination; but he also fails to supply what he did promise, which is indeed his announced business, viz. the purposive occupation of the Understanding.

[051-008]On the other hand, the poet promises little and announces a mere play with Ideas; but he supplies something which is worth occupying ourselves with, because he provides in this play food for the Understanding, and by the aid of Imagination gives life to his concepts. [Thus the orator on the whole gives less, the poet more, than he promises.]89

[051-009](2) TheFORMATIVEarts, or those by which expression is found for Ideas insensible intuition(not by representations of mere Imagination that are aroused by words), are either arts ofsensible truthor ofsensible illusion. The former is calledPlastic, the latterPainting. Both express Ideas by figures in space; the former makes figures cognisable by two senses, sight and touch (although not by the latter as far as beauty is concerned); the latter only by one, the first of these. The aesthetical Idea (the archetype or original image) is fundamental for both in the Imagination, but the figure which expresses this (the ectype or copy) is either given in its bodily extension (as the object itself exists), or as it paints itself on the eye (according to its appearance when projected on a flat surface). In the first case90the condition given to reflection may be either the reference to an actual purpose or only the semblance of it.

[051-010]ToPlastic, the first kind of beautiful formative Art, belongSculptureandArchitecture. Thefirstpresents corporeally concepts of things,as they might have existed in nature(though as beautiful art it has regard to aesthetical purposiveness). Thesecondis the art of presenting concepts of things that are possibleonly through Art, and whose form has for its determining ground not nature but an arbitrary purpose, with the view of presenting them with aesthetical purposiveness. In the latter the chief point is a certainuseof the artistic object, by which condition the aesthetical Ideas are limited.

[051-011]In the former the main design is the mereexpressionof aesthetical Ideas. Thus statues of men, gods,animals, etc., are of the first kind; but temples, splendid buildings for public assemblies, even dwelling-houses, triumphal arches, columns, mausoleums, and the like, erected in honourable remembrance, belong to Architecture. Indeed all house furniture (upholsterer’s work and such like things which are for use) may be reckoned under this art; because the suitability of a product for a certain use is the essential thing in anarchitectural work. On the other hand, a merepiece of sculpture, which is simply made for show and which is to please in itself, is as a corporeal presentation a mere imitation of nature, though with a reference to aesthetical Ideas; in itsensible truthis not to be carried so far that the product ceases to look like art and looks like a product of the elective will.

[051-012]Painting, as the second kind of formative art, which presents asensible illusionartificially combined with Ideas, I would divide into the art of the beautifuldepicting of natureand that of the beautifularrangement of its products. The first ispainting proper, the second is the art oflandscape gardening.

[051-013]The first gives only the illusory appearance of corporeal extension; the second gives this in accordance with truth, but only the appearance of utility and availableness for other purposes than the mere play of the Imagination in the contemplation of its forms.91This latter is nothing else than theornamentation of the soil with a variety of those things (grasses, flowers, shrubs, trees, even ponds, hillocks, and dells) which nature presents to an observer, only arranged differently and in conformity with certain Ideas. But, again, the beautiful arrangement of corporeal things is only apparent to the eye, like painting; the sense of touch cannot supply any intuitive presentation of such a form. Under painting in the wide sense I would reckon the decoration of rooms by the aid of tapestry, bric-a-brac, and all beautiful furniture which is merely available to belookedat; and the same may be said of the art of tasteful dressing (with rings, snuff-boxes, etc.). For a bed of various flowers, a room filled with various ornaments (including under this head even ladies’ finery), make at a fête a kind of picture; which, like pictures properly so-called (that are not intended toteacheither history or natural science), has in view merely the entertainment of the Imagination in free play with Ideas, and the occupation of the aesthetical Judgement without any definite purpose. The detailed work in all this decoration may be quite distinct in the different cases and may require very different artists; but the judgement of taste upon whatever is beautiful in these various arts is always determined in the same way: viz. it only judges the forms (without any reference to a purpose) as they present themselves to the eye either singly or in combination, according to the effect they produce upon the Imagination.—But that formative art may be compared (by analogy)with deportment in speech is justified by the fact that the spirit of the artist supplies by these figures a bodily expression to his thought and its mode, and makes the thing itself as it were speak in mimic language. This is a very common play of our fancy, which attributes to lifeless things a spirit suitable to their form by which they speak to us.

[051-014](3) The art of theBEAUTIFUL PLAY OF SENSATIONS(externally stimulated), which admits at the same time of universal communication, can be concerned with nothing else than the proportion of the different degrees of the disposition (tension) of the sense, to which the sensation belongs,i.e.with its tone.

[051-015]In this far-reaching signification of the word it may be divided into the artistic play of the sensations of hearing and sight,i.e.intoMusicand theArt of colour.—It is noteworthy that these two senses, besides their susceptibility for impressions so far as these are needed to gain concepts of external objects, are also capable of a peculiar sensation bound up therewith, of which we cannot strictly decide whether it is based on sense or reflection. This susceptibility may sometimes be wanting, although in other respects the sense, as regards its use for the cognition of Objects, is not at all deficient but is peculiarly fine.

[051-016]That is, we cannot say with certainty whether colours or tones (sounds) are merely pleasant sensations or whether they form in themselves a beautiful play of sensations, and as such bring with them in aesthetical judgement a satisfaction in their form.

[051-017]If we think of the velocity of the vibrations of light, or in the second case of the air, which probably far surpasses all our faculty of judging immediately in perception the time interval between them, we must believe that it is only theeffectof these vibrationsupon the elastic parts of our body that is felt, but that thetime intervalbetween them is not remarked or brought into judgement; and thus that only pleasantness and not beauty of composition is bound up with colours and tones. But on the other hand,first, we think of the mathematical [element] which enables us to pronounce on the proportion between these oscillations in music and thus to judge of them; and by analogy with which we easily may judge of the distinctions between colours.Secondly, we recall instances (although they are rare) of men who with the best sight in the world cannot distinguish colours, and with the sharpest hearing cannot distinguish tones; whilst for those who can do this the perception of an altered quality (not merely of the degree of sensation) in the different intensities in the scale of colours and tones is definite; and further, the very number of these is fixed byintelligibledifferences. Thus we may be compelled to see that both kinds of sensations are to be regarded not as mere sensible impressions, but as the effects of a judgement passed upon the form in the play of divers sensations. The difference in our definition, according as we adopt the one or the other opinion in judging of the grounds of Music, would be just this: either, as we have done, we must explain it as the beautiful play of sensations (of hearing), or else as a play ofpleasantsensations. According to the former mode of explanation music is represented altogether as abeautifulart; according to the latter, as apleasantart (at least in part).
