---
description: "### VII"
id: ch07
label: "VII: How King Henry Thanked Him"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[007-001]?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?

### VII

[007-002]How [[king-henry-v|King Henry]] Thanked Him

[007-003]There followed a fortnight [[geoffrey-of-malvallet|of]] forced inactivity for [[simon-of-beauvallet|Simon]], but although he could do nothing further concerning [[raoul-the-terrible|the]] plot, he was not altogether idle. Much time he spent in exploring the city, and my [[charles-of-granmere|Lord of Granmere]] contrived to keep him occupied by inviting many guests to his house, to all of whom he presented Simon. And if some of these gentlemen did not like the silent, direct young man whom they met, at least they were not in danger of easily forgetting his strangely forceful personality.

[007-004]It did not occur to Simon that he might write to his lord at [[montlice|Montlice]], assuring him of his well-being, and when [[granmere|Granmere]] offered to send a messenger with any letter that he might wish to send, he was rather surprised, and refused the offer.

[007-005]“But mayhap my cousin [[fulk-of-montlice|Fulk]] is worried at thy long absence!” Granmere pointed out.

[007-006]“That is not very likely,” Simon said.

[007-007]“He may think thee dead, or lost!”

[007-008]Simon smiled a little.

[007-009]“He knows me too well to think that, my lord.”

[007-010]Granmere waved his hands.

[007-011]“But at least write him that thou hast arrived in [[london|London]]!”

[007-012]“That he knows.”

[007-013]“That thou hast seen the King!”

[007-014]“That also doth he know.”

[007-015]Granmere looked at him hopelessly.

[007-016]“My good boy, how can he know?”

[007-017]Simon smiled again, sweetly.

[007-018]“Because he doth know me, my lord. What I set out to do, I do.”

[007-019]Granmere sat down.

[007-020]“One cannot always be sure of success, Simon.”

[007-021]Simon looked inscrutable.

[007-022]“Why, boy, surely thou dost know that!”

[007-023]“No, my lord, that is what I will not know.”

[007-024]My lord laughed at him, but he leaned forward, interested.

[007-025]“Simon, suppose that thou didst engage on an impossible emprise﻿—something in which thou couldst not succeed?”

[007-026]“That were the action of a fool, my lord, and I do not think I am one.”

[007-027]“Nor I!” Granmere laughed again. “Thou wouldst never set out to do the impossible?”

[007-028]Simon reflected.

[007-029]“Nay, I think not, sir. Yet I believe that there is a very little that is impossible. There is always a way.”

[007-030]“So if ye find not that way, ye will let be? Suppose that thy greatest friend lay imprisoned, and it was seemingly impossible to rescue him, because thou hadst discovered no way? Would ye then let be?”

[007-031]Simon thought it out carefully.

[007-032]“Ay, my lord. But I think that I should find a way,” he said gravely.

[007-033]Granmere looked him over.

[007-034]“By God, I believe that thou wouldst!” he said.

[007-035]
---

[007-036]At the end of the fortnight came a second summons from the King, and in obedience Simon presented himself at the Palace early one morning. As before, he was conducted to the King’s closet, but this time he found some six or seven gentlemen of the Council there beside the King. Henry gave him his hand to kiss.

[007-037]“We do rejoice to see you again, Sir Simon. Methinks some apology we do owe you for the long days ye have been kept waiting.”

[007-038]Simon rose from his knees.

[007-039]“If during these days, sire, information has been yielded, then are they not wasted,” he said in his deep, deliberate voice.

[007-040]One of the gentlemen seated about the long table, smiled. Henry saw it, and the smile was reflected in his eyes.

[007-041]“Ye speak sooth, Sir Simon, and that is better than a courtier’s soft, flattering answer.” His glance flickered a shade reprovingly to the gentleman who had smiled. “Will ye not be seated, sir?”

[007-042]Simon thanked him, and sat down in a vacant chair. Henry folded his hands in his sleeves.

[007-043]“Ye will like to know, Sir Simon, that full inquiry has been made into this matter of Serle’s plot, and much has been discovered. [[the-chevalier|The]] messenger whom ye waylaid came safely to London, but methinks he was something stiff of limb, and sore in every part of his worthless carcase.” He looked quizzically at Simon as he said this, and Simon gave his short laugh.

[007-044]“That is possible, my liege.”

[007-045]Henry ran his eyes down Simon’s large, muscular person.

[007-046]“I think it was inevitable, sir,” he said solemnly. “But that is not what we would say. This man has been put to the question, and he disclosed all that he knew. I will not weary you with the details of this traitorous affair, but it will interest you to know that the tale of Richard’s living still has gained the seeming credence of many of my unfaithful nobles in the eastern counties, and even so far indeed as your Cambridge. Thus your vigilance and your promptitude have not been for little cause. Rather they are of great service and import to the realm, for because that ye have brought the news of this plot thus early to our ears, we are enabled to deal with it at once, and to crush the seeds of rebellion ere they have had time to sprout and multiply.” The gentle voice paused, then, as Simon said nothing: “This is not a little thing to have done, Sir Simon,” Henry said.

[007-047]There was silence for a moment. Simon looked up.

[007-048]“The deed itself was little, sire, and easy. It is only the fruits of the deed that are great. To me is small honour due, for by chance alone did I discover the plot, without toil, and without intent.”

[007-049]“Some of the greatest issues in the history of this world have had birth from Chance,” Henry answered, “yet to him whom the finger of Chance guided to the vital spot has honour ever been due.”

[007-050]Simon did not answer. He hoped that Henry would continue to talk, for the soft voice pleased him, and he was interested in what the King had to say.

[007-051]Henry resumed after another pause.

[007-052]“I see, Sir Simon, that ye do think your share in this matter but trifling, since it was not done with pain and travail, and of intent. But a measure of intent there was, for having discovered this plot what easier than to take no action, or to send the messenger on his way with those documents?”

[007-053]Simon’s eyes narrowed.

[007-054]“That were treachery, sire, or indolence and lack of care for your Majesty’s person and the safety of the realm.”

[007-055]Henry slid one hand along the arm of his chair.

[007-056]“It were indeed so, Sir Simon. None of these faults was yours.”

[007-057]“Nay.”

[007-058]“Rather was zeal yours, and [[allegiance|loyalty]], and firmness of purpose. It was not chance alone which brought you safe to London, and which has brought your prisoner, too. It was determination brought you, sir, and strength both of body and mind which kept you safe from robbers, and brought you thus surely to my presence. Ye frown. Is it not as I say?”

[007-059]“It is true that mine own wit and strength brought *me* here, sire,” Simon said, who had no false modesty: “But it was your Majesty’s men who brought my prisoner.”

[007-060]Henry’s lips quivered. Two or three of the gentlemen of the Council chuckled a little.

[007-061]“That is so,” Henry agreed, “but by whose contriving was the prisoner safely delivered into their hands?”

[007-062]“By my lieutenant Gregory’s contriving, sire,” Simon answered seriously.

[007-063]Henry bent his brows upon him, but his eyes twinkled.

[007-064]“Sir Simon of [[beauvallet|Beauvallet]], are ye determined to foil me at every turn?”

[007-065]“Nay, my liege,” Simon said. “But it seems that your Majesty would give honour to me where it is due unto another.”

[007-066]“Under whose orders acted this Gregory?” Henry asked.

[007-067]“Under mine, sire.”

[007-068]“Then ye will agree, Sir Simon, that his part was but to obey, asking no questions.”

[007-069]“Ay, that is so, my liege.”

[007-070]Henry nodded.

[007-071]“Will ye also agree, sir, that honour is due to him whose brain planned the whole emprise so well that it was carried through with no hitch or stoppage?”

[007-072]Simon considered this.

[007-073]“It seems just, sire.”

[007-074]“It is just,” Henry assured him. “I sent for you hither that I might reward you for your services, but it hath taken me all this while to convince you that ye are deserving of a reward. Nor am I sure that I have done it even now. Are you convinced, Sir Simon?”

[007-075]Simon smiled.

[007-076]“Your Majesty’s reasoning is so full of wit that it were insolent of me to dispute your [[justice|judgment]]. And indeed as your Majesty has put the matter, it seems reasonable enough. Yet it was in all truth a very little thing that I did, sire.”

[007-077]“Sir Simon, are you content to let me judge of the magnitude of the service ye have rendered me?”

[007-078]Simon’s rare humour peeped out.

[007-079]“Ay, my liege, since that promises to be more to my advantage.”

[007-080]“And to your advancement,” Henry said in amusement. “Tell me, Sir Simon, what may I do for you? Is there something that ye desire, and that I can give you? Advancement in rank? Gold? Land? Tell me!”

[007-081]Simon rose to his feet, swiftly turning a certain cherished project round in his mind. He looked down at Henry, hardly knowing that he did so, and Henry saw his eyes keen and shrewd, and knew that something was he weighing in his brain. He leaned back in his chair, waiting.

[007-082]After a short pause Simon spoke.

[007-083]“My lord the King, one thing is there that I desire.”

[007-084]“If it be within my power to give it you, it is yours.”

[007-085]“It is in your power, sire, but it may not be pleasing to your Majesty to accord it me.”

[007-086]“What is it?” Henry asked. “It would not have been pleasing to me to have had a rebellion thrumming about my ears.”

[007-087]“Sire, in Cambridge, to the south and east of Montlice, is a fair barony of little size, but, as I judge, of passing great wealth. It is named Fair Pastures, and it was once the property of one John of Barminster, who joined with Percy against your Majesty, and was fitly hanged for his pains. The land is confiscate unto the Crown, sire, but your Majesty has neither set one to rule over it in your name, nor given it to some noble about your person. It is in disorder now, and the serfs are masterless, while lawless men ravage the place. Give this land to me, sire, and I will bring law and order into it, and hold it as mine own, myself owning allegiance to you!”

[007-088]“It seems not much to ask,” Henry said slowly. He looked at one of his Council. “What know ye of this place?”

[007-089]“I remember it, sire. It is as Sir Simon says, not large, but fertile. Naught has been done with it as yet.”

[007-090]Henry brought his eyes back to Simon.

[007-091]“Is this indeed your desire? There are larger, more orderly lands I might bestow on you.”

[007-092]“Nay, sire, I need them not. It is this barony I desire.”

[007-093]“Why?”

[007-094]“There are several reasons, sire, but the greatest of all is that its name is very like to mine.”

[007-095]“Fair Pastures﻿—Beau Vallet. Ay, that is a good omen. Ye shall have that land, Sir Simon, and ye shall call it Beauvallet and be yourself Lord of Beauvallet. The deed of gift shall be sent to you at Granmere Hall, and ye shall subdue your turbulent subjects. Can ye do that, I wonder?”

[007-096]Simon smiled grimly.

[007-097]“I can do that, sire.”

[007-098] (“I make no doubt he can!” whispered one of the Council to his neighbour.)

[007-099]“Then the land is yours, and I have paid my debt to you. Ye shall not wait long for my mandate, I promise.” He held out his hand, and Simon knelt.

[007-100]“I do thank you, sire,” he said sincerely.

[007-101]“Nay, ’tis I thank you,” Henry answered. “I need have little fear of risings near Beauvallet now. This gift is to mine own advantage, for ye will hold the peace under me in your barony. May you prosper, my Lord of Beauvallet.”

[007-102]
---

[007-103]When Simon told Charles of Granmere what had befallen him, Granmere clapped him heartily upon the back, delighted at his protégé’s good fortune.

[007-104]“Why, it is excellent, Simon! The King must have conceived as great a liking for thee as have I!”

[007-105]“Have you a liking for me?” inquired Simon, rather taken aback.

[007-106]“That have I! Have I been so cold in my bearing that thou shouldst doubt it?”

[007-107]“Nay, but kindness may mean naught. It is curious how many people call me friend, who call friend so few.”

[007-108]“Well, I do trust I merit that title,” Granmere said.

[007-109]“Oh, yes,” Simon answered. “Thou and my half-brother, Geoffrey of [[malvallet|Malvallet]], and my Lord of Montlice. [[alan-of-montlice|Alan]], too, I suppose, although he would rather be my slave.”

[007-110]“Thou hast not many,” Granmere commented.

[007-111]“Nay, for I can find few whom I desire to call friend.”

[007-112]“Yet you count my cousin amongst these few? He is not most men’s choice.”

[007-113]“My Lord Fulk and I have dwelt amicably enough together for three years and more. Were there not friendship between us we had not done that.”

[007-114]“I do not think so indeed!” Granmere said, and laughed. “What will he have to say concerning thy sudden elevation?”

[007-115]“He is like to say much,” Simon answered placidly. “He knows that I go mine own road.”

[007-116]“Holy Virgin, what fights thou must have had!”

[007-117]“Oh, no,” said Simon. “We understand each other very fairly.”

[007-118]“Do ye so? Well, ye are a fitting pair!” Then he burst out laughing again. “Thou and Fulk!” he gasped. “I would give much to see it!”

[007-119]“Well, so thou mayst,” Simon said, watching him gravely. “Come with me to Montlice, and pay my lord a visit.”

[007-120]Granmere checked his mirth.

[007-121]“By God, I believe I will come! Why it is seven years since I set eyes on Fulk! We will ride together, Lord of Beauvallet.”
