---
description: "### I"
id: ch12
label: "I: How He Came to Normandy"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[012-001]?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?

### I

[012-002]How He Came to [[normandy|Normandy]]

[012-003]He stood upon a hill by Alençon, looking out over France, and [[raoul-the-terrible|the]] wind blew his fair hair all about his face, and whipped his surcoat round his mailed form. He was past thirty now, and ten years had gone by since he became Lord [[geoffrey-of-malvallet|of]] [[beauvallet|Beauvallet]].

[012-004]Behind him, sprawling on the soft grass, was his squire, a handsome youth with black curls and merry eyes. They were thoughtful now and admiring, for they rested on [[simon-of-beauvallet|Simon]], pondering him.

[012-005]Simon stood motionless, half-turned away; he had not moved or spoken for some minutes, but was frowning over the fair land stretched at his feet. His squire watched the grim profile respectfully, glancing from the massive, projecting brow with the deep-set eyes shining from beneath it, to the strong jawbone, outlined clearly in the bronzed, lean cheek. One of Simon’s hands hung listless at his side, and presently clenched a little; the spurred feet were well apart and firmly planted. [[the-chevalier|The]] squire reflected idly that the pose stood for all the strength and purpose that were Simon’s. He rolled over on to his side, supporting his head on one slim hand, still watching Simon.

[012-006]This was not the first time that Simon had set foot on French soil. Twice before had he marched into this land; once under [[king-henry-v|the King]]’s brother, [[thomas-duke-of-clarence|Thomas, Duke of Clarence]], and again under Henry himself, when they had fought at Agincourt. He was famous now for his generalship; his name was linked with that of Clarence, or of [[gilbert-of-umfraville|Umfraville]]; he was spoken of as the Fifth Henry’s friend, and the Iron Lord. Of some he was beloved, of others hated, but no man ignored him or thought him of little count. He had become great, and this by his own wit and strength. He had no equal save the King himself in generalship; no commander was so instantly obeyed, and no commander was so greatly respected by his men. He had power and wealth, a splendid body, fit for any hardship or endurance, a not unpleasing countenance, and a quick, cool brain. Yet something he seemed to lack, for with all his assets and attainments, he was cold as stone, almost as though some humanising part of him had been left out in his fashioning. There were those who said that a softer side of love and passion was not in him, but Henry the King, wiser than these, would point to some frolicking page in the Beauvallet green and russet when he heard this criticism.

[012-007]“What! Do ye think Beauvallet hath no tenderness within him? Fool, what of the children?”

[012-008]The critics were silenced then, for Simon’s love of children was well-known.

[012-009]“It sleeps,” Henry said once to Simon’s half-brother. “It will awaken one day.”

[012-010]Geoffrey turned his head.

[012-011]“Of what speak you, sir?”

[012-012]Henry’s eyes were upon the distant Simon.

[012-013]“Of the passion that lies in Simon.”

[012-014]“There is none, sire. Once I thought as you think, but I have known him for fifteen years, and never once have I seen him melt, or lose one jot of his coldness. Save with the children.”

[012-015]“Ay, save with the children. By that sign, Geoffrey, I do know that there is that in him that will spring to life one day.”

[012-016]“There is icy rage, sir,” Geoffrey answered, smiling. “What manner of woman will it be before whom Simon will fall? How many fair maids hath he passed by? And now he is past thirty. He is not like to love. It is too late.”

[012-017]Henry smiled, laying his hand on [[malvallet|Malvallet]]’s arm.

[012-018]“Geoffrey, Geoffrey, sometimes thou art a fool! [[alan-of-montlice|Alan]] is wiser.”

[012-019]“Alan is very wise in all matters of the heart, sir,” Geoffrey retorted. He cast a laughing glance to where sat the young [[montlice|Montlice]], chin in hand and soft eyes dreaming.

[012-020]Henry followed his look, echoed his laugh.

[012-021]“What a trio have I about me!” he said. “My Soldier, my Knight, and my Poet.”

[012-022]
---

[012-023]And as such they were known, close friends all three, and each one unlike the other. Clarence once named them Iron, Flame, and Silver, and marvelled at their friendship, but the King’s name for them was more apt. Simon was all a soldier, dauntless and cool, born to rule and to lead; Geoffrey, the Knight, had a hot courage, a courtier’s tongue, and an impetuous spirit; Alan, the Poet, was a dreamer, unfit for wars, yet partaking in them much as some troubador of a hundred years before, born to love, perhaps not greatly, but often and sweetly. He followed where Simon led, but Geoffrey would sometimes leap ahead with characteristic blindness, only to be dragged back by Simon’s inflexible will. They had been together now, this ill-assorted trio, for many years. Geoffrey and Alan had watched Simon’s gradual conquest of his lands with amused yet admiring eyes; they saw him rise to fame without feeling a spark of jealousy stir within them; they looked on Simon as master, but they thought him a child in everything that had to do with the heart. Time and again had they watched him with some fair lady, breathlessly waiting to observe a change in him. Each time disappointment came, for although he had met the greatest and most lovely ladies of the time not one of them had ever stirred the sleeping passion within him. He was not, as some strong men, timid of the gentler sex; in a maiden’s presence his tongue did not stumble, nor did his tanned cheeks flush. It was simply that he had no room for women in his life, and no liking for them in his heart.

[012-024]
---

[012-025][[cedric|Cedric]], the squire, plucked a blade of grass and began to suck it meditatively. His eyes were upon Simon’s broad shoulders, and he was wondering if his would ever match them in breadth or straightness. He sighed a little, for he was a slim youth, not square-set as was his lord, and without the iron muscle that had been Simon’s long before he had attained Cedric’s age. His eyes travelled down Simon’s tapering flanks, to the arched, spurred feet, and then up again to that stern, rugged face. He had not been told why they had tramped out of Alençon this afternoon, and he knew better than to ask, privileged though he was. He had followed Simon to this hill, silent all the way, for Simon was deep in thought. Cedric guessed that he was puzzling over some weighty problem, by the frown on his brow, and the grimness about his mouth. They had been stationary upon this hill for a long time now, and Cedric rather wished that his lord would say or do something to relieve the tedium, instead of gazing far away at the distant horizon.

[012-026]Then Simon spoke in his deep, grave voice, without turning his head.

[012-027]“Canst find naught better to do than stare at thy lord, child?”

[012-028]Accustomed as he was to Simon’s unexpected ways, Cedric was startled. He had thought that Simon had forgotten his presence, nor been aware of the fixed scrutiny behind him.

[012-029]“Nay, my lord, I think not.”

[012-030]Simon smiled a little.

[012-031]“I am so pleasing to thine eye?”

[012-032]“Yes, sir,” Cedric answered simply.

[012-033]Simon moved at last, and looked down at his sprawling squire. There was a note of feeling in his voice now.

[012-034]“Thou lazy pup!” he said, still smiling. “Take that grass out of thy mouth.”

[012-035]Cedric ejected it, laughing up at Simon. He made no effort to rise, for well he knew that he was privileged in his lord’s eyes. Other pages had come and gone, but for none had Simon cherished the same affection that he felt for Cedric of [[gountray|Gountray]], who, long years ago, had forced himself upon his notice.

[012-036]“Lord, when do we move from Alençon?” he asked presently. “Are we to remain here for aye?”

[012-037]“When the time comes ye will know,” Simon answered curtly.

[012-038]Cedric was in no way abashed. He sat up, hugging his knees.

[012-039]“It is soon, I think,” he said shrewdly, and cast a glance upward at Simon’s impassive countenance. “I wonder, do we march with the King, or with the Duke?” He paused a moment, “Or alone?” he added softly.

[012-040]Simon vouchsafed no reply, but jerked his head, as a sign that they were going. He set off with striding steps towards the town, Cedric trotting along beside him.

[012-041]Within the gates they came upon Sir Alan, whereupon Cedric fell discreetly to the rear.

[012-042]Alan slipped his arm in Simon’s, looking up at him with the subservient affection that not all the years had tempered. He was very little changed from the youth Simon had met without the [[stronghold|castle]] of Montlice. His face had retained its girlish curves, his figure its slender grace. He was attired in silks and velvets, for he scorned a soldier’s garb save when it was necessary.

[012-043]“Simon,” he said in an undertone, “whence comes this talk of sending thee to [[belremy|Belrémy]]?”

[012-044]“From idle men’s tongues belike,” answered Simon shortly.

[012-045]“It is not true?”

[012-046]“True enough, but prate not of it, Alan.”

[012-047]“Thou art indeed to pit thy strength against the [[the-lady-margaret|Lady Margaret]] of Belrémy?”

[012-048]“Ay.”

[012-049]“Where Umfraville hath failed thou art to conquer. Shalt thou take the town, Simon?”

[012-050]“God willing.”

[012-051]Alan chuckled softly, whistling “*Deo Gratias*” below his breath.

[012-052]“I too shall come, of course,” he remarked dreamily. “I have a mind to see this Lady Margaret.”

[012-053]Then Simon smiled.

[012-054]“There will be no lovemaking while thou art with me, Alan.”

[012-055]“Will there not? Thou shouldst bear the Lady Margaret off thyself, lad. That indeed would be a conquest.”

[012-056]“Um!” Simon grunted. “A spitfire to wife? I thank thee.”

[012-057]They were nearing the King’s quarters, and passed several knights who waved a greeting, or asked a question of Simon.

[012-058]“I came in search of thee,” Alan said. “The King would speak with thee. Where hast been?”

[012-059]“Over yonder, upon the hill.”

[012-060]“Wherefore?”

[012-061]“To think, and to breathe. The town chokes me. Dost thou come with me to the King?”

[012-062]“Ay. Geoffrey is there, and swears he will go with thee to Belrémy. So we fare forth together once more.”

[012-063]They entered the house and made their way up the staircase to the King’s apartments. Henry was there, with Geoffrey of Malvallet, and [[gilbert|Gilbert]] of Umfraville. He looked up as Simon entered, and smiled.

[012-064]“Hither, my Soldier. I did send for Gilbert.”

[012-065]Umfraville came forward to grip Simon’s hand.

[012-066]“Unlike me, thou’lt be like unto Caesar, Simon,” he said. “To Belrémy wilt thou go, and where I saw, thou wilt also conquer.”

[012-067]“Thou wouldst have conquered but for the short space of time accorded thee,” Simon answered slowly.

[012-068]Henry laughed, signing a sheet of parchment that was spread out before him.

[012-069]“Hark to my Soldier! He blames me for Umfraville’s defeat.”

[012-070]“Nay, sire!” Geoffrey interposed swiftly. “He is not so ungallant.”

[012-071]“He is not gallant at all,” responded Henry. He pushed the parchment from him, and turned to look at Simon. “He is honest. Tell me, Simon, was it my fault that we took not Belrémy?”

[012-072]“Ay, sir,” Simon replied imperturbably. “Ye did underrate the enemy. The task had been too easy before.”

[012-073]“That is so,” nodded the King. “And now a woman baulks me. So I send her Simon the Coldheart.”

[012-074]Geoffrey laughed out.

[012-075]“Nay, nay, your generals feel no love for her, sir! She is a very Amazon. Is it not so, Gilbert?”

[012-076]“Ay, so I believe. I have not seen her, nor any of my men.”

[012-077]“They say she is garbed in armour and fights at the head of her men.”

[012-078]“Whether that be true or not, her men are wildcats,” Gilbert said ruefully. “I met them but once when a body marched out upon us by night. Thou wilt do well to have a care, Simon. The town is so strongly fortified that ’twould take thee months to batter down the walls. Provisions they seem to have in plenty.”

[012-079]“By the gleam in Simon’s eyes, I know it to be a task after his heart’s desire,” Henry said quizzically.

[012-080]Simon gave his short laugh.

[012-081]“Ay, sir. I will hand you the keys of Belrémy.”

[012-082]“And I will write a canzonet to music on it,” Alan said. “Save that our King be not with us, it will be another Agincourt.”

[012-083]“What, dost thou go with Simon, my Poet?” Henry asked. “Who then will charm mine ears with song?”

[012-084]Alan blushed, shaking back his curls.

[012-085]“So please your Majesty, I must e’en stay by Simon lest he lose his heart to Margaret the Amazon,” he bowed.

[012-086]“Nay, the woman Simon will wed must be some puling lass with a timid tongue,” Henry retorted. “It is always thus.”

[012-087]“ ’Twould be to mate an eagle with a dove, sir,” Gilbert said. “Simon will return to you an enslaved creature, having prostrated himself at the Amazon’s proud feet.”

[012-088]“Well, she is a fair maid, so I hear,” Henry said. “Dost thou covet her, Simon?”

[012-089]“Nay, sire. Her lands rather. Alan shall charm her into submission.”

[012-090]Henry laughed.

[012-091]“Is that thy reason for taking my Poet from me?”

[012-092]“What else, sir?” Simon answered, smiling. “A soldier he is not, nor a leader.”

[012-093]“And what shall Geoffrey do?”

[012-094]“Oh, there is work enough for Geoffrey,” said Simon tranquilly. “Whither do ye go, sir, when ye quit this town?”

[012-095]Henry looked up at him gravely.

[012-096]“Back to Falaise, my Soldier.”

[012-097]Simon nodded.

[012-098]“Ay, take that town, sir. It is worthy of the endeavour.”

[012-099]“So if the King take Falaise, Simon shall take Belrémy,” Gilbert remarked. “Who shall say which task be the harder?”

[012-100]“I shall say.” Alan had seated himself by the window, apart from them, but now he turned his head, smiling sweetly upon Sir Gilbert of Umfraville.

[012-101]“Speak, Sage,” Henry invited.

[012-102]Alan crossed his legs.

[012-103]“Belrémy is the harder task, sire, saving your presence.”

[012-104]Geoffrey frowned.

[012-105]“Wherefore, Alan?”

[012-106]“Because the Sire de Mauny rules Falaise, and the Lady Margaret rules Belrémy.”

[012-107]Geoffrey shook his head.

[012-108]“What dost thou mean?”

[012-109]“Ay, propound me this riddle,” Henry said.

[012-110]“ ’Tis very simple, sir. A man holds Falaise, and a woman, Belrémy. I would sooner fight a man than a woman.”

[012-111]“This woman,” Gilbert corrected. “Alan is [[justice|right]]. When a woman guards her own she is more dangerous than a man. Yet this lady knows not Simon.”

[012-112]“And Simon knows not her,” Alan answered gently.
