---
description: "### III"
id: ch14
label: "III: How He Took Belrémy"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[014-001]?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?

### III

[014-002]How He Took [[belremy|Belrémy]]

[014-003]He struck a week before [[raoul-the-terrible|the]] promised date, and the manner [[geoffrey-of-malvallet|of]] his striking was typical of his policy throughout his career. His mine ran from the camp beneath the town-walls to a corner of waste ground within the town. He had made his calculations exactly, a rough plan of Belrémy as his guide. Two hours’ work would make an outlet from this subterranean passage.

[014-004][[simon-of-beauvallet|Simon]] called a council of his captains on the day before his attack, and laid his last commands upon them. Holland was there, a youngster, unskilled in wars, but brave as a lion, and eager; Geoffrey, dark and tall, peerless in attack, and [[alan-of-montlice|Alan]], dreamy and nonchalant, yet ready to obey any order, blessed with the [[montlice|Montlice]] dash and verve whenever necessity called. They gathered together in Simon’s tent, unwontedly grave. Huntingdon was clad in leather, his armour laid by, and sat upon a rude bench, leaning forward the better to keep his eyes on Simon. Geoffrey stood before the table, fully equipped, but Alan had drawn a stool near to the entrance of the tent, and was dressed in soft cloth and silks. He rested his head in his hand, and his eyes were upon Simon, wide-open, and shining with a childlike innocence. Simon himself sat at the table, plans before him, in such a way that he might look easily from one to the other of his captains. His hands were loosely clasped upon the rough wood; he frowned, but his voice was passionless and even.

[014-005]“You, Huntingdon, at the sounding of the horn at seven in the morning, shall fall upon the western gate with all your force, using your three towers of archers, and your breaching-tower. [[the-chevalier|The]] wall hath crumbled ’neath your cannon. Ye should breach it easily now, and ye must set about the task with much to-do and noise, so that the garrison may think I seek to enter there in full force. Thus ye draw their fire. It will be easy enough, for it is at the western gate that they are most vigilant. There they expect assault. Twelve men will creep along my mine at five o’clock, to break away the earthcrust within the town. When the signal is heard and the townsfolk are thrown into a turmoil by Huntingdon’s sudden attack, those twelve will run swiftly to the southern gates which I now front, and open them. You, [[malvallet|Malvallet]], with Montlice, shall charge then, and enter. There will be [[battle|fighting]] enough to satisfy ye all, but the greater part of the garrison will have flown to defeat Holland. Malvallet, your task then is to ride westward through the town to Holland’s assistance. Montlice will press forward to the centre, where stands the [[stronghold|castle]]. I shall be with you by then.” He paused, and shot a keen glance round. “Ye do understand?”

[014-006]“Ay,” Huntingdon nodded.

[014-007]“Well enough,” Alan sighed.

[014-008]“But one thing,” Malvallet said.

[014-009]Simon’s eyes were upon him.

[014-010]“And that?”

[014-011]“I do understand mine own part, for ’tis child’s play. What part do you play, sir?”

[014-012]“I lead those who enter the town by the mine. I am the twelfth man,” Simon answered quietly.

[014-013]On the word there was an outcry.

[014-014]“You have assigned to yourself the most difficult task!” Huntingdon exclaimed.

[014-015]“Nay, Simon, it is not fitting,” Alan said softly.

[014-016]“At least ye will take me with you!” Geoffrey cried.

[014-017]“Nay.” The word fell heavily, enforcing silence. “It shall be as I have said.”

[014-018]“But, Simon!” Geoffrey threw out his hands impulsively. “What comes to us if ye fall?”

[014-019]“Then shall ye be commander in my room. I fall not.”

[014-020]Huntingdon smote his knee.

[014-021]“[[beauvallet|Beauvallet]], take my place, and let me take thine! Indeed, indeed﻿—”

[014-022]“Silence, Holland. What I have said I have said.”

[014-023]Alan rose, stretching himself like a cat. His eyes seemed more childlike than before, his pose more indolent.

[014-024]“Simon, for the love that lies betwixt us two assign thy task to me.”

[014-025]Simon came to his feet, and laid his hands on Alan’s shoulders.

[014-026]“Thou lovesick child! Then were we indeed lost. Be content to do my bidding.”

[014-027]Alan clasped his hands on Simon’s arm.

[014-028]“Simon, I beg of thee!”

[014-029]“And I.” Malvallet clanked forward, and smote Simon upon the shoulder. “Lad, there is too much danger in thy task. We need thee for other things, and if thou art slain we fall to pieces.”

[014-030]Simon shook his head indomitably.

[014-031]“Thou wilt meet me within the gates of Belrémy, Geoffrey. My hand on it.”

[014-032]Malvallet wrung his hand.

[014-033]“Simon, if so be they slay thee before thou hast flung open the gates, Belrémy shall have no quarter. That I swear.”

[014-034]A gleam came into the curious eyes.

[014-035]“Beauvallet dies not with his task unaccomplished, Geoffrey. Now listen to me, and cease thy plainings. Lie safe and still behind yonder palisade until the gates swing back, and the bridge is down. Then charge swiftly over. Let no movement be seen in my camp that thou canst avoid. Thyself lead the van, and let Alan follow. And come quickly, Geoffrey, for it may be that I shall need thy help.”

[014-036]“By God!” Malvallet swore, “if I come not at once, may I be damned eternally!”

[014-037]Simon nodded briefly, and turned to address them all.

[014-038]“And further, let this my command be given out: If any man strike down a woman or child in the fight, or offer injury where none is courted, his life will I take, and that [[justice|right]] speedily. I will have no burning or pillaging, but order and chivalry. Ye do understand?”

[014-039]“Ay.”

[014-040]“Then that is all. Fare ye well, Huntingdon. I shall not fail you.”

[014-041]The young Earl gripped his hand for a moment, smiling.

[014-042]“We meet within Belrémy, Beauvallet. God be with you and keep you in His care.”

[014-043]“And you.” Simon watched him swing out of the tent, and turned to his two friends. There was a little warmth in his voice now, and his eyes rested kindly upon them.

[014-044]“If this be my last fight, my lands go to [[king-henry-v|the King]], by this my Will.” He picked up a sealed parchment. “My wealth I have divided equally between you, saving only that which I have left to my Marshal, [[maurice|Maurice]] of [[gountray|Gountray]], and mine other men. I leave this packet with Bernard of Talmayne. One of you will care for [[cedric|Cedric]] and [[edmund-of-fenton|Edmund]] for my sake?”

[014-045]“I will,” Alan answered and turned away, lifting one flap of the tent and gazing out.

[014-046]But Geoffrey put his hand on Simon’s shoulder.

[014-047]“Simon, ye have never spoken thus before. Not in all our fights. What ill-omen dost thou feel, my brother?”

[014-048]“None.” Simon smiled into the anxious eyes. “Yet this will be a stern fight, and I would leave all in order.”

[014-049]“If thou shouldst be slain,” Geoffrey began, and broke off. “Well, thou dost know.”

[014-050]“Ay.”

[014-051]“If thou shouldst be slain,” Alan said slowly, “then shall the vixen Margaret die.”

[014-052]“Nay. That is folly. I die not. But if any of us be missing tomorrow, when all is done, those that are left will have lost the most faithful and the dearest friend. Go now, Geoffrey, and sleep whilst thou may.”

[014-053]Geoffrey lingered still.

[014-054]“And thou?”

[014-055]“I have to see my captain, [[walter-of-santoy|Walter of Santoy]], and I must attend to some other matters. Remember, Geoffrey, if I fall tomorrow, thou art in command. Subdue Belrémy and invest it under Huntingdon. Then repair at once to the King. I can tell thee no more.”

[014-056]“If thou dost fall before thou canst open the gates﻿—”

[014-057]Simon smiled grimly.

[014-058]“That may not be. Fare thee well, my brother.” He watched Geoffrey walk to the entrance. “Tell thy men to follow the Gilded [[armour|Armour]]. I shall wear it.”

[014-059]Geoffrey nodded. He paused by Alan and spoke to him.

[014-060]“Thou wilt be ready, Alan?”

[014-061]“Ay. I will come to thee when Simon goes, to hear thine orders.”

[014-062]Geoffrey nodded again and went out. Simon’s secretary entered from the inner tent, and Alan waited until Simon had finished with him. Bernard went softly out to summon Walter of [[santoy|Santoy]].

[014-063]“It grows late,” Alan remarked. “Six of the clock. Thou wilt rest, Simon?”

[014-064]“Presently.”

[014-065]“Who goes with thee into the town?”

[014-066]“Mine own people. Eleven men.”

[014-067]“Well, they would die for thee,” Alan said, as though he found therein some grain of comfort. “Cedric also?”

[014-068]“Nay, he is too young. Take the boy with thee, Alan, for he will not be left behind. He is enraged already that I will not take him with me. Have a care to him.”

[014-069]“I will. I’ll see thee again, lad, when thou art ready.” Alan smiled over his shoulder, and sauntered out to his own quarters.

[014-070]
---

[014-071]The night was very still and calm, the silence broken only within the camp where men moved stealthily about in preparation. The palisade had been undermined so that it would fall as soon as the supports were withdrawn. Away to the left Huntingdon was moving, with less stealth and more noise.

[014-072]Simon stood at the entrance to his mine, tall and square, girt in his gilded armour, which glinted in the light of the fires. His great sword hung at his side, but his lance and shield he had discarded to be brought to him in Malvallet’s charge. He was wrapped about in a great cloak, as was each of his men, and he carried his green-plumed helm beneath his arm. Alan stood by his side, while he called the names of each of his followers. Every man answered promptly but softly. Dimly they were outlined against the black sky. Simon cast a quick glance over them, and turned to bid Alan farewell. He wasted no time, but held Alan’s hand a moment in his mailed clasp.

[014-073]“God be with thee, Alan. Follow the Gilded Armour, remember, and have a care to thyself. Give me the torch.”

[014-074]It was handed to him and he bent, entering the mine, sword in hand. One by one his men crept in behind him, and presently were hidden from Alan’s sight in the gloomy tunnel. Even the glow of the torchlight faded; it was as though the earth had swallowed one and all.

[014-075]Treading softly, and bent almost double, the line of men went steadily along the dank, earth-smelling passage, following the torch, and trusting implicitly to their leader. And so at length they came to the end of the mine, where they could stand upright. For a moment they stood listening, and then, quietly, Simon gave the order to begin to break upwards. Concealing cloaks were laid aside, and arms bared. Each man was furnished with either a pick or a spade, and with these they set to work, digging upwards as steeply as was possible. Simon himself flung down his cloak and helm, and hampered as he was by his armour, fell to hacking away the earth, his torch stuck in a niche in the earthen wall. There was no word spoken for a long time, but when Simon turned to pick up a spade his eyes fell on the eleventh man, shovelling the earth away with a will. A curly black head met his eye, and a young, strained face down which the sweat rolled in great beads. The boy raised his head at that moment and saw Simon’s stern glance upon him. He paused in his work to send his lord a look of piteous apology, not unmixed with triumph.

[014-076]“You and I shall have a reckoning to settle for this, Cedric,” Simon said softly.

[014-077]Cedric nodded, flushing.

[014-078]“Ay, my lord. That I know. I could not let ye come without me. If﻿—if aught befall us﻿—you﻿—you will have﻿—forgiven?”

[014-079]Simon’s hard mouth twitched.

[014-080]“It would seem so. Go to now.”

[014-081]Cedric threw him a grateful smile and returned to his digging with renewed vigour. Not another word was spoken; the work was done as silently as possible, and no man shirked his full share of this arduous task, although the tunnel was dank and airless, and the roof seemed to close down upon them. These picked men of Beauvallet would cheerfully have died sooner than fail their lord, or grumble at his strictness in a time of stress.

[014-082]At last the foremost, one [[malcolm|Malcolm Clayton]], glanced back over his shoulder, and spoke in a hushed voice.

[014-083]“Lord, my pick went through.”

[014-084]Simon scrambled up the crumbling slope of loose earth.

[014-085]“Then silence now, as you value your lives. Stand back, the others.”

[014-086]He was observed instantly; the panting, sweating men rested on their tools, watching Simon and Malcolm break through the thin crust. It was slowly done, and carefully, but at length a wave of frosty air came down to them, and they drank it in gladly. Still Simon worked, making a hole just large enough to admit a man. Then he set down his pick, and raising himself on Malcolm’s shoulders, peered cautiously above the opening. Down he came again, springing lightly, and nodded.

[014-087]“Bank the earth to form a step. You, John, and Peter. The dawn is upon us.”

[014-088]Again they set to work, and soon had fulfilled his behest. A pale grey light filtered down into the tunnel, but overhead the sky seemed still dark and frowning.

[014-089]Simon gave the order to stack the tools. Wine had been brought in small leathern bottles; they drank deeply of it before they donned their helms and cloaks. Cedric picked up the golden helm and shook its waving plumes free of the dirt. He buckled it on to Simon’s neck-plate, and clasped the long green surcoat upon his shoulders. Then Simon wrapped the dark cloak over all and picked up his great sword. It gleamed wickedly in the torchlight, and the golden helm seemed to glow with an inward fire. Beneath its peak Simon’s eyes looked calmly forth and the green of his plumes seemed to steal into them, so that he appeared as some huge [[knighthood|knight]] all gold and green. His men were nervous through anticipation, but his measured voice quieted them.

[014-090]“Extinguish the torch.”

[014-091]It was done, and the golden figure faded to a black silhouette against the faint light. Each man stood very still, and breathed rather fast. Again the cool voice spoke.

[014-092]“Silence now until I speak. The time should be soon. Follow me close, but keep your swords hidden and show no fight until ye see me draw. Cedric, stay by me throughout.”

[014-093]A low murmur of assent came and then all was eerily silent. Yet through the chilling darkness and the tense period of waiting Simon’s magnetic personality seemed to spread over his men so that their jagged nerves were soothed. Not one amongst them but placed his whole trust in Simon, believing implicitly that he would lead them to victory.

[014-094]Time crept by on leaden feet, and bit by bit the grey light grew stronger. Above, all was quiet as the grave, so that the very silence seemed to din in the waiting men’s ears.

[014-095]Presently one fidgeted unconsciously, and drew a deep, sobbing breath. Against the light they saw Simon raise his hand, and once more there was quiet.

[014-096]Then, as from a long way off, a horn sounded, wailing across the land. Thrice came the call, and something like a gasp of relief broke from eleven tense throats. Away in the camp, Geoffrey of Malvallet had given the signal for attack. Still Simon moved not, but stood rocklike, waiting.

[014-097]Faintly came the noise of a great shout. Holland had obeyed the signal. Eleven men fixed their eyes upon their lord, muscles taut, to move at his least command. He stood immobile, his head slightly tilted, listening.

[014-098]Gradually the noise grew, though it came muffled into the mine. An explosion rent the air; Holland had trained his one cannon on to the western wall the better to attract attention.

[014-099]Nearer at hand turmoil sounded, subdued at first, but increasing in volume. The town was awake, and plunged into sudden and desperate activity.

[014-100]At last Simon moved, and spoke one word.

[014-101]“Follow.” He mounted the rude step and scrambled through the hole with surprising agility. Quickly his men followed, and found themselves on a patch of waste ground behind some rude houses, amidst rubbish and garbage. They closed up behind Simon and strode after him across the uneven ground.

[014-102]“Remember, ye are soldiers of Belrémy,” he reminded them. “Spread a little, but follow me.”

[014-103]On they went, and broke into a trot as they emerged upon a narrow street. It was thronged with hurrying men, and from the windows and doors of the houses women called, some hysterical, others calm. Soldiers were running towards the western ramparts, buckling on their swords or mailed gloves. Simon’s little band separated quickly and ran after him, to the south, pushing and jostling the excited townsfolk. From behind came the roar of Holland’s attack, but they tarried not to listen. On they sped, out into the main street and down it towards the gates, always keeping the green plumes in sight, and gradually drawing near to Simon again.

[014-104]Through the rapidly filling street the gates loomed large ahead, and from them came part of the garrison, mounted, and galloping to save the western walls, heedless of the scattered humanity flying from before the plunging hoofs.

[014-105]They were upon the gates now, and Simon’s voice rang out, clarion-like above the din.

[014-106]“To me, and do what I do!”

[014-107]Full upon the startled sentries he rushed, and cried:

[014-108]“The Seneschal! The Seneschal!”

[014-109]They fell back instantly, thinking he came from the Marshal, and he swept on, his men at his heels, to the gate-tower. There again they were accosted, but this time the sentry but asked for news.

[014-110]“They are through on the western side!” Simon shouted, and thundered up the stairs, sword drawn. At the top some fifteen men were fretting, trying to hear or see what was toward. They fell upon Simon.

[014-111]“What news? What news? Are they through? Bring ye commands?”

[014-112]Before they had realised he was a stranger, he had struck, and with a quick movement, he had flung his cloak about the foremost, muffling and blinding him. The room was suddenly full of armed men, and they hacked down the tiny garrison with deadly precision. Swords were wrenched from scabbards, daggers drawn; all was confusion in that desperate fight. Then again Simon’s voice rang out, and they saw him wrench at the lever which let down the bridge.

[014-113]“John, Malcolm, Frank, guard me this!” he called, and was lost again amid the scuffling fight.

[014-114]A cry went up for help; someone reached the great bell-rope, and set the iron bell clanging a wild alarm; dead and wounded lay upon the floor, but Simon’s eleven men were whole, three of them guarding the drawbridge lever as he had commanded. Simon plunged forward to the door, waving a huge key.

[014-115]“The rest follow me!” he cried, and was gone down the winding stairs. Out they raced, pell-mell, to the barred gate.

[014-116]The bell had stirred the garrison station nearby to action. From a little way off came shouts from the oncoming soldiers.

[014-117]“Guard my back!” Simon gasped, and struck down a man who sought to stand against him. He leapt over the body and fumbled with the key. Cedric was at his side; behind them, his men were engaging with the startled enemy. Slowly, slowly the bolts were pushed back, and the iron bars removed. The gates swung back.

[014-118]Simon swerved round on his heel to meet the attackers. Some dozen men-at-arms were striving desperately to reach the gate, but Simon’s men had the advantage of them and could hold them in check till Geoffrey came. Simon hacked a way through for himself and Cedric, intent on reaching the gate-tower before the soldiers, who were even now in sight, some mounted, and charging down the narrow street. He was just in time, for a small body of men rushed to the tower to draw up the bridge before it should be too late. They came upon a great knight in golden armour, who stood within the doorway, and met their charge like a rock. His sword slashed and thrust mercilessly, his brow was lowering.

[014-119]Then a welcome sound fell upon Simon’s ears, a roar and the thunder of hoofs on the wooden bridge. He heaved a short sigh of relief, for the men who guarded the gate for him were hard-pressed, and could hold out no longer. His voice rang out above the medley of sound.

[014-120]“Stand aside! Stand aside! Let Malvallet finish!”

[014-121]Even as he shouted to them they had sprung away from the gateway, pressing back against the walls to let Malvallet through.

[014-122]Plunging into Belrémy came the English, Malvallet at their head, unmistakable by his black plumes and surcoat. He held his lance in one hand, his shield in the other, with the bridle of his own horse, and that of Simon’s huge black charger. Behind him came his own men, and such was the force of their charge that they bore the French backwards into the town, so that they broke, and fled in confusion. In that brief respite Geoffrey wheeled about and came back to the gate. He saw Simon at the entrance of the tower, and charged down upon his assailants, scattering them.

[014-123]“All safe?” he cried.

[014-124]Simon caught his horse’s bridle, and the shield from the saddle.

[014-125]“Ay. I wait to see all in. Ride to the western ramparts now.”

[014-126]Geoffrey turned again, and galloped back into the open street. An order was shouted, and the vanguard closed in behind him, horse and foot, orderly in an instant, the archers with their crossbows held ready. The cavalcade streamed down a side street, making for the western gate.

[014-127]Again the bridge shook, this time beneath the weight of Alan’s onslaught. In he came, red plumes waving, and his brilliant surcoat stretched out behind him by the wind. Close behind him, riding three abreast, were his horse-archers, skilled warriors every one, mounted on trained chargers. As Alan rode past, Simon shouted to him above the clatter of hoofs on the cobblestones.

[014-128]“On to the marketplace! I join thee there! ’Ware men from the right!”

[014-129]Alan glanced quickly over his shoulder, and waved his sword gaily in token that he had heard; then he was gone down the main-street to where the French had gathered, ready to defend their own.

[014-130]In silence Simon watched his soldiers come running through the gateway, pikes levelled, and every foot striking the ground as one. His eyes glinted as he observed their shining armour and their disciplined appearance. There was no semblance of riot in their attack; they came swiftly and orderly, fine men all of them, and well equipped.

[014-131]At last came Walter of Santoy, in green-and-russet, Beauvallet colours, riding at the head of the rearguard, some score and a half men-at-arms mounted. They halted within the town, and spread quickly to guard the bridge at a sharp command from Santoy. Eleven of them rode on to where Simon stood, and saluted, dismounting, and holding their steeds in readiness for the men who had entered the town with Simon. It was all done as if by machinery, without fluster.

[014-132]Then at last Simon moved. He turned, and called up the stairs of the gate-tower.

[014-133]“All in! Down now to me!”

[014-134]Down the stairs clattered the three men he had left aloft, wounded every one, but dauntless. Six of Santoy’s men went up to hold the tower in their place, and the three tired warriors mounted their waiting chargers, for they were to form Simon’s bodyguard. One man of the eleven was too badly wounded to move, but the others swung themselves into their saddles. Simon looked them over.

[014-135]“It was well done,” he said, and from him that was praise enough to set them blushing. He glanced towards the one who was wounded, and raised his hand to his helm in stiff salute. “God be with you, Malcolm.”

[014-136]“And with you, lord!” Malcolm gasped, and fell back into the arms of the surgeon who had come with Santoy.

[014-137]Simon mounted his coal-black horse, and watched Cedric fling himself into the nearest horse’s saddle.

[014-138]“Onward!” he said, and spurred forward down the street in Alan’s wake.

[014-139]The English had pressed on to the wide marketplace, but there the French were gathered, soldiers and townspeople and there they made a determined stand.

[014-140]“Way for Beauvallet!” Simon roared, and pressed through to the fore. A hundred voices took up the cry; a wave of relief seemed to sweep through the English ranks.

[014-141]“Way for Beauvallet! Follow the Gilded Armour! The Lion, the Lion! Follow the Gilded Armour!”

[014-142]The marketplace was a medley of fighting men, a blaze of colour, with here and there the red-and-gold of Montlice showing, fighting shoulder to shoulder with the Malvallet black. Green-and-russet men were scattered all over, and away to the right, the King’s men hacked and hewed with Alan at their head.

[014-143]Simon pressed on towards one of his captains, rapped out a sharp command, and rode to the left. The captain wheeled about to the right, shouting Simon’s order as he went. In a moment it seemed the English fell into two divisions, and the left flank charged after the great golden figure ahead, bearing down upon the enemy like a battering ram. Back and back fell the French till the marketplace was left behind, and the mad fight swept on into the narrow streets beyond.

[014-144]Women shrieked from doors and windows, hysterical at the sight of blood, and the sound of steel on steel and the roar of voices. Children who had slipped out into the road, fled hither and thither, terrified at this sudden invasion of fighting men. One babe ran right out into the road almost beneath the plunging hoofs of Simon’s horse. He wrenched the animal back upon its haunches and swung it deftly to one side, stooping to hoist the child up by its mud-spattered skirts.

[014-145]An agonised, sobbing scream came from the side of the road, where the mother had flattened herself against the wall. Simon cut his way towards her, the babe held safe behind his shield, its face buried in the folds of his surcoat. He handed it down to the woman.

[014-146]“Get ye within doors,” he told her sternly, and was gone again into the melee.

[014-147]From the other end of the street enemy reinforcements came running, and the French retreat was checked and the English fell back a little.

[014-148]Simon rose in his stirrups; his voice blared forth, and at the sound of it his men rallied round him again, and put new zest into their blows.

[014-149]“For St. George and the King!” Simon cried, and someone behind him started to roar out the song of Agincourt.

[014-150]A score of voices took it up, and again the English pressed forward.

[014-151]A burly fellow at Simon’s side smote down one Frenchman who would have hamstrung his horse, and as he did so he sang jovially.

[014-152]“ ‘Our King went forth to [[normandy|Normandy]]’﻿—have at ye now! ‘With grace and might of chivalry’﻿—So, so! That for thy pains! ‘The God for him’﻿—Would ye, would ye? ’Ware, lord! ’ware!﻿—‘wrought marv’lously’﻿—Oh, brave, brave, my lord! On, on! ‘Wherefore England’﻿—Hey, John Dawlish, Peter Westmere, take it up!﻿—‘may call and cry: *De‑o Gratias! De‑o Gratias!*’ ”

[014-153]“*Deo Gratias, Deo Gratias!*” came the roar from all around, and on the words the English swept the French backwards, pressing on and on, down the street.

[014-154]For fully an hour the fight lasted, all over the town, but at length, first in one place, and then in another, the French cried for quarter. In a little while the truce was called, and comparative silence fell, the battle-yells dying away. [[mercy|Quarter]] was granted everywhere, and soon the sheriff sent to Simon, who had pushed his way back to the marketplace, surrendering the keys of the town.

[014-155]Dead and wounded lay upon the ground, but already the women and the noncombatants were out, tending the wounded, whether they were French or English.

[014-156]Simon found one of his captains in the crowd, and delivered his orders. Most of the French soldiery, it seemed, had fled north to the castle, which still held firm, and wherein lay the [[the-lady-margaret|Lady Margaret]].

[014-157]Across the square came Malvallet, his armour dented and battered, his surcoat torn.

[014-158]“God be thanked! Thou art alive!” he cried, and reined in beside Simon. “Huntingdon is in long since. Where is Alan?”

[014-159]“I have not seen him. To the right, I think, down the street. Holland hath his men in hand?”

[014-160]“Ay. They tend the wounded, some of them. We hold each gate. I’ll go seek Alan.” He turned, and picked his way across the square.

[014-161]When he came back it was full half-an-hour later, and the marketplace was almost cleared.

[014-162]“Simon, Simon!” Malvallet cried, and Simon turned sharply, waiting for Geoffrey to come up to him. “Alan is taken! Taken by that she-devil, and carried into her stronghold!”

[014-163]“What!” Simon glared into Malvallet’s haggard face. For a moment he was silent, and then his upper lip curled back, showing his teeth in that famous tiger-snarl.

[014-164]“If I have not Alan by nightfall, may my soul wither in hell!” he said softly.
