---
description: "### VII"
id: ch18
label: "VII: How He Found Geoffrey and Jeanne on the Terrace"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[018-001]?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?

### VII

[018-002]How He Found [[geoffrey-of-malvallet|Geoffrey]] and [[jeanne|Jeanne]] on [[raoul-the-terrible|the]] Terrace

[018-003]On the broad terrace Jeanne sat sewing, a fur cloak about her plump form, for although the sun was shining it was but a wintry sun, and the day was frosty. To her came [[malvallet|Malvallet]], bedight in crimson velvet and gold lacing. Mademoiselle looked up, surveying him.

[018-004]“Oh, fie!” she murmured and turned her head to gaze pensively at a robin. “[[the-chevalier|The]] soldier turned popinjay, i’ faith. He shames the sun.” She picked up her needle again.

[018-005]“This is cruelty,” Geoffrey said mournfully, and sat down upon the parapet, facing her.

[018-006]“Doubtless he will take a chill,” Mademoiselle sighed. “Such cold stone!” She sent a fleeting glance towards the damp parapet.

[018-007]“I wonder, will she be sorry?” Geoffrey asked the sky.

[018-008]“He dreams of his English love,” Mademoiselle nodded sagely.

[018-009]“In truth, she is unkind today,” Geoffrey said. “She doth not look at me.”

[018-010]“Oh, she hath no mind to be blinded!”

[018-011]“Yet every time I do look into her eyes I am blinded and so bemused that I can see naught else forever after.”

[018-012]“She must be very beautiful,” Mademoiselle said. “This English maid.”

[018-013]“Not English yet,” Geoffrey answered. “Please God I will make her so ere long.”

[018-014]Mademoiselle bit her thread.

[018-015]“The gentleman is courageous indeed,” she said, and bent again over her work.

[018-016]For a time there was silence.

[018-017]“Jeanne,” Geoffrey said pleadingly.

[018-018]Mademoiselle started.

[018-019]“Oh, are ye here still?” she asked in innocent surprise.

[018-020]Geoffrey came to her side and knelt. He stole one arm about her trim waist.

[018-021]“Nay, Jeanne!”

[018-022]“He will certainly be pricked,” Jeanne said, plying her needle faster still.

[018-023]His [[justice|right]] hand imprisoned hers.

[018-024]“Sweet, thou shalt not torment me. Listen, and I will tell thee of my ladylove.”

[018-025]Mademoiselle gazed blankly before her. A provocative smile lingered about her lips.

[018-026]“I might call for help,” she mused.

[018-027]“Nay, I need none,” Geoffrey answered promptly. “This lady, sweet, is little and lovely. So little that I might hide her in my pocket and forget that she was there.”

[018-028]“This is English gallantry,” sighed Jeanne. “Poor lady!”

[018-029]“Not ‘poor,’ Jeanne, for she hath all a man’s heart.”

[018-030]“Which is so little,” quoth she, “that she slipped it into her bag and forgot that it was there. Heyday!”

[018-031]“But even though she forgot, being cruel, it still remained, braving her coldness and her tauntings, and waiting very humbly till she should grow kind.”

[018-032]“A craven, cringing heart, wasting its life.”

[018-033]“Nay, for although it was humble, it kept a close watch on the lady. And even though she scorned and flouted it, it made solemn oath unto itself that it would devote its whole life to guarding her welfare and her happiness.”

[018-034]“Why, then, it was a busy heart, for doubtless it had sworn that oath many a time before.”

[018-035]“Not so, Jeanne, for before it was asleep.”

[018-036]“Oh, grammercy, was this its calf-love then?”

[018-037]“All its love, lady. It knew none before it beheld the little lady with the big blue eyes and the pretty dimples. A French maid, Jeanne, with brown curls and a cruel tongue.”

[018-038]“A spitfire, forsooth!”

[018-039]“Just a wilful maid.”

[018-040]“And French.” Jeanne nodded dreamily. “An enemy. Indeed, I am sorry for this heart.”

[018-041]Geoffrey’s arm tightened about her.

[018-042]“The heart is happy enough, Jeanne, but what of its owner! It left him to serve the lady, and now he hath none.”

[018-043]“It was so little that he would scarce notice its absence,” Jeanne said.

[018-044]“But he does indeed notice it, and though he would not have it return to him, he would fain have the lady’s heart in its place.”

[018-045]“Oh, it would freeze him, sir!”

[018-046]“He might warm it, sweet.”

[018-047]“Nay, for he is English, and the lady’s foe. And mayhap the lady’s heart has been given elsewhere.”

[018-048]Geoffrey rose.

[018-049]“Now I know why she is cold,” he said. “Her heart was gone already, so that she had none to give this Englishman. So he left her﻿—with his heart.”

[018-050]Jeanne inspected her stitchery.

[018-051]“Perhaps, after all﻿—it was still a virgin heart,” she said softly. “The﻿—the lady’s, I mean.”

[018-052]Geoffrey came back.

[018-053]“And might it be won, Jeanne?” he asked.

[018-054]She bent lower still over her work, and the long lashes veiled her eyes.

[018-055]“By an English foe, sir?”

[018-056]“By an English lover, Jeanne.”

[018-057]She poised her needle, looking at it intently.

[018-058]“Nay. It could not be won.”

[018-059]“Never?”

[018-060]“Never. You see, sir, it was a cold, cruel heart, and it repulsed all its suitors. And﻿—and it was a shy heart﻿—but true. So﻿—so one day﻿—it left the lady﻿—very secretly, so that at first she did not know that it had gone, and﻿—and slipped into a man’s pocket. And﻿—when the lady﻿—tried to recall it﻿—it would not come, but nestled down in its hiding-place. But﻿—but it was such a timid little heart, that the man﻿—he was a great, stupid Englishman﻿—never knew that it was in his pocket, but besought the lady to give it to him. He was so blinded, you see﻿—and just an English conqueror.”

[018-061]“An English slave,” Geoffrey said, and knelt again, his arms about her. “A suppliant at the little lady’s feet.”

[018-062]“But he was very strong and masterful withal,” Jeanne murmured, and let her stitchery fall. “And﻿—and clad in crimson velvet which he knew became him well. A conceited popinjay, sir.”

[018-063]Geoffrey drew her to rest against his shoulder.

[018-064]“Nay, for he doffed his work-a-day clothes and donned the crimson velvet only to do his lady honour.”

[018-065]“A peacock preening himself to dazzle the hen,” Jeanne replied, and smoothed her russet gown.

[018-066]“She was such a pretty hen that he decked himself in velvet so as not to show himself a drab fellow beside her loveliness.”

[018-067]“Oh, I do not think he was ever drab,” Jeanne said into his ear. “In his steel armour with the black plumes in his helm, and the black surcoat floating from his shoulders, and his great sword in hand﻿—he﻿—he was a fine figure.”

[018-068]“When saw ye me thus, Jeanne?”

[018-069]“From the tower window, sir. And I hated you. You and your leader, the icy Lord of [[beauvallet|Beauvallet]].”

[018-070]“And [[alan-of-montlice|Alan]]?”

[018-071]“Alan? Oh﻿—well, he was my lady’s prisoner﻿—and one does not hate a helpless man. And﻿—and indeed he makes pretty love to a maid.” Unseen, she smiled.

[018-072]“Doth he so?” Geoffrey turned her face up, a hand beneath her chin. “I will speak with Master Alan. Is his lovemaking so pretty as mine?” He kissed her red lips.

[018-073]“Prettier by far,” Jeanne retorted, when she could. “For he did not squeeze me brutally, nor take advantage of my loneliness.”

[018-074]“Why he is but half a man, then,” Geoffrey answered, and kissed her again.

[018-075]Her bosom rose and fell quickly; she returned his kisses for a while, then struggled to be free of him, her neck and cheeks a rosy red.

[018-076]“Oh, but we are traitors, both!” she cried, and set her hands on his breast, thrusting him away.

[018-077]“Traitors, sweet? Why?”

[018-078]“Thou to the Lord Beauvallet, I to the [[the-lady-margaret|Lady Margaret]]! While these two stay at enmity I must cleave to the one, and thou to the other.”

[018-079]“The Lady Margaret will make her submission,” Geoffrey said.

[018-080]“Ah, you do not know her! She hath never bent the knee yet. I have been with her since childhood, and﻿—and I know how strong is her will.”

[018-081]“Fifteen years have I known [[simon-of-beauvallet|Simon]],” Geoffrey answered, “and I have yet to see him beaten.”

[018-082]“But now he is pitted ’gainst a woman, and therefore is defenceless, for what weapons can he use? I tell thee, Geoffrey, ever since my lady’s father died, she hath ruled supreme. She will never bend, least of all before an Englishman.”

[018-083]“In truth, the Lady Margaret is an Amazon,” Geoffrey said ruefully. “I mislike these tigress-women.”

[018-084]“That is not true!” Jeanne cried hotly. “She is the sweetest, dearest lady! She shows herself tigerish to you, because you seek to conquer her!”

[018-085]“Not I!” Geoffrey grimaced. “I do not willingly cross her path.”

[018-086]“She is brave and proud! But to her own people she is, oh, so kind and just!”

[018-087]“Beshrew me, I am glad that I am not of her people.”

[018-088]“Sir,” said Jeanne coldly, “loose me!”

[018-089]Geoffrey kissed her averted cheek.

[018-090]“Nay, I meant not to anger thee, my dear. The Lady Margaret is what you will. I care not. No woman is aught to me save one.”

[018-091]Jeanne pushed him away.

[018-092]“Geoffrey, loose me! Here comes thy lord! Oh, rise, thou great stupid!”

[018-093]Along the terrace Simon was coming, capless, and Jeanne glanced from his face to Geoffrey’s.

[018-094]“In truth ye are much alike,” she said. “But the one is ‘*beau*’ and the other is ‘*mal*.’ ”

[018-095]“We are half-brothers,” Geoffrey told her. He turned to greet Simon. “Hast need of me, lad?”

[018-096]Simon bowed awkwardly to Mademoiselle.

[018-097]“Nay. I thought Alan was here. I ask your pardon for my intrusion.”

[018-098]In the depths of his strange eyes Jeanne saw a twinkle. She blushed, sewing quicker than ever.

[018-099]“I have seen not Alan. What’s amiss?”

[018-100]“He bears the title, Master of the Horse,” Simon said with heavy sarcasm. “I would have him attend to his affairs.”

[018-101]Jeanne spoke demurely.

[018-102]“Methinks Sir Alan is in the western hall, milor’.”

[018-103]Geoffrey chuckled, for the Lady Margaret’s ladies often sat there.

[018-104]“Who is the charmer, my Jeanne?” he asked.

[018-105]A frown reproved him.

[018-106]“I believe it is Mademoiselle Yvonne de Vertimaine,” Jeanne answered.

[018-107]“Wilt fetch him for me, Geoffrey?” Simon said. “Ye will find me here.”

[018-108]Geoffrey smiled.

[018-109]“Simon, do ye fear to enter the ladies’ bower?”

[018-110]“I would not rob you of that sweet delight,” Simon answered. “Go, Geoffrey. I will bear Mademoiselle company.”

[018-111]“Thank you!” Geoffrey bowed ironically, and sauntered away down the terrace.

[018-112]Jeanne found her heart beating rather fast. She had been present when Simon had captured her mistress, and she had accompanied Margaret to the English camp. Both of these experiences left her very nervous of Simon. Now he sat down upon the parapet, looking at her.

[018-113]“So ye have captured my captain’s heart, mademoiselle,” he said slowly.

[018-114]Jeanne looked at him. He was smiling down at her pleasantly, and she plucked up her courage.

[018-115]“No, sir. He gave it to me.”

[018-116]“It is all one. I take it you and he will walk to the altar soon?”

[018-117]Jeanne shook her head.

[018-118]“It cannot be, milor’.”

[018-119]“Ah?”

[018-120]“I serve the Countess.”

[018-121]“I see,” said Simon. “Yet when I have quelled this turbulent lady, what then?”

[018-122]“Ye will not do it, milor’,” she said confidently.

[018-123]“Shall I not? I might ask thine aid.”

[018-124]She paused in her stitching, and looked him steadily between the eyes.

[018-125]“Ye would be ill-advised, sir.”

[018-126]“Oh?” He raised his brows. “Like mistress like maid, is it?”

[018-127]“Ay, sir.”

[018-128]“Not all Malvallet’s pleadings will make thee change thy mind?”

[018-129]“Sir Geoffrey, milor’, would be the last to have me turn traitor.”

[018-130]“I but ask thy persuasion, lady.”

[018-131]“You ask in vain, sir.”

[018-132]“So? Then let me tell thee, mademoiselle, that if the Lady Margaret cannot be persuaded, she may yet be coerced.”

[018-133]“Oh, brave!” Jeanne exclaimed scornfully.

[018-134]“It is in my power,” Simon said imperturbably, “to execute the Countess. Hast thou thought of that, I wonder?”

[018-135]“Ye would have all [[belremy|Belrémy]] about your ears, like hornets,” she answered.

[018-136]“It would not worry me. If I have not the Lady Margaret’s submission soon, I shall be forced to take stronger measures. Let her take heed, for I mean what I say.”

[018-137]“I doubt it not.” Jeanne eyed him for a moment. “Yet would ye not slay the Countess, for ye are English, and I have heard that their justice is great.”

[018-138]“As ye shall see,” Simon answered grimly.

[018-139]“And﻿—and do ye war on women?” Jeanne asked.

[018-140]“Ay, if need be.”

[018-141]“It is very sad,” she sighed.
