---
description: "### XV"
id: ch26
label: "XV: How He Came Upon the Lady Margaret in the Gallery"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[026-001]?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?

### XV

[026-002]How He Came Upon [[raoul-the-terrible|the]] [[the-lady-margaret|Lady Margaret]] in the Gallery

[026-003]On a voyage [[geoffrey-of-malvallet|of]] exploration through the [[stronghold|castle]], [[fulk-of-montlice|Fulk]] came to a wide gallery where the musicians were wont to play. Coming towards him, away from her rooms, was the Lady Margaret, tall and stately as ever in a cloth of gold, with her long hair braided, and a gold band about her forehead from which glowed a single sapphire stone. She paused when she saw Fulk, and looked him over, for he was a stranger to her.

[026-004]Fulk looked back at her squarely, leaning on his stout ash-plant. [[the-chevalier|The]] Lady Margaret would have passed on, chin lifted, but he blocked her passage.

[026-005]“Know ye the way back to the hall, madame?” he asked, in very fair French. “I have lost my path.”

[026-006]“The stairs are yonder, sir,” she said, pointing.

[026-007]Fulk sighed, and thought that he would be very cunning.

[026-008]“Stairs, stairs, stairs! If there were chairs I should like it better. I have had the gout this many a day, lady, and it plagues me sorely.”

[026-009]The Countess hesitated, but Fulk’s white hairs made her courteous.

[026-010]“There are chairs behind you, sir,” she said.

[026-011]“Why then, madame, if you will be seated, so will I,” he answered.

[026-012]“I thank you, no.” On swept my lady, but was arrested by Fulk’s roar. He could never be patient for long.

[026-013]“Come back, come back! God’s Body, have I not been lonely enough? Come hither, whoever ye may be, and bear an old man company.”

[026-014]The Lady Margaret spoke coldly.

[026-015]“I am the Countess of [[belremy|Belrémy]],” she said, and her tone should have crushed him.

[026-016]“What care I for that?” he demanded. “If you wish to sing titles, I am the Earl of [[montlice|Montlice]]. Now sit ye down, a-God’s sake!”

[026-017]Margaret was somewhat taken aback.

[026-018]“I﻿—I do not know the Earl of Montlice, sir.”

[026-019]“That do ye. Sit thee down, I say!”

[026-020]Margaret was inclined to be haughty, but when Fulk stamped his foot and swore at the pain, she laughed, and came to him, sitting down.

[026-021]“I do not know why ye should desire to keep me with you,” she said frankly. “I have no love for Englishmen.”

[026-022]Fulk lowered himself beside her.

[026-023]“Now what hath been done to thee by an Englishman?” quoth he.

[026-024]She flushed.

[026-025]“Ye call it nothing that my land hath been ta’en by an Englishman?” she cried.

[026-026]“Fortune o’ war,” he grunted. “Thou hadst a worthy foe.”

[026-027]“Sir?”

[026-028]“Why I do hear that my boy [[simon-of-beauvallet|Simon]] and thou do tilt at one another. Now Simon is a man, God wot!”

[026-029]“Indeed, sir?”

[026-030]“Did ye doubt it?” Fulk slewed round to face her. “A plague be on the lad, what hath he done? He was ever a pert, headstrong child, but I never heard that he did more harm to a maid than turn his back on her.”

[026-031]“Oh, he is very chivalrous!” she sneered. “See this scar on my breast! That did he with his sword!”

[026-032]Fulk looked at it.

[026-033]“Did he so? Wherefore should he do that?”

[026-034]“Because I would not yield thy son to him, nor my castle!”

[026-035]“Ah, well!” Fulk puffed out his cheeks. “[[alan-of-montlice|Alan]] is dear to him. As for thy castle﻿—what he had sworn to take he would take, willy-nilly. It is his way. Lord, Lord, I should know, for had I not to bear with him four long years? The lad was my squire, lady.”

[026-036]“Thy squire?” She was surprised, in spite of herself. “How could he be that?”

[026-037]“Why, look ye, he was [[malvallet|Malvallet]]’s bastard, and Malvallet was my foe. When Simon’s mother died he came to me, and bearded me in my lair.” He chuckled. “I was a fierce fellow in those days, lady, but Holy Virgin, he was as fierce! A square-set whelp, some fourteen years old, and forced himself into my service. A pretty time I had with him, madame, and an obstinate, impudent cub he was. Many’s the beating I’ve given him, but do ye think he cared? Not he! He’d e’en go his own road, say or do what I would. Cold as a stone, as strong as I was myself. Up he grew, like a young tree. The shoulders of him! He hath a blow which would fell an ox, lady, and the coolest brain ever I knew. Now hark while I tell thee how he came by his land.” Fulk settled himself more comfortably, and proceeded to recount the exploits of his beloved lion-cub. Margaret listened, eyes downcast, but once she raised them, and they were sparkling with sympathy for one of Simon’s deeds. But at the end of the recital the colour died out of her cheeks, and she remembered that Simon was her enemy.

[026-038]“Ye would seem to have a fondness for this Simon, milor’.”

[026-039]“Needs must I,” Fulk grunted. “I do indeed love the boy. He cares for me a little, but he hath never asked a favour of me, and never will. What he wants, he will win himself. Never was there a prouder, more cocksure lad!”

[026-040]“It is praiseworthy, perhaps,” Margaret said slowly, “but he cannot﻿—always﻿—win.”

[026-041]Fulk’s eyes twinkled.

[026-042]“So, so! And who shall teach him that, lady?”

[026-043]She looked at him, and he saw her lips tight-shut.

[026-044]“Aha! So ye think to bring Simon to heel, madame? I wonder if you will do it?”

[026-045]“I desire only that he shall leave my land, never to return.”

[026-046]“Well, he is like to,” Fulk announced. “He goes soon to join [[king-henry-v|the King]].”

[026-047]“I am glad,” said the Lady Margaret primly. “I hope it will be very, very soon!”

[026-048]“Here’s a heat!” Fulk remarked. “Why dost thou hate him so?”

[026-049]“I have told thee. Once I sought to kill him﻿—” she spoke through clenched teeth﻿—“and could not! Could not, though he would have let me! I was a coward, and now I do owe my life to him.”

[026-050]“And didst fight at his side, if Malvallet and thy lady speak sooth. That was not done of hate, madame.”

[026-051]“I fought because﻿—because I had to escape. Not to save him!”

[026-052]Fulk grunted.

[026-053]“And even now, had I the means to hand, I would slay him gladly! Ay, gladly!”

[026-054]“Brave words,” Fulk said. “Simon is not one to be worsted by a maid. What good would his death bring you? [[henry-iv-bolingbroke|King Henry]] would fall upon thy land.”

[026-055]“I held out ’gainst [[gilbert-of-umfraville|Umfraville]]!”

[026-056]“Ay, but the English are in now,” Fulk said.

[026-057]A soft yet heavy tread sounded. Along the gallery came Simon, and at sight of him the Lady Margaret rose, yet was too proud to seek refuge in flight.

[026-058]Simon halted before her, looking gravely into her eyes. But all at once a smile came to disperse the gravity, and it was so unlike the smile she had seen on his lips before, that almost it drew from her an answering gleam. There was no grimness in it, but a species of amused understanding.

[026-059]“So my lord hath found thee?” he said. “I dare swear he hath told thee that I was once the bane of his life.”

[026-060]“My lord is generous in his praise of you,” she answered stiffly.

[026-061]Simon glanced at Fulk with uplifted brows.

[026-062]“Never said I one word of praise!” Fulk roared. “I praise thee? God’s Body, I am not yet in my dotage! Praise﻿—thou pert boy, what ails thee? My lady knows now thy stubborn temper. Praise, forsooth!”

[026-063]Simon laughed.

[026-064]“Wert ever chary of praise to my face, sir,” he said mildly.

[026-065]“And behind thy back!” Fulk averred. “A more worthless, blundering, silly-pated, obstinate lad never I saw! A pity is it that none ever thought to knock a little sense into thee.”

[026-066]“Nay, my lord, one did try, but it seemed he failed, although he had me in my youth to mould.”

[026-067]“A graceless, impudent coxcomb thou wert!”

[026-068]“Indeed, I think I was so indeed,” Simon reflected. “A sore trial to thee, sir.”

[026-069]“Thou art well enough,” Fulk grunted. “Ye need not seek to cozen me.”

[026-070]“Why, sir, I do know it to be useless,” Simon said.

[026-071]Margaret glanced from one to the other. This new Simon was a stranger to her. The Simon she knew was a stern lord with little humour but great strength, not a smiling man who meekly listened to abuse of himself. She drew her skirts about her, preparing to depart, but Fulk struggled up, laying a hand on her shoulder.

[026-072]“Now here is a [[justice|right]] noble lady,” he informed Simon bluffly. “Shouldst take a lesson from her, lad.”

[026-073]Simon’s eyes were upon her face, and Margaret felt the colour rise to her cheeks.

[026-074]“It boots not to sing my praise to Lord Simon of [[beauvallet|Beauvallet]], sir,” she said icily.

[026-075]“Nay.” It was Simon who answered. “I need no telling.”

[026-076]“Hadst best have a care to thyself,” Fulk warned him jovially. “My lady will be satisfied with naught save thy life.”

[026-077]Margaret’s cheeks were flaming now. She bit her lip, glaring at the well-meaning but tactless Fulk.

[026-078]“My life is hers,” Simon said quietly.

[026-079]“I should have said thy death,” Fulk chuckled.

[026-080]Simon drew his dagger from its sheath and presented the hilt to Margaret.

[026-081]“That also.”

[026-082]Margaret drew away from under Fulk’s hand.

[026-083]“The jest is no doubt amusing, sir. I will leave you to enjoy it.”

[026-084]Fulk conceived that this curious pair of lovers should now be left alone, so he stumped off towards the stairs, shaking his head over the incomprehensible ways of the younger generation.

[026-085]Simon stood before Margaret, barring her passage. He was in a genial mood this morning, and strange forces were at work within him.

[026-086]“Be pleased to let me pass,” Margaret said imperiously.

[026-087]He shook his head.

[026-088]“In a little while, Margot.”

[026-089]“My name, sir?” Her eyes flamed.

[026-090]“Thy name.” He turned the naked dagger in his hand, looking down at it. “It was no jest, madame. If thou wouldst strike, strike now.”

[026-091]“Thou hast tied my hands,” she answered bitterly. “I am not sunk so low. Thou hast told me that my life is thine by right of conquest. That is not so, but thou didst rescue me, in my dire peril, for which I must needs be grateful.”

[026-092]“I want not thy gratitude. That debt is paid, and the past is dead. If thou dost indeed hate me﻿—”

[026-093]“Ah, can you doubt that?” she cried.

[026-094]He smiled a little.

[026-095]“Thou hast assured me of thy hatred many a time, and of thine undying lust for vengeance. And yet.﻿ ﻿… Thou didst lie in mine arms once, content to be there, and it was not hate that prompted thee to feel thyself safe, and to sleep with thy head on my breast.”

[026-096]“You taunt me with that? I was weary, and beside myself with fear and﻿—and everything!”

[026-097]“Nay, I do not taunt thee. The memory of that ride is precious to me.”

[026-098]She was silent.

[026-099]“Methinks,” Simon went on, “I never knew thee until I saw thee clad in thy boy’s clothes, [[battle|fighting]] at my side.”

[026-100]She flushed.

[026-101]“Not for nothing am I the Amazon,” she said through her shut teeth.

[026-102]“The Amazon? Nay, thou didst seem just a helpless child, grown suddenly small in thine unaccustomed raiment. It was that, I think, that awoke some devil within me, and made me slay Raoul.”

[026-103]She laughed harshly.

[026-104]“I thank you, milor’! So it was with a child that thou didst﻿—didst﻿—fall in love﻿—if love this be!”

[026-105]“It must be love, Margot, but I know little of such matters. I only know that I want thee, and must have thee.”

[026-106]“Then know also, sir, that I will none of thy wooing! Now let me pass!”

[026-107]He stood aside at once, and she almost ran down the gallery to her rooms, meeting Alan on the way, and brushing past him without a glance in his direction. Alan strolled up to Simon, half-smiling.

[026-108]“One pair of lovers left I in the hall, and here I stumble upon yet another. And I﻿—I the only real lover amongst you﻿—am maid-less. It is a sad world.”

[026-109]“Alan,” Simon said abruptly. “Tell me of love. What is it?”

[026-110]“I can tell thee naught that thou dost not know already. Long, long ago I did say that the day would come when some maid should wake thy cold heart. Behold, it is here at last, and thou dost ask me to tell thee of love!”

[026-111]“It is love, then, that stirs my blood? But﻿—but﻿—but﻿—”

[026-112]Alan laughed softly.

[026-113]“It comes to all men at least once, and to some many times. To thee it came slowly, but to some it comes as a sudden shock.”

[026-114]Simon pondered gravely, and in a few moments Alan spoke again.

[026-115]“I came in search of thee. I want to warn thee.”

[026-116]Instantly Simon was on the alert, and the softness went out of his face.

[026-117]“Well?”

[026-118]“I mislike the looks of yon Frenchman, the Chevalier. Of late there hath come a new gleam into his eyes, and I think he seeks to do thee harm.”

[026-119]“That little popinjay!”

[026-120]“But he was first in the field,” Alan said quietly.

[026-121]“What mean ye?”

[026-122]“Why, that he also loves the Lady Margaret, although she slights him.”

[026-123]“He﻿—loves﻿—!” Simon’s hand clenched. “If I find﻿—”

[026-124]“Nay, listen, thou jealous lover! As I came hither I chanced on him, descending the stairway. Methinks he doth play the spy, and if it seems to him that thou art like to win the Countess, he will dispose of thee as best he can.”

[026-125]Simon shrugged.

[026-126]“What can he do! He made his submission long since.”

[026-127]“And ye would trust to his honour, Simon?”

[026-128]“I have as yet no reason﻿—since his submission﻿—for doubting it.”

[026-129]“Save his shifty eyes, and spying ways. I would like to see him safe under lock and key, lad.”

[026-130]“I cannot do that,” Simon answered shortly. “Do ye think I fear him?”

[026-131]“Not I, but the soft-spoken are the most dangerous of all foes. Look well to thyself, Simon.”

[026-132]“Ye think he will slay me?”

[026-133]“Nay, I think he will try to,” Alan riposted. “Or mayhap he will hire some rogue to do it for him, and thus in a little salve his conscience.”

[026-134]Simon smiled.

[026-135]“I doubt that same rogue will find his task hard indeed,” he remarked. “I have ears that hear that which makes no sound, and eyes that see in the dark.”

[026-136]“Still, be more watchful than ever,” Alan warned him. “When do ye go to [[bayeux|Bayeux]]?”

[026-137]“Next week. I leave Geoffrey here, with thy father. Huntingdon must go with me.”

[026-138]“And I.”

[026-139]“And thou.”

[026-140]“When wilt thou return?”

[026-141]“I know not.” Simon sighed faintly. “The message that thy father brought told me that the King had need of me. He waits but to see [[gloucester|Gloucester]] triumph, and Domfront fall to Warwick. Then he will march on Rouen.”

[026-142]“Whom will he leave to govern this land?”

[026-143]“The Lady Margaret hath submitted. She will rule here.”

[026-144]“Some overlord he will appoint.”

[026-145]“Perhaps Salisbury. Who knows?”

[026-146]“Who indeed?” said Alan softly.
