---
description: "Morgan's fleet sails for Panama, the greatest prize of the Spanish Main."
id: ch06
label: "Part I, Chapter VI"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Part I, Chapter VI

[006-001] All night Old Robert tossed nervously in his bed, and his wife lay motionless beside him. At last, when the darkness was changing to silver gray in the window, she rose quietly.

[006-002] “What? Have you not been sleeping, Mother? And where are you going?”

[006-003] “I am going to Henry, now. I must talk with him. Perhaps he will listen to me.” Only a moment she was gone, and then she returned and laid her head on Robert’s arm.

[006-004] “Henry is gone,” she said, and her whole body stiffened a little.

[006-005] “Gone? But how could he do that? Here is his first cowardice, Mother. He was afraid to say goodbye to us. But I am not sorry for his fear, because it holds the sureness of his sorrow. He could not bear to hear the thing of his feeling in words.

[006-006] “Why, Mother!” He was startled at her silence and her coldness. “He will come back to us, Mother, in a little; perhaps when the spring grass is lifting out. Surely he will come back to us. I swear it. Can’t you believe it? He is gone only for a week—a few days. Oh, believe me!

[006-007] “The years are gone from us surely, dear, and now we are as we were—do you remember?—only closer—closer of all the things that have been. We are rich with all the little pictures of the past and the things he played with. They can never go from us while life is here.”

[006-008] She did not weep nor move nor even seem to breathe. “Oh, my wife—[[elizabeth|Elizabeth]]—say that you will believe in his coming, very soon—soon—before you have missed him,” he cried wildly. “Do not lie there silently and lost. He will be here when the Spring comes in. You must believe it, dear—my dear.” Very softly he stroked the still cheek beside him with his great tender fingers.
