---
description: "It was interesting when I dressed before daylight to peep out of"
id: ch-08
label: "Chapter 8: Covering a Multitude of Sins"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[008-001] It was interesting when I dressed before daylight to peep out of

[008-002] window, where my candles were reflected in the black panes like

[008-003] two beacons, and finding all beyond still enshrouded in the

[008-004] indistinctness of last night, to watch how it turned out when the day

[008-005] came on. As the prospect gradually revealed itself and disclosed the

[008-006] scene over which the wind had wandered in the dark, like my memory

[008-007] over my life, I had a pleasure in discovering the unknown objects

[008-008] that had been around me in my sleep. At first they were faintly

[008-009] discernible in the mist, and above them the later stars still

[008-010] glimmered. That pale interval over, the picture began to enlarge and

[008-011] fill up so fast that at every new peep I could have found enough

[008-012] to look at for an hour. Imperceptibly my candles became the only

[008-013] incongruous part of the morning, the dark places in my room all

[008-014] melted away, and the day shone bright upon a cheerful landscape,

[008-015] prominent in which the old Abbey Church, with its massive tower,

[008-016] threw a softer train of shadow on the view than seemed compatible

[008-017] with its rugged character. But so from rough outsides (I hope I have

[008-018] learnt), serene and gentle influences often proceed.

[008-019] Every part of the house was in such order, and every one was so

[008-020] attentive to me, that I had no trouble with my two bunches of keys,

[008-021] though what with trying to remember the contents of each little

[008-022] store-room drawer and cupboard; and what with making notes on a slate

[008-023] about jams, and pickles, and preserves, and bottles, and glass, and

[008-024] china, and a great many other things; and what with being generally a

[008-025] methodical, old-maidish sort of foolish little person, I was so busy

[008-026] that I could not believe it was breakfast-time when I heard the bell

[008-027] ring. Away I ran, however, and made tea, as I had already been

[008-028] installed into the responsibility of the tea-pot; and then, as they

[008-029] were all rather late and nobody was down yet, I thought I would take

[008-030] a peep at the garden and get some knowledge of that too. I found it

[008-031] quite a delightful place—in front, the pretty avenue and drive by

[008-032] which we had approached (and where, by the by, we had cut up the

[008-033] gravel so terribly with our wheels that I asked the gardener to roll

[008-034] it); at the back, the flower-garden, with my darling at her window up

[008-035] there, throwing it open to smile out at me, as if she would have

[008-036] kissed me from that distance. Beyond the flower-garden was a

[008-037] kitchen-garden, and then a paddock, and then a snug little rick-yard,

[008-038] and then a dear little farm-yard. As to the house itself, with its

[008-039] three peaks in the roof; its various-shaped windows, some so large,

[008-040] some so small, and all so pretty; its trellis-work, against the

[008-041] south-front for roses and honey-suckle, and its homely, comfortable,

[008-042] welcoming look—it was, as [[ada-clare|Ada]] said when she came out to meet me with

[008-043] her arm through that of its master, worthy of her cousin John, a bold

[008-044] thing to say, though he only pinched her dear cheek for it.

[008-045] [[harold-skimpole|Mr. Skimpole]] was as agreeable at breakfast as he had been overnight.

[008-046] There was honey on the table, and it led him into a discourse about

[008-047] bees. He had no objection to honey, he said (and I should think he

[008-048] had not, for he seemed to like it), but he protested against the

[008-049] overweening assumptions of bees. He didn’t at all see why the busy

[008-050] bee should be proposed as a model to him; he supposed the bee liked

[008-051] to make honey, or he wouldn’t do it—nobody asked him. It was not

[008-052] necessary for the bee to make such a merit of his tastes. If every

[008-053] confectioner went buzzing about the world banging against everything

[008-054] that came in his way and egotistically calling upon everybody to take

[008-055] notice that he was going to his work and must not be interrupted, the

[008-056] world would be quite an unsupportable place. Then, after all, it was

[008-057] a ridiculous position to be smoked out of your fortune with brimstone

[008-058] as soon as you had made it. You would have a very mean opinion of a

[008-059] Manchester man if he spun cotton for no other purpose. He must say he

[008-060] thought a drone the embodiment of a pleasanter and wiser idea. The

[008-061] drone said unaffectedly, “You will excuse me; I really cannot attend

[008-062] to the shop! I find myself in a world in which there is so much to

[008-063] see and so short a time to see it in that I must take the liberty of

[008-064] looking about me and begging to be provided for by somebody who

[008-065] doesn’t want to look about him.” This appeared to Mr. Skimpole to be

[008-066] the drone philosophy, and he thought it a very good philosophy,

[008-067] always supposing the drone to be willing to be on good terms with the

[008-068] bee, which, so far as he knew, the easy fellow always was, if the

[008-069] consequential creature would only let him, and not be so conceited

[008-070] about his honey!

[008-071] He pursued this fancy with the lightest foot over a variety of ground

[008-072] and made us all merry, though again he seemed to have as serious a

[008-073] meaning in what he said as he was capable of having. I left them

[008-074] still listening to him when I withdrew to attend to my new duties.

[008-075] They had occupied me for some time, and I was passing through the

[008-076] passages on my return with my basket of keys on my arm when Mr.

[008-077] Jarndyce called me into a small room next his bed-chamber, which I

[008-078] found to be in part a little library of books and papers and in part

[008-079] quite a little museum of his boots and shoes and hat-boxes.

[008-080] “Sit down, my dear,” said [[john-jarndyce|Mr. Jarndyce]]. “This, you must know, is the

[008-081] growlery. When I am out of humour, I come and growl here.”

[008-082] “You must be here very seldom, sir,” said I.

[008-083] “Oh, you don’t know me!” he returned. “When I am deceived or

[008-084] disappointed in—the wind, and it’s easterly, I take refuge here. The

[008-085] growlery is the best-used room in the house. You are not aware of

[008-086] half my humours yet. My dear, how you are trembling!”

[008-087] I could not help it; I tried very hard, but being alone with that

[008-088] benevolent presence, and meeting his kind eyes, and feeling so happy

[008-089] and so honoured there, and my heart so full—I kissed his hand. I

[008-090] don’t know what I said, or even that I spoke. He was disconcerted and

[008-091] walked to the window; I almost believed with an intention of jumping

[008-092] out, until he turned and I was reassured by seeing in his eyes what

[008-093] he had gone there to hide. He gently patted me on the head, and I sat

[008-094] down.

[008-095] “There! There!” he said. “That’s over. Pooh! Don’t be foolish.”

[008-096] “It shall not happen again, sir,” I returned, “but at first it is

[008-097] difficult—”

[008-098] “Nonsense!” he said. “It’s easy, easy. Why not? I hear of a good

[008-099] little orphan girl without a protector, and I take it into my head to

[008-100] be that protector. She grows up, and more than justifies my good

[008-101] opinion, and I remain her guardian and her friend. What is there in

[008-102] all this? So, so! Now, we have cleared off old scores, and I have

[008-103] before me thy pleasant, trusting, trusty face again.”

[008-104] I said to myself, “[[esther-summerson|Esther]], my dear, you surprise me! This really is

[008-105] not what I expected of you!” And it had such a good effect that I

[008-106] folded my hands upon my basket and quite recovered myself. Mr.

[008-107] Jarndyce, expressing his approval in his face, began to talk to me as

[008-108] confidentially as if I had been in the habit of conversing with him

[008-109] every morning for I don’t know how long. I almost felt as if I had.

[008-110] “Of course, Esther,” he said, “you don’t understand this [[chancery-court|Chancery]]

[008-111] business?”

[008-112] And of course I shook my head.

[008-113] “I don’t know who does,” he returned. “The lawyers have twisted it

[008-114] into such a state of bedevilment that the original merits of the case

[008-115] have long disappeared from the face of the earth. It’s about a will

[008-116] and the trusts under a will—or it was once. It’s about nothing but

[008-117] costs now. We are always appearing, and disappearing, and swearing,

[008-118] and interrogating, and filing, and cross-filing, and arguing, and

[008-119] sealing, and motioning, and referring, and reporting, and revolving

[008-120] about the Lord Chancellor and all his satellites, and equitably

[008-121] waltzing ourselves off to dusty death, about costs. That’s the great

[008-122] question. All the rest, by some extraordinary means, has melted

[008-123] away.”

[008-124] “But it was, sir,” said I, to bring him back, for he began to rub his

[008-125] head, “about a will?”

[008-126] “Why, yes, it was about a will when it was about anything,” he

[008-127] returned. “A certain Jarndyce, in an evil hour, made a great fortune,

[008-128] and made a great will. In the question how the trusts under that will

[008-129] are to be administered, the fortune left by the will is squandered

[008-130] away; the legatees under the will are reduced to such a miserable

[008-131] condition that they would be sufficiently punished if they had

[008-132] committed an enormous crime in having money left them, and the will

[008-133] itself is made a dead letter. All through the deplorable cause,

[008-134] everything that everybody in it, except one man, knows already is

[008-135] referred to that only one man who don’t know, it to find out—all

[008-136] through the deplorable cause, everybody must have copies, over and

[008-137] over again, of everything that has accumulated about it in the way of

[008-138] cartloads of papers (or must pay for them without having them, which

[008-139] is the usual course, for nobody wants them) and must go down the

[008-140] middle and up again through such an infernal country-dance of costs

[008-141] and fees and nonsense and corruption as was never dreamed of in the

[008-142] wildest visions of a witch’s Sabbath. Equity sends questions to law,

[008-143] law sends questions back to equity; law finds it can’t do this,

[008-144] equity finds it can’t do that; neither can so much as say it can’t

[008-145] do anything, without this solicitor instructing and this counsel

[008-146] appearing for A, and that solicitor instructing and that counsel

[008-147] appearing for B; and so on through the whole alphabet, like the

[008-148] history of the apple pie. And thus, through years and years, and

[008-149] lives and lives, everything goes on, constantly beginning over and

[008-150] over again, and nothing ever ends. And we can’t get out of the suit

[008-151] on any terms, for we are made parties to it, and MUST BE parties to

[008-152] it, whether we like it or not. But it won’t do to think of it! When

[008-153] my great uncle, poor Tom Jarndyce, began to think of it, it was the

[008-154] beginning of the end!”

[008-155] “The Mr. Jarndyce, sir, whose story I have heard?”

[008-156] He nodded gravely. “I was his heir, and this was his house, Esther.

[008-157] When I came here, it was bleak indeed. He had left the signs of his

[008-158] misery upon it.”

[008-159] “How changed it must be now!” I said.

[008-160] “It had been called, before his time, the Peaks. He gave it its

[008-161] present name and lived here shut up, day and night poring over the

[008-162] wicked heaps of papers in the suit and hoping against hope to

[008-163] disentangle it from its mystification and bring it to a close. In the

[008-164] meantime, the place became dilapidated, the wind whistled through the

[008-165] cracked walls, the rain fell through the broken roof, the weeds

[008-166] choked the passage to the rotting door. When I brought what remained

[008-167] of him home here, the brains seemed to me to have been blown out of

[008-168] the house too, it was so shattered and ruined.”

[008-169] He walked a little to and fro after saying this to himself with a

[008-170] shudder, and then looked at me, and brightened, and came and sat down

[008-171] again with his hands in his pockets.

[008-172] “I told you this was the growlery, my dear. Where was I?”

[008-173] I reminded him, at the hopeful change he had made in [[bleak-house|Bleak House]].

[008-174] “Bleak House; true. There is, in that city of [[london|London]] there, some

[008-175] [[inheritance-and-property|property]] of ours which is much at this day what Bleak House was then;

[008-176] I say property of ours, meaning of the suit’s, but I ought to call it

[008-177] the property of costs, for costs is the only power on earth that will

[008-178] ever get anything out of it now or will ever know it for anything but

[008-179] an eyesore and a heartsore. It is a street of perishing blind houses,

[008-180] with their eyes stoned out, without a pane of glass, without so much

[008-181] as a window-frame, with the bare blank shutters tumbling from their

[008-182] hinges and falling asunder, the iron rails peeling away in flakes of

[008-183] rust, the chimneys sinking in, the stone steps to every door (and

[008-184] every door might be death’s door) turning stagnant green, the very

[008-185] crutches on which the ruins are propped decaying. Although Bleak

[008-186] House was not in Chancery, its master was, and it was stamped with

[008-187] the same seal. These are the Great Seal’s impressions, my dear, all

[008-188] over England—the children know them!”

[008-189] “How changed it is!” I said again.

[008-190] “Why, so it is,” he answered much more cheerfully; “and it is wisdom

[008-191] in you to keep me to the bright side of the picture.” (The idea of my

[008-192] wisdom!) “These are things I never talk about or even think about,

[008-193] excepting in the growlery here. If you consider it right to mention

[008-194] them to [[richard-carstone|Rick]] and Ada,” looking seriously at me, “you can. I leave it

[008-195] to your discretion, Esther.”

[008-196] “I hope, sir—” said I.

[008-197] “I think you had better call me guardian, my dear.”

[008-198] I felt that I was choking again—I taxed myself with it, “Esther,

[008-199] now, you know you are!”—when he feigned to say this slightly, as if

[008-200] it were a whim instead of a thoughtful tenderness. But I gave the

[008-201] housekeeping keys the least shake in the world as a reminder to

[008-202] myself, and folding my hands in a still more determined manner on the

[008-203] basket, looked at him quietly.

[008-204] “I hope, guardian,” said I, “that you may not trust too much to my

[008-205] discretion. I hope you may not mistake me. I am afraid it will be a

[008-206] disappointment to you to know that I am not clever, but it really is

[008-207] the truth, and you would soon find it out if I had not the honesty to

[008-208] confess it.”

[008-209] He did not seem at all disappointed; quite the contrary. He told me,

[008-210] with a smile all over his face, that he knew me very well indeed and

[008-211] that I was quite clever enough for him.

[008-212] “I hope I may turn out so,” said I, “but I am much afraid of it,

[008-213] guardian.”

[008-214] “You are clever enough to be the good little woman of our lives here,

[008-215] my dear,” he returned playfully; “the little old woman of the child’s

[008-216] (I don’t mean Skimpole’s) rhyme:

[008-217] “‘Little old woman, and whither so high?’

[008-218] ‘To sweep the cobwebs out of the sky.’”

[008-219] “You will sweep them so neatly out of OUR sky in the course of your

[008-220] housekeeping, Esther, that one of these days we shall have to abandon

[008-221] the growlery and nail up the door.”

[008-222] This was the beginning of my being called Old Woman, and Little Old

[008-223] Woman, and Cobweb, and Mrs. Shipton, and Mother Hubbard, and Dame

[008-224] Durden, and so many names of that sort that my own name soon became

[008-225] quite lost among them.

[008-226] “However,” said Mr. Jarndyce, “to return to our gossip. Here’s Rick,

[008-227] a fine young fellow full of promise. What’s to be done with him?”

[008-228] Oh, my goodness, the idea of asking my advice on such a point!

[008-229] “Here he is, Esther,” said Mr. Jarndyce, comfortably putting his

[008-230] hands into his pockets and stretching out his legs. “He must have a

[008-231] [[professional-identity|profession]]; he must make some choice for himself. There will be a

[008-232] world more wiglomeration about it, I suppose, but it must be done.”

[008-233] “More what, guardian?” said I.

[008-234] “More wiglomeration,” said he. “It’s the only name I know for the

[008-235] thing. He is a ward in Chancery, my dear. [[kenge-and-carboy|Kenge and Carboy]] will have

[008-236] something to say about it; Master Somebody—a sort of ridiculous

[008-237] sexton, digging graves for the merits of causes in a back room at the

[008-238] end of Quality Court, [[chancery-lane|Chancery Lane]]—will have something to say about

[008-239] it; counsel will have something to say about it; the Chancellor will

[008-240] have something to say about it; the satellites will have something to

[008-241] say about it; they will all have to be handsomely fee’d, all round,

[008-242] about it; the whole thing will be vastly ceremonious, wordy,

[008-243] unsatisfactory, and expensive, and I call it, in general,

[008-244] wiglomeration. How mankind ever came to be afflicted with

[008-245] Wiglomeration, or for whose sins these young people ever fell into a

[008-246] pit of it, I don’t know; so it is.”

[008-247] He began to rub his head again and to hint that he felt the wind. But

[008-248] it was a delightful instance of his kindness towards me that whether

[008-249] he rubbed his head, or walked about, or did both, his face was sure

[008-250] to recover its benignant expression as it looked at mine; and he was

[008-251] sure to turn comfortable again and put his hands in his pockets and

[008-252] stretch out his legs.

[008-253] “Perhaps it would be best, first of all,” said I, “to ask Mr. Richard

[008-254] what he inclines to himself.”

[008-255] “Exactly so,” he returned. “That’s what I mean! You know, just

[008-256] accustom yourself to talk it over, with your tact and in your quiet

[008-257] way, with him and Ada, and see what you all make of it. We are sure

[008-258] to come at the heart of the matter by your means, little woman.”

[008-259] I really was frightened at the thought of the importance I was

[008-260] attaining and the number of things that were being confided to me. I

[008-261] had not meant this at all; I had meant that he should speak to

[008-262] Richard. But of course I said nothing in reply except that I would do

[008-263] my best, though I feared (I really felt it necessary to repeat this)

[008-264] that he thought me much more sagacious than I was. At which my

[008-265] guardian only laughed the pleasantest laugh I ever heard.

[008-266] “Come!” he said, rising and pushing back his chair. “I think we may

[008-267] have done with the growlery for one day! Only a concluding word.

[008-268] Esther, my dear, do you wish to ask me anything?”

[008-269] He looked so attentively at me that I looked attentively at him and

[008-270] felt sure I understood him.

[008-271] “[[About]] myself, sir?” said I.

[008-272] “Yes.”

[008-273] “Guardian,” said I, venturing to put my hand, which was suddenly

[008-274] colder than I could have wished, in his, “nothing! I am quite sure

[008-275] that if there were anything I ought to know or had any need to know,

[008-276] I should not have to ask you to tell it to me. If my whole reliance

[008-277] and confidence were not placed in you, I must have a hard heart

[008-278] indeed. I have nothing to ask you, nothing in the world.”

[008-279] He drew my hand through his arm and we went away to look for Ada.

[008-280] From that hour I felt quite easy with him, quite unreserved, quite

[008-281] content to know no more, quite happy.

[008-282] We lived, at first, rather a busy life at Bleak House, for we had to

[008-283] become acquainted with many residents in and out of the neighbourhood

[008-284] who knew Mr. Jarndyce. It seemed to Ada and me that everybody knew

[008-285] him who wanted to do anything with anybody else’s money. It amazed us

[008-286] when we began to sort his [[document-and-letter|letters]] and to answer some of them for him

[008-287] in the growlery of a morning to find how the great object of the

[008-288] lives of nearly all his correspondents appeared to be to form

[008-289] themselves into committees for getting in and laying out money. The

[008-290] ladies were as desperate as the gentlemen; indeed, I think they were

[008-291] even more so. They threw themselves into committees in the most

[008-292] impassioned manner and collected subscriptions with a vehemence quite

[008-293] extraordinary. It appeared to us that some of them must pass their

[008-294] whole lives in dealing out subscription-cards to the whole

[008-295] post-office directory—shilling cards, half-crown cards,

[008-296] half-sovereign cards, penny cards. They wanted everything. They

[008-297] wanted wearing apparel, they wanted linen rags, they wanted money,

[008-298] they wanted coals, they wanted soup, they wanted interest, they

[008-299] wanted autographs, they wanted flannel, they wanted whatever Mr.

[008-300] Jarndyce had—or had not. Their objects were as various as their

[008-301] demands. They were going to raise new buildings, they were going to

[008-302] pay off debts on old buildings, they were going to establish in a

[008-303] picturesque building (engraving of proposed west elevation attached)

[008-304] the Sisterhood of Mediaeval Marys, they were going to give a

[008-305] testimonial to Mrs. Jellyby, they were going to have their

[008-306] secretary’s portrait painted and presented to his mother-in-law,

[008-307] whose deep devotion to him was well known, they were going to get up

[008-308] everything, I really believe, from five hundred thousand tracts to an

[008-309] annuity and from a marble monument to a silver tea-pot. They took a

[008-310] multitude of titles. They were the Women of England, the Daughters of

[008-311] Britain, the Sisters of all the cardinal virtues separately, the

[008-312] Females of America, the Ladies of a hundred denominations. They

[008-313] appeared to be always excited about canvassing and electing. They

[008-314] seemed to our poor wits, and according to their own accounts, to be

[008-315] constantly polling people by tens of thousands, yet never bringing

[008-316] their candidates in for anything. It made our heads ache to think, on

[008-317] the whole, what feverish lives they must lead.

[008-318] Among the ladies who were most distinguished for this rapacious

[008-319] benevolence (if I may use the expression) was a Mrs. Pardiggle, who

[008-320] seemed, as I judged from the number of her letters to Mr. Jarndyce,

[008-321] to be almost as powerful a correspondent as Mrs. Jellyby herself. We

[008-322] observed that the wind always changed when Mrs. Pardiggle became the

[008-323] subject of conversation and that it invariably interrupted Mr.

[008-324] Jarndyce and prevented his going any farther, when he had remarked

[008-325] that there were two classes of charitable people; one, the people who

[008-326] did a little and made a great deal of noise; the other, the people

[008-327] who did a great deal and made no noise at all. We were therefore

[008-328] curious to see Mrs. Pardiggle, suspecting her to be a type of the

[008-329] former class, and were glad when she called one day with her five

[008-330] young sons.

[008-331] She was a formidable style of lady with spectacles, a prominent nose,

[008-332] and a loud voice, who had the effect of wanting a great deal of room.

[008-333] And she really did, for she knocked down little chairs with her

[008-334] skirts that were quite a great way off. As only Ada and I were at

[008-335] home, we received her timidly, for she seemed to come in like cold

[008-336] weather and to make the little Pardiggles blue as they followed.

[008-337] “These, young ladies,” said Mrs. Pardiggle with great volubility

[008-338] after the first salutations, “are my five boys. You may have seen

[008-339] their names in a printed subscription list (perhaps more than one) in

[008-340] the possession of our esteemed friend Mr. Jarndyce. Egbert, my eldest

[008-341] (twelve), is the boy who sent out his pocket-money, to the amount of

[008-342] five and threepence, to the Tockahoopo Indians. Oswald, my second

[008-343] (ten and a half), is the child who contributed two and nine-pence to

[008-344] the Great National Smithers Testimonial. Francis, my third (nine),

[008-345] one and sixpence halfpenny; Felix, my fourth (seven), eightpence to

[008-346] the Superannuated Widows; Alfred, my youngest (five), has voluntarily

[008-347] enrolled himself in the Infant Bonds of Joy, and is pledged never,

[008-348] through life, to use tobacco in any form.”

[008-349] We had never seen such dissatisfied children. It was not merely that

[008-350] they were weazened and shrivelled—though they were certainly that

[008-351] too—but they looked absolutely ferocious with discontent. At the

[008-352] mention of the Tockahoopo Indians, I could really have supposed

[008-353] Egbert to be one of the most baleful members of that tribe, he gave

[008-354] me such a savage frown. The face of each child, as the amount of his

[008-355] contribution was mentioned, darkened in a peculiarly vindictive

[008-356] manner, but his was by far the worst. I must except, however, the

[008-357] little recruit into the Infant Bonds of Joy, who was stolidly and

[008-358] evenly miserable.

[008-359] “You have been visiting, I understand,” said Mrs. Pardiggle, “at Mrs.

[008-360] Jellyby’s?”

[008-361] We said yes, we had passed one night there.

[008-362] “Mrs. Jellyby,” pursued the lady, always speaking in the same

[008-363] demonstrative, loud, hard tone, so that her voice impressed my fancy

[008-364] as if it had a sort of spectacles on too—and I may take the

[008-365] opportunity of remarking that her spectacles were made the less

[008-366] engaging by her eyes being what Ada called “choking eyes,” meaning

[008-367] very prominent—“Mrs. Jellyby is a benefactor to society and deserves

[008-368] a helping hand. My boys have contributed to the African

[008-369] project—Egbert, one and six, being the entire allowance of nine

[008-370] weeks; Oswald, one and a penny halfpenny, being the same; the rest,

[008-371] according to their little means. Nevertheless, I do not go with Mrs.

[008-372] Jellyby in all things. I do not go with Mrs. Jellyby in her treatment

[008-373] of her young family. It has been noticed. It has been observed that

[008-374] her young family are excluded from participation in the objects to

[008-375] which she is devoted. She may be right, she may be wrong; but, right

[008-376] or wrong, this is not my course with MY young family. I take them

[008-377] everywhere.”

[008-378] I was afterwards convinced (and so was Ada) that from the

[008-379] ill-conditioned eldest child, these words extorted a sharp yell. He

[008-380] turned it off into a yawn, but it began as a yell.

[008-381] “They attend matins with me (very prettily done) at half-past six

[008-382] o’clock in the morning all the year round, including of course the

[008-383] depth of winter,” said Mrs. Pardiggle rapidly, “and they are with me

[008-384] during the revolving duties of the day. I am a School lady, I am a

[008-385] Visiting lady, I am a Reading lady, I am a Distributing lady; I am on

[008-386] the local Linen Box Committee and many general committees; and my

[008-387] canvassing alone is very extensive—perhaps no one’s more so. But

[008-388] they are my companions everywhere; and by these means they acquire

[008-389] that knowledge of the poor, and that capacity of doing charitable

[008-390] business in general—in short, that taste for the sort of

[008-391] thing—which will render them in after life a service to their

[008-392] neighbours and a satisfaction to themselves. My young family are not

[008-393] frivolous; they expend the entire amount of their allowance in

[008-394] subscriptions, under my direction; and they have attended as many

[008-395] public meetings and listened to as many lectures, orations, and

[008-396] discussions as generally fall to the lot of few grown people. Alfred

[008-397] (five), who, as I mentioned, has of his own election joined the

[008-398] Infant Bonds of Joy, was one of the very few children who manifested

[008-399] consciousness on that occasion after a fervid address of two hours

[008-400] from the chairman of the evening.”

[008-401] Alfred glowered at us as if he never could, or would, forgive the

[008-402] injury of that night.

[008-403] “You may have observed, Miss Summerson,” said Mrs. Pardiggle, “in

[008-404] some of the lists to which I have referred, in the possession of our

[008-405] esteemed friend Mr. Jarndyce, that the names of my young family are

[008-406] concluded with the name of O. A. Pardiggle, F.R.S., one pound. That

[008-407] is their father. We usually observe the same routine. I put down my

[008-408] mite first; then my young family enrol their contributions, according

[008-409] to their ages and their little means; and then Mr. Pardiggle brings

[008-410] up the rear. Mr. Pardiggle is happy to throw in his limited donation,

[008-411] under my direction; and thus things are made not only pleasant to

[008-412] ourselves, but, we trust, improving to others.”

[008-413] Suppose Mr. Pardiggle were to dine with Mr. Jellyby, and suppose Mr.

[008-414] Jellyby were to relieve his mind after dinner to Mr. Pardiggle, would

[008-415] Mr. Pardiggle, in return, make any confidential communication to Mr.

[008-416] Jellyby? I was quite confused to find myself thinking this, but it

[008-417] came into my head.

[008-418] “You are very pleasantly situated here!” said Mrs. Pardiggle.

[008-419] We were glad to change the subject, and going to the window, pointed

[008-420] out the beauties of the prospect, on which the spectacles appeared to

[008-421] me to rest with curious indifference.

[008-422] “You know Mr. Gusher?” said our visitor.

[008-423] We were obliged to say that we had not the pleasure of Mr. Gusher’s

[008-424] acquaintance.

[008-425] “The loss is yours, I assure you,” said Mrs. Pardiggle with her

[008-426] commanding deportment. “He is a very fervid, impassioned

[008-427] speaker—full of fire! Stationed in a waggon on this lawn, now,

[008-428] which, from the shape of the land, is naturally adapted to a public

[008-429] meeting, he would improve almost any occasion you could mention for

[008-430] hours and hours! By this time, young ladies,” said Mrs. Pardiggle,

[008-431] moving back to her chair and overturning, as if by invisible agency,

[008-432] a little round table at a considerable distance with my work-basket

[008-433] on it, “by this time you have found me out, I dare say?”

[008-434] This was really such a confusing question that Ada looked at me in

[008-435] perfect dismay. As to the guilty nature of my own consciousness after

[008-436] what I had been thinking, it must have been expressed in the colour

[008-437] of my cheeks.

[008-438] “Found out, I mean,” said Mrs. Pardiggle, “the prominent point in my

[008-439] character. I am aware that it is so prominent as to be discoverable

[008-440] immediately. I lay myself open to detection, I know. Well! I freely

[008-441] admit, I am a woman of business. I love hard work; I enjoy hard work.

[008-442] The excitement does me good. I am so accustomed and inured to hard

[008-443] work that I don’t know what fatigue is.”

[008-444] We murmured that it was very astonishing and very gratifying, or

[008-445] something to that effect. I don’t think we knew what it was either,

[008-446] but this is what our politeness expressed.

[008-447] “I do not understand what it is to be tired; you cannot tire me if

[008-448] you try!” said Mrs. Pardiggle. “The quantity of exertion (which is no

[008-449] exertion to me), the amount of business (which I regard as nothing),

[008-450] that I go through sometimes astonishes myself. I have seen my young

[008-451] family, and Mr. Pardiggle, quite worn out with witnessing it, when I

[008-452] may truly say I have been as fresh as a lark!”

[008-453] If that dark-visaged eldest boy could look more malicious than he had

[008-454] already looked, this was the time when he did it. I observed that he

[008-455] doubled his right fist and delivered a secret blow into the crown of

[008-456] his cap, which was under his left arm.

[008-457] “This gives me a great advantage when I am making my rounds,” said

[008-458] Mrs. Pardiggle. “If I find a person unwilling to hear what I have to

[008-459] say, I tell that person directly, ‘I am incapable of fatigue, my good

[008-460] friend, I am never tired, and I mean to go on until I have done.’ It

[008-461] answers admirably! Miss Summerson, I hope I shall have your

[008-462] assistance in my visiting rounds immediately, and Miss Clare’s very

[008-463] soon.”

[008-464] At first I tried to excuse myself for the present on the general

[008-465] ground of having occupations to attend to which I must not neglect.

[008-466] But as this was an ineffectual protest, I then said, more

[008-467] particularly, that I was not sure of my qualifications. That I was

[008-468] inexperienced in the art of adapting my mind to minds very

[008-469] differently situated, and addressing them from suitable points of

[008-470] view. That I had not that delicate knowledge of the heart which must

[008-471] be essential to such a work. That I had much to learn, myself, before

[008-472] I could teach others, and that I could not confide in my good

[008-473] intentions alone. For these reasons I thought it best to be as useful

[008-474] as I could, and to render what kind services I could to those

[008-475] immediately about me, and to try to let that circle of duty gradually

[008-476] and naturally expand itself. All this I said with anything but

[008-477] confidence, because Mrs. Pardiggle was much older than I, and had

[008-478] great experience, and was so very military in her manners.

[008-479] “You are wrong, Miss Summerson,” said she, “but perhaps you are not

[008-480] equal to hard work or the excitement of it, and that makes a vast

[008-481] difference. If you would like to see how I go through my work, I am

[008-482] now about—with my young family—to visit a brickmaker in the

[008-483] neighbourhood (a very bad character) and shall be glad to take you

[008-484] with me. Miss Clare also, if she will do me the favour.”

[008-485] Ada and I interchanged looks, and as we were going out in any case,

[008-486] accepted the offer. When we hastily returned from putting on our

[008-487] bonnets, we found the young family languishing in a corner and Mrs.

[008-488] Pardiggle sweeping about the room, knocking down nearly all the light

[008-489] objects it contained. Mrs. Pardiggle took possession of Ada, and I

[008-490] followed with the family.

[008-491] Ada told me afterwards that Mrs. Pardiggle talked in the same loud

[008-492] tone (that, indeed, I overheard) all the way to the brickmaker’s

[008-493] about an exciting contest which she had for two or three years waged

[008-494] against another lady relative to the bringing in of their rival

[008-495] candidates for a pension somewhere. There had been a quantity of

[008-496] printing, and promising, and proxying, and polling, and it appeared

[008-497] to have imparted great liveliness to all concerned, except the

[008-498] pensioners—who were not elected yet.

[008-499] I am very fond of being confided in by children and am happy in being

[008-500] usually favoured in that respect, but on this occasion it gave me

[008-501] great uneasiness. As soon as we were out of doors, Egbert, with the

[008-502] manner of a little footpad, demanded a shilling of me on the ground

[008-503] that his pocket-money was “boned” from him. On my pointing out the

[008-504] great impropriety of the word, especially in connexion with his

[008-505] parent (for he added sulkily “By her!”), he pinched me and said, “Oh,

[008-506] then! Now! Who are you! YOU wouldn’t like it, I think? What does she

[008-507] make a sham for, and pretend to give me money, and take it away

[008-508] again? Why do you call it my allowance, and never let me spend it?”

[008-509] These exasperating questions so inflamed his mind and the minds of

[008-510] Oswald and Francis that they all pinched me at once, and in a

[008-511] dreadfully expert way—screwing up such little pieces of my arms that

[008-512] I could hardly forbear crying out. Felix, at the same time, stamped

[008-513] upon my toes. And the Bond of Joy, who on account of always having

[008-514] the whole of his little income anticipated stood in fact pledged to

[008-515] abstain from cakes as well as tobacco, so swelled with grief and rage

[008-516] when we passed a pastry-cook’s shop that he terrified me by becoming

[008-517] purple. I never underwent so much, both in body and mind, in the

[008-518] course of a walk with young people as from these unnaturally

[008-519] constrained children when they paid me the compliment of being

[008-520] natural.

[008-521] I was glad when we came to the brickmaker’s house, though it was one

[008-522] of a cluster of wretched hovels in a brick-field, with pigsties close

[008-523] to the broken windows and miserable little gardens before the doors

[008-524] growing nothing but stagnant pools. Here and there an old tub was put

[008-525] to catch the droppings of rain-water from a roof, or they were banked

[008-526] up with mud into a little pond like a large dirt-pie. At the doors

[008-527] and windows some men and women lounged or prowled about, and took

[008-528] little notice of us except to laugh to one another or to say

[008-529] something as we passed about gentlefolks minding their own business

[008-530] and not troubling their heads and muddying their shoes with coming to

[008-531] look after other people’s.

[008-532] Mrs. Pardiggle, leading the way with a great show of moral

[008-533] determination and talking with much volubility about the untidy

[008-534] habits of the people (though I doubted if the best of us could have

[008-535] been tidy in such a place), conducted us into a cottage at the

[008-536] farthest corner, the ground-floor room of which we nearly filled.

[008-537] Besides ourselves, there were in this damp, offensive room a woman

[008-538] with a black eye, nursing a poor little gasping baby by the fire; a

[008-539] man, all stained with clay and mud and looking very dissipated, lying

[008-540] at full length on the ground, smoking a pipe; a powerful young man

[008-541] fastening a collar on a dog; and a bold girl doing some kind of

[008-542] washing in very dirty water. They all looked up at us as we came in,

[008-543] and the woman seemed to turn her face towards the fire as if to hide

[008-544] her bruised eye; nobody gave us any welcome.

[008-545] “Well, my friends,” said Mrs. Pardiggle, but her voice had not a

[008-546] friendly sound, I thought; it was much too business-like and

[008-547] systematic. “How do you do, all of you? I am here again. I told you,

[008-548] you couldn’t tire me, you know. I am fond of hard work, and am true

[008-549] to my word.”

[008-550] “There an’t,” growled the man on the floor, whose head rested on his

[008-551] hand as he stared at us, “any more on you to come in, is there?”

[008-552] “No, my friend,” said Mrs. Pardiggle, seating herself on one stool

[008-553] and knocking down another. “We are all here.”

[008-554] “Because I thought there warn’t enough of you, perhaps?” said the

[008-555] man, with his pipe between his lips as he looked round upon us.

[008-556] The young man and the girl both laughed. Two friends of the young

[008-557] man, whom we had attracted to the doorway and who stood there with

[008-558] their hands in their pockets, echoed the laugh noisily.

[008-559] “You can’t tire me, good people,” said Mrs. Pardiggle to these

[008-560] latter. “I enjoy hard work, and the harder you make mine, the better

[008-561] I like it.”

[008-562] “Then make it easy for her!” growled the man upon the floor. “I wants

[008-563] it done, and over. I wants a end of these liberties took with my

[008-564] place. I wants an end of being drawed like a badger. Now you’re

[008-565] a-going to poll-pry and question according to custom—I know what

[008-566] you’re a-going to be up to. Well! You haven’t got no occasion to be

[008-567] up to it. I’ll save you the trouble. Is my daughter a-washin? Yes,

[008-568] she IS a-washin. Look at the water. Smell it! That’s wot we drinks.

[008-569] How do you like it, and what do you think of gin instead! An’t my

[008-570] place dirty? Yes, it is dirty—it’s nat’rally dirty, and it’s

[008-571] nat’rally onwholesome; and we’ve had five dirty and onwholesome

[008-572] children, as is all dead infants, and so much the better for them,

[008-573] and for us besides. Have I read the little book wot you left? No, I

[008-574] an’t read the little book wot you left. There an’t nobody here as

[008-575] knows how to read it; and if there wos, it wouldn’t be suitable to

[008-576] me. It’s a book fit for a babby, and I’m not a babby. If you was to

[008-577] leave me a doll, I shouldn’t nuss it. How have I been conducting of

[008-578] myself? Why, I’ve been drunk for three days; and I’da been drunk four

[008-579] if I’da had the money. Don’t I never mean for to go to church? No, I

[008-580] don’t never mean for to go to church. I shouldn’t be expected there,

[008-581] if I did; the beadle’s too gen-teel for me. And how did my wife get

[008-582] that black eye? Why, I give it her; and if she says I didn’t, she’s a

[008-583] Lie!”

[008-584] He had pulled his pipe out of his mouth to say all this, and he now

[008-585] turned over on his other side and smoked again. Mrs. Pardiggle, who

[008-586] had been regarding him through her spectacles with a forcible

[008-587] composure, calculated, I could not help thinking, to increase his

[008-588] antagonism, pulled out a good book as if it were a constable’s staff

[008-589] and took the whole family into custody. I mean into religious

[008-590] custody, of course; but she really did it as if she were an

[008-591] inexorable moral policeman carrying them all off to a station-house.

[008-592] Ada and I were very uncomfortable. We both felt intrusive and out of

[008-593] place, and we both thought that Mrs. Pardiggle would have got on

[008-594] infinitely better if she had not had such a mechanical way of taking

[008-595] possession of people. The children sulked and stared; the family took

[008-596] no notice of us whatever, except when the young man made the dog

[008-597] bark, which he usually did when Mrs. Pardiggle was most emphatic. We

[008-598] both felt painfully sensible that between us and these people there

[008-599] was an iron barrier which could not be removed by our new friend. By

[008-600] whom or how it could be removed, we did not know, but we knew that.

[008-601] Even what she read and said seemed to us to be ill-chosen for such

[008-602] auditors, if it had been imparted ever so modestly and with ever so

[008-603] much tact. As to the little book to which the man on the floor had

[008-604] referred, we acquired a knowledge of it afterwards, and Mr. Jarndyce

[008-605] said he doubted if Robinson Crusoe could have read it, though he had

[008-606] had no other on his desolate island.

[008-607] We were much relieved, under these circumstances, when Mrs. Pardiggle

[008-608] left off.

[008-609] The man on the floor, then turning his head round again, said

[008-610] morosely, “Well! You’ve done, have you?”

[008-611] “For to-day, I have, my friend. But I am never fatigued. I shall come

[008-612] to you again in your regular order,” returned Mrs. Pardiggle with

[008-613] demonstrative cheerfulness.

[008-614] “So long as you goes now,” said he, folding his arms and shutting his

[008-615] eyes with an oath, “you may do wot you like!”

[008-616] Mrs. Pardiggle accordingly rose and made a little vortex in the

[008-617] confined room from which the pipe itself very narrowly escaped.

[008-618] Taking one of her young family in each hand, and telling the others

[008-619] to follow closely, and expressing her hope that the brickmaker and

[008-620] all his house would be improved when she saw them next, she then

[008-621] proceeded to another cottage. I hope it is not unkind in me to say

[008-622] that she certainly did make, in this as in everything else, a show

[008-623] that was not conciliatory of doing charity by wholesale and of

[008-624] dealing in it to a large extent.

[008-625] She supposed that we were following her, but as soon as the space was

[008-626] left clear, we approached the woman sitting by the fire to ask if the

[008-627] baby were ill.

[008-628] She only looked at it as it lay on her lap. We had observed before

[008-629] that when she looked at it she covered her discoloured eye with her

[008-630] hand, as though she wished to separate any association with noise and

[008-631] violence and ill treatment from the poor little child.

[008-632] Ada, whose gentle heart was moved by its appearance, bent down to

[008-633] touch its little face. As she did so, I saw what happened and drew

[008-634] her back. The child died.

[008-635] “Oh, Esther!” cried Ada, sinking on her knees beside it. “Look here!

[008-636] Oh, Esther, my love, the little thing! The suffering, quiet, pretty

[008-637] little thing! I am so sorry for it. I am so sorry for the mother. I

[008-638] never saw a sight so pitiful as this before! Oh, baby, baby!”

[008-639] Such compassion, such gentleness, as that with which she bent down

[008-640] weeping and put her hand upon the mother’s might have softened any

[008-641] mother’s heart that ever beat. The woman at first gazed at her in

[008-642] astonishment and then burst into tears.

[008-643] Presently I took the light burden from her lap, did what I could to

[008-644] make the baby’s rest the prettier and gentler, laid it on a shelf,

[008-645] and covered it with my own handkerchief. We tried to comfort the

[008-646] mother, and we whispered to her what Our Saviour said of children.

[008-647] She answered nothing, but sat weeping—weeping very much.

[008-648] When I turned, I found that the young man had taken out the dog and

[008-649] was standing at the door looking in upon us with dry eyes, but quiet.

[008-650] The girl was quiet too and sat in a corner looking on the ground. The

[008-651] man had risen. He still smoked his pipe with an air of defiance, but

[008-652] he was silent.

[008-653] An ugly woman, very poorly clothed, hurried in while I was glancing

[008-654] at them, and coming straight up to the mother, said, “Jenny! Jenny!”

[008-655] The mother rose on being so addressed and fell upon the woman’s neck.

[008-656] She also had upon her face and arms the marks of ill usage. She had

[008-657] no kind of grace about her, but the grace of sympathy; but when she

[008-658] condoled with the woman, and her own tears fell, she wanted no

[008-659] beauty. I say condoled, but her only words were “Jenny! Jenny!” All

[008-660] the rest was in the tone in which she said them.

[008-661] I thought it very touching to see these two women, coarse and shabby

[008-662] and beaten, so united; to see what they could be to one another; to

[008-663] see how they felt for one another, how the heart of each to each was

[008-664] softened by the hard trials of their lives. I think the best side of

[008-665] such people is almost hidden from us. What the poor are to the poor

[008-666] is little known, excepting to themselves and God.

[008-667] We felt it better to withdraw and leave them uninterrupted. We stole

[008-668] out quietly and without notice from any one except the man. He was

[008-669] leaning against the wall near the door, and finding that there was

[008-670] scarcely room for us to pass, went out before us. He seemed to want

[008-671] to hide that he did this on our account, but we perceived that he

[008-672] did, and thanked him. He made no answer.

[008-673] Ada was so full of grief all the way home, and Richard, whom we found

[008-674] at home, was so distressed to see her in tears (though he said to me,

[008-675] when she was not present, how beautiful it was too!), that we

[008-676] arranged to return at night with some little comforts and repeat our

[008-677] visit at the brick-maker’s house. We said as little as we could to

[008-678] Mr. Jarndyce, but the wind changed directly.

[008-679] Richard accompanied us at night to the scene of our morning

[008-680] expedition. On our way there, we had to pass a noisy drinking-house,

[008-681] where a number of men were flocking about the door. Among them, and

[008-682] prominent in some dispute, was the father of the little child. At a

[008-683] short distance, we passed the young man and the dog, in congenial

[008-684] company. The sister was standing laughing and talking with some other

[008-685] young women at the corner of the row of cottages, but she seemed

[008-686] ashamed and turned away as we went by.

[008-687] We left our escort within sight of the brickmaker’s dwelling and

[008-688] proceeded by ourselves. When we came to the door, we found the woman

[008-689] who had brought such consolation with her standing there looking

[008-690] anxiously out.

[008-691] “It’s you, young ladies, is it?” she said in a whisper. “I’m

[008-692] a-watching for my master. My heart’s in my mouth. If he was to catch

[008-693] me away from home, he’d pretty near murder me.”

[008-694] “Do you mean your husband?” said I.

[008-695] “Yes, miss, my master. Jenny’s asleep, quite worn out. She’s scarcely

[008-696] had the child off her lap, poor thing, these seven days and nights,

[008-697] except when I’ve been able to take it for a minute or two.”

[008-698] As she gave way for us, she went softly in and put what we had

[008-699] brought near the miserable bed on which the mother slept. No effort

[008-700] had been made to clean the room—it seemed in its nature almost

[008-701] hopeless of being clean; but the small waxen form from which so much

[008-702] solemnity diffused itself had been composed afresh, and washed, and

[008-703] neatly dressed in some fragments of white linen; and on my

[008-704] handkerchief, which still covered the poor baby, a little bunch of

[008-705] sweet herbs had been laid by the same rough, scarred hands, so

[008-706] lightly, so tenderly!

[008-707] “May heaven reward you!” we said to her. “You are a good woman.”

[008-708] “Me, young ladies?” she returned with surprise. “Hush! Jenny, Jenny!”

[008-709] The mother had moaned in her sleep and moved. The sound of the

[008-710] familiar voice seemed to calm her again. She was quiet once more.

[008-711] How little I thought, when I raised my handkerchief to look upon the

[008-712] tiny sleeper underneath and seemed to see a halo shine around the

[008-713] child through Ada’s drooping hair as her pity bent her head—how

[008-714] little I thought in whose unquiet bosom that handkerchief would come

[008-715] to lie after covering the motionless and peaceful breast! I only

[008-716] thought that perhaps the Angel of the child might not be all

[008-717] unconscious of the woman who replaced it with so compassionate a

[008-718] hand; not all unconscious of her presently, when we had taken leave,

[008-719] and left her at the door, by turns looking, and listening in terror

[008-720] for herself, and saying in her old soothing manner, “Jenny, Jenny!”
