---
description: "While Esther sleeps, and while Esther wakes, it is still wet weather"
id: ch-07
label: "Chapter 7: The Ghost’s Walk"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[007-001] While [[esther-summerson|Esther]] sleeps, and while Esther wakes, it is still wet weather

[007-002] down at the place in Lincolnshire. The rain is ever falling—drip,

[007-003] drip, drip—by day and night upon the broad flagged terrace-pavement,

[007-004] the Ghost’s Walk. The weather is so very bad down in Lincolnshire

[007-005] that the liveliest imagination can scarcely apprehend its ever being

[007-006] fine again. Not that there is any superabundant life of imagination

[007-007] on the spot, for [[sir-leicester-dedlock|Sir Leicester]] is not here (and, truly, even if he

[007-008] were, would not do much for it in that particular), but is in Paris

[007-009] with my Lady; and solitude, with dusky wings, sits brooding upon

[007-010] [[chesney-wold|Chesney Wold]].

[007-011] There may be some motions of fancy among the lower animals at Chesney

[007-012] Wold. The horses in the stables—the long stables in a barren,

[007-013] red-brick court-yard, where there is a great bell in a turret, and a

[007-014] clock with a large face, which the pigeons who live near it and who

[007-015] love to perch upon its shoulders seem to be always consulting—THEY

[007-016] may contemplate some mental pictures of fine weather on occasions,

[007-017] and may be better artists at them than the grooms. The old roan, so

[007-018] famous for cross-country work, turning his large eyeball to the

[007-019] grated window near his rack, may remember the fresh leaves that

[007-020] glisten there at other times and the scents that stream in, and may

[007-021] have a fine run with the hounds, while the human helper, clearing out

[007-022] the next stall, never stirs beyond his pitchfork and birch-broom. The

[007-023] grey, whose place is opposite the door and who with an impatient

[007-024] rattle of his halter pricks his ears and turns his head so wistfully

[007-025] when it is opened, and to whom the opener says, “Woa grey, then,

[007-026] steady! Noabody wants you to-day!” may know it quite as well as the

[007-027] man. The whole seemingly monotonous and uncompanionable half-dozen,

[007-028] stabled together, may pass the long wet hours when the door is shut

[007-029] in livelier communication than is held in the servants’ hall or at

[007-030] the Dedlock Arms, or may even beguile the time by improving (perhaps

[007-031] corrupting) the pony in the loose-box in the corner.

[007-032] So the mastiff, dozing in his kennel in the court-yard with his large

[007-033] head on his paws, may think of the hot sunshine when the shadows of

[007-034] the stable-buildings tire his patience out by changing and leave him

[007-035] at one time of the day no broader refuge than the shadow of his own

[007-036] house, where he sits on end, panting and growling short, and very

[007-037] much wanting something to worry besides himself and his chain. So

[007-038] now, half-waking and all-winking, he may recall the house full of

[007-039] company, the coach-houses full of vehicles, the stables full of

[007-040] horses, and the out-buildings full of attendants upon horses, until

[007-041] he is undecided about the present and comes forth to see how it is.

[007-042] Then, with that impatient shake of himself, he may growl in the

[007-043] spirit, “Rain, rain, rain! Nothing but rain—and no family here!” as

[007-044] he goes in again and lies down with a gloomy yawn.

[007-045] So with the dogs in the kennel-buildings across the park, who have

[007-046] their restless fits and whose doleful voices when the wind has been

[007-047] very obstinate have even made it known in the house itself—upstairs,

[007-048] downstairs, and in my Lady’s chamber. They may hunt the whole

[007-049] country-side, while the raindrops are pattering round their

[007-050] inactivity. So the rabbits with their self-betraying tails, frisking

[007-051] in and out of holes at roots of trees, may be lively with ideas of

[007-052] the breezy days when their ears are blown about or of those seasons

[007-053] of interest when there are sweet young plants to gnaw. The turkey in

[007-054] the poultry-yard, always troubled with a class-grievance (probably

[007-055] Christmas), may be reminiscent of that summer morning wrongfully

[007-056] taken from him when he got into the lane among the felled trees,

[007-057] where there was a barn and barley. The discontented goose, who stoops

[007-058] to pass under the old gateway, twenty feet high, may gabble out, if

[007-059] we only knew it, a waddling preference for weather when the gateway

[007-060] casts its shadow on the ground.

[007-061] Be this as it may, there is not much fancy otherwise stirring at

[007-062] Chesney Wold. If there be a little at any odd moment, it goes, like a

[007-063] little noise in that old echoing place, a long way and usually leads

[007-064] off to ghosts and mystery.

[007-065] It has rained so hard and rained so long down in Lincolnshire that

[007-066] Mrs. Rouncewell, the old housekeeper at Chesney Wold, has several

[007-067] times taken off her spectacles and cleaned them to make certain that

[007-068] the drops were not upon the glasses. Mrs. Rouncewell might have been

[007-069] sufficiently assured by hearing the rain, but that she is rather

[007-070] deaf, which nothing will induce her to believe. She is a fine old

[007-071] lady, handsome, stately, wonderfully neat, and has such a back and

[007-072] such a stomacher that if her stays should turn out when she dies to

[007-073] have been a broad old-fashioned family fire-grate, nobody who knows

[007-074] her would have cause to be surprised. Weather affects Mrs. Rouncewell

[007-075] little. The house is there in all weathers, and the house, as she

[007-076] expresses it, “is what she looks at.” She sits in her room (in a side

[007-077] passage on the ground floor, with an arched window commanding a

[007-078] smooth quadrangle, adorned at regular intervals with smooth round

[007-079] trees and smooth round blocks of stone, as if the trees were going to

[007-080] play at bowls with the stones), and the whole house reposes on her

[007-081] mind. She can open it on occasion and be busy and fluttered, but it

[007-082] is shut up now and lies on the breadth of Mrs. Rouncewell’s

[007-083] iron-bound bosom in a majestic sleep.

[007-084] It is the next difficult thing to an impossibility to imagine Chesney

[007-085] Wold without Mrs. Rouncewell, but she has only been here fifty years.

[007-086] Ask her how long, this rainy day, and she shall answer “fifty year,

[007-087] three months, and a fortnight, by the blessing of heaven, if I live

[007-088] till Tuesday.” Mr. Rouncewell died some time before the decease of

[007-089] the pretty fashion of pig-tails, and modestly hid his own (if he took

[007-090] it with him) in a corner of the churchyard in the park near the

[007-091] mouldy porch. He was born in the market-town, and so was his young

[007-092] widow. Her progress in the family began in the time of the last Sir

[007-093] Leicester and originated in the still-room.

[007-094] The present representative of the Dedlocks is an excellent master. He

[007-095] supposes all his dependents to be utterly bereft of individual

[007-096] characters, intentions, or opinions, and is persuaded that he was

[007-097] born to supersede the necessity of their having any. If he were to

[007-098] make a discovery to the contrary, he would be simply stunned—would

[007-099] never recover himself, most likely, except to gasp and die. But he is

[007-100] an excellent master still, holding it a part of his state to be so.

[007-101] He has a great liking for Mrs. Rouncewell; he says she is a most

[007-102] respectable, creditable woman. He always shakes hands with her when

[007-103] he comes down to Chesney Wold and when he goes away; and if he were

[007-104] very ill, or if he were knocked down by accident, or run over, or

[007-105] placed in any situation expressive of a Dedlock at a disadvantage, he

[007-106] would say if he could speak, “Leave me, and send Mrs. Rouncewell

[007-107] here!” feeling his dignity, at such a pass, safer with her than with

[007-108] anybody else.

[007-109] Mrs. Rouncewell has known trouble. She has had two sons, of whom the

[007-110] younger ran wild, and went for a soldier, and never came back. Even

[007-111] to this hour, Mrs. Rouncewell’s calm hands lose their composure when

[007-112] she speaks of him, and unfolding themselves from her stomacher, hover

[007-113] about her in an agitated manner as she says what a likely lad, what a

[007-114] fine lad, what a gay, good-humoured, clever lad he was! Her second

[007-115] son would have been provided for at Chesney Wold and would have been

[007-116] made steward in due season, but he took, when he was a schoolboy, to

[007-117] constructing steam-engines out of saucepans and setting birds to draw

[007-118] their own water with the least possible amount of labour, so

[007-119] assisting them with artful contrivance of hydraulic pressure that a

[007-120] thirsty canary had only, in a literal sense, to put his shoulder to

[007-121] the wheel and the job was done. This propensity gave Mrs. Rouncewell

[007-122] great uneasiness. She felt it with a mother’s anguish to be a move in

[007-123] the Wat Tyler direction, well knowing that Sir Leicester had that

[007-124] general impression of an aptitude for any art to which smoke and a

[007-125] tall chimney might be considered essential. But the doomed young

[007-126] rebel (otherwise a mild youth, and very persevering), showing no sign

[007-127] of grace as he got older but, on the contrary, constructing a model

[007-128] of a power-loom, she was fain, with many tears, to mention his

[007-129] backslidings to the baronet. “Mrs. Rouncewell,” said Sir Leicester,

[007-130] “I can never consent to argue, as you know, with any one on any

[007-131] subject. You had better get rid of your boy; you had better get him

[007-132] into some Works. The iron country farther north is, I suppose, the

[007-133] congenial direction for a boy with these tendencies.” Farther north

[007-134] he went, and farther north he grew up; and if Sir Leicester Dedlock

[007-135] ever saw him when he came to Chesney Wold to visit his mother, or

[007-136] ever thought of him afterwards, it is certain that he only regarded

[007-137] him as one of a body of some odd thousand conspirators, swarthy and

[007-138] grim, who were in the habit of turning out by torchlight two or three

[007-139] nights in the week for unlawful purposes.

[007-140] Nevertheless, Mrs. Rouncewell’s son has, in the course of nature and

[007-141] art, grown up, and established himself, and married, and called unto

[007-142] him Mrs. Rouncewell’s grandson, who, being out of his apprenticeship,

[007-143] and home from a journey in far countries, whither he was sent to

[007-144] enlarge his knowledge and complete his preparations for the venture

[007-145] of this life, stands leaning against the chimney-piece this very day

[007-146] in Mrs. Rouncewell’s room at Chesney Wold.

[007-147] “And, again and again, I am glad to see you, Watt! And, once again, I

[007-148] am glad to see you, Watt!” says Mrs. Rouncewell. “You are a fine

[007-149] young fellow. You are like your poor uncle [[george-rouncewell|George]]. Ah!” Mrs.

[007-150] Rouncewell’s hands unquiet, as usual, on this reference.

[007-151] “They say I am like my father, grandmother.”

[007-152] “Like him, also, my dear—but most like your poor uncle George! And

[007-153] your dear father.” Mrs. Rouncewell folds her hands again. “He is

[007-154] well?”

[007-155] “Thriving, grandmother, in every way.”

[007-156] “I am thankful!” Mrs. Rouncewell is fond of her son but has a

[007-157] plaintive feeling towards him, much as if he were a very honourable

[007-158] soldier who had gone over to the enemy.

[007-159] “He is quite happy?” says she.

[007-160] “Quite.”

[007-161] “I am thankful! So he has brought you up to follow in his ways and

[007-162] has sent you into foreign countries and the like? Well, he knows

[007-163] best. There may be a world beyond Chesney Wold that I don’t

[007-164] understand. Though I am not young, either. And I have seen a quantity

[007-165] of good company too!”

[007-166] “Grandmother,” says the young man, changing the subject, “what a very

[007-167] pretty girl that was I found with you just now. You called her Rosa?”

[007-168] “Yes, child. She is daughter of a widow in the village. Maids are so

[007-169] hard to teach, now-a-days, that I have put her about me young. She’s

[007-170] an apt scholar and will do well. She shows the house already, very

[007-171] pretty. She lives with me at my table here.”

[007-172] “I hope I have not driven her away?”

[007-173] “She supposes we have family affairs to speak about, I dare say. She

[007-174] is very modest. It is a fine quality in a young woman. And scarcer,”

[007-175] says Mrs. Rouncewell, expanding her stomacher to its utmost limits,

[007-176] “than it formerly was!”

[007-177] The young man inclines his head in acknowledgment of the precepts of

[007-178] experience. Mrs. Rouncewell listens.

[007-179] “Wheels!” says she. They have long been audible to the younger ears

[007-180] of her companion. “What wheels on such a day as this, for gracious

[007-181] sake?”

[007-182] After a short interval, a tap at the door. “Come in!” A dark-eyed,

[007-183] dark-haired, shy, village beauty comes in—so fresh in her rosy and

[007-184] yet delicate bloom that the drops of rain which have beaten on her

[007-185] hair look like the dew upon a flower fresh gathered.

[007-186] “What company is this, Rosa?” says Mrs. Rouncewell.

[007-187] “It’s two young men in a gig, ma’am, who want to see the house—yes,

[007-188] and if you please, I told them so!” in quick reply to a gesture of

[007-189] dissent from the housekeeper. “I went to the hall-door and told them

[007-190] it was the wrong day and the wrong hour, but the young man who was

[007-191] driving took off his hat in the wet and begged me to bring this card

[007-192] to you.”

[007-193] “Read it, my dear Watt,” says the housekeeper.

[007-194] Rosa is so shy as she gives it to him that they drop it between them

[007-195] and almost knock their foreheads together as they pick it up. Rosa is

[007-196] shyer than before.

[007-197] “Mr. Guppy” is all the information the card yields.

[007-198] “Guppy!” repeats Mrs. Rouncewell, “MR. Guppy! Nonsense, I never heard

[007-199] of him!”

[007-200] “If you please, he told ME that!” says Rosa. “But he said that he and

[007-201] the other young gentleman came from [[london|London]] only last night by the

[007-202] mail, on business at the magistrates’ meeting, ten miles off, this

[007-203] morning, and that as their business was soon over, and they had heard

[007-204] a great deal said of Chesney Wold, and really didn’t know what to do

[007-205] with themselves, they had come through the wet to see it. They are

[007-206] lawyers. He says he is not in [[mr-tulkinghorn|Mr. Tulkinghorn]]’s office, but he is

[007-207] sure he may make use of Mr. Tulkinghorn’s name if necessary.”

[007-208] Finding, now she leaves off, that she has been making quite a long

[007-209] speech, Rosa is shyer than ever.

[007-210] Now, Mr. Tulkinghorn is, in a manner, part and parcel of the place,

[007-211] and besides, is supposed to have made Mrs. Rouncewell’s will. The old

[007-212] lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a favour,

[007-213] and dismisses Rosa. The grandson, however, being smitten by a sudden

[007-214] wish to see the house himself, proposes to join the party. The

[007-215] grandmother, who is pleased that he should have that interest,

[007-216] accompanies him—though to do him justice, he is exceedingly

[007-217] unwilling to trouble her.

[007-218] “Much obliged to you, ma’am!” says Mr. Guppy, divesting himself of

[007-219] his wet dreadnought in the hall. “Us London lawyers don’t often get

[007-220] an out, and when we do, we like to make the most of it, you know.”

[007-221] The old housekeeper, with a gracious severity of deportment, waves

[007-222] her hand towards the great staircase. Mr. Guppy and his friend follow

[007-223] Rosa; Mrs. Rouncewell and her grandson follow them; a young gardener

[007-224] goes before to open the shutters.

[007-225] As is usually the case with people who go over houses, Mr. Guppy and

[007-226] his friend are dead beat before they have well begun. They straggle

[007-227] about in wrong places, look at wrong things, don’t care for the right

[007-228] things, gape when more rooms are opened, exhibit profound depression

[007-229] of spirits, and are clearly knocked up. In each successive chamber

[007-230] that they enter, Mrs. Rouncewell, who is as upright as the house

[007-231] itself, rests apart in a window-seat or other such nook and listens

[007-232] with stately approval to Rosa’s exposition. Her grandson is so

[007-233] attentive to it that Rosa is shyer than ever—and prettier. Thus they

[007-234] pass on from room to room, raising the pictured Dedlocks for a few

[007-235] brief minutes as the young gardener admits the light, and

[007-236] reconsigning them to their graves as he shuts it out again. It

[007-237] appears to the afflicted Mr. Guppy and his inconsolable friend that

[007-238] there is no end to the Dedlocks, whose family greatness seems to

[007-239] consist in their never having done anything to distinguish themselves

[007-240] for seven hundred years.

[007-241] Even the long drawing-room of Chesney Wold cannot revive Mr. Guppy’s

[007-242] spirits. He is so low that he droops on the threshold and has hardly

[007-243] strength of mind to enter. But a portrait over the chimney-piece,

[007-244] painted by the fashionable artist of the day, acts upon him like a

[007-245] charm. He recovers in a moment. He stares at it with uncommon

[007-246] interest; he seems to be fixed and fascinated by it.

[007-247] “Dear me!” says Mr. Guppy. “Who’s that?”

[007-248] “The picture over the fire-place,” says Rosa, “is the portrait of the

[007-249] present [[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]]. It is considered a perfect likeness, and the

[007-250] best work of the master.”

[007-251] “Blest,” says Mr. Guppy, staring in a kind of dismay at his friend,

[007-252] “if I can ever have seen her. Yet I know her! Has the picture been

[007-253] engraved, miss?”

[007-254] “The picture has never been engraved. Sir Leicester has always

[007-255] refused permission.”

[007-256] “Well!” says Mr. Guppy in a low voice. “I’ll be shot if it ain’t very

[007-257] curious how well I know that picture! So that’s Lady Dedlock, is it!”

[007-258] “The picture on the right is the present Sir Leicester Dedlock. The

[007-259] picture on the left is his father, the late Sir Leicester.”

[007-260] Mr. Guppy has no eyes for either of these magnates. “It’s

[007-261] unaccountable to me,” he says, still staring at the portrait, “how

[007-262] well I know that picture! I’m dashed,” adds Mr. Guppy, looking round,

[007-263] “if I don’t think I must have had a dream of that picture, you know!”

[007-264] As no one present takes any especial interest in Mr. Guppy’s dreams,

[007-265] the probability is not pursued. But he still remains so absorbed by

[007-266] the portrait that he stands immovable before it until the young

[007-267] gardener has closed the shutters, when he comes out of the room in a

[007-268] dazed state that is an odd though a sufficient substitute for

[007-269] interest and follows into the succeeding rooms with a confused stare,

[007-270] as if he were looking everywhere for Lady Dedlock again.

[007-271] He sees no more of her. He sees her rooms, which are the last shown,

[007-272] as being very elegant, and he looks out of the windows from which she

[007-273] looked out, not long ago, upon the weather that bored her to death.

[007-274] All things have an end, even houses that people take infinite pains

[007-275] to see and are tired of before they begin to see them. He has come to

[007-276] the end of the sight, and the fresh village beauty to the end of her

[007-277] description; which is always this: “The terrace below is much

[007-278] admired. It is called, from an old story in the family, the Ghost’s

[007-279] Walk.”

[007-280] “No?” says Mr. Guppy, greedily curious. “What’s the story, miss? Is

[007-281] it anything about a picture?”

[007-282] “Pray tell us the story,” says Watt in a half whisper.

[007-283] “I don’t know it, sir.” Rosa is shyer than ever.

[007-284] “It is not related to visitors; it is almost forgotten,” says the

[007-285] housekeeper, advancing. “It has never been more than a family

[007-286] anecdote.”

[007-287] “You’ll excuse my asking again if it has anything to do with a

[007-288] picture, ma’am,” observes Mr. Guppy, “because I do assure you that

[007-289] the more I think of that picture the better I know it, without

[007-290] knowing how I know it!”

[007-291] The story has nothing to do with a picture; the housekeeper can

[007-292] guarantee that. Mr. Guppy is obliged to her for the information and

[007-293] is, moreover, generally obliged. He retires with his friend, guided

[007-294] down another staircase by the young gardener, and presently is heard

[007-295] to drive away. It is now dusk. Mrs. Rouncewell can trust to the

[007-296] discretion of her two young hearers and may tell THEM how the terrace

[007-297] came to have that ghostly name.

[007-298] She seats herself in a large chair by the fast-darkening window and

[007-299] tells them: “In the wicked days, my dears, of King Charles the

[007-300] First—I mean, of course, in the wicked days of the rebels who

[007-301] leagued themselves against that excellent king—Sir Morbury Dedlock

[007-302] was the owner of Chesney Wold. Whether there was any account of a

[007-303] ghost in the family before those days, I can’t say. I should think it

[007-304] very likely indeed.”

[007-305] Mrs. Rouncewell holds this opinion because she considers that a

[007-306] family of such antiquity and importance has a right to a ghost. She

[007-307] regards a ghost as one of the privileges of the upper classes, a

[007-308] genteel distinction to which the common people have no claim.

[007-309] “Sir Morbury Dedlock,” says Mrs. Rouncewell, “was, I have no occasion

[007-310] to say, on the side of the blessed martyr. But it IS supposed that

[007-311] his Lady, who had none of the family blood in her veins, favoured the

[007-312] bad cause. It is said that she had relations among King Charles’s

[007-313] enemies, that she was in correspondence with them, and that she gave

[007-314] them information. When any of the country gentlemen who followed his

[007-315] Majesty’s cause met here, it is said that my Lady was always nearer

[007-316] to the door of their council-room than they supposed. Do you hear a

[007-317] sound like a footstep passing along the terrace, Watt?”

[007-318] Rosa draws nearer to the housekeeper.

[007-319] “I hear the rain-drip on the stones,” replies the young man, “and I

[007-320] hear a curious echo—I suppose an echo—which is very like a halting

[007-321] step.”

[007-322] The housekeeper gravely nods and continues: “Partly on account of

[007-323] this division between them, and partly on other accounts, Sir Morbury

[007-324] and his Lady led a troubled life. She was a lady of a haughty temper.

[007-325] They were not well suited to each other in age or character, and they

[007-326] had no children to moderate between them. After her favourite

[007-327] brother, a young gentleman, was killed in the civil wars (by Sir

[007-328] Morbury’s near kinsman), her feeling was so violent that she hated

[007-329] the race into which she had married. When the Dedlocks were about to

[007-330] ride out from Chesney Wold in the king’s cause, she is supposed to

[007-331] have more than once stolen down into the stables in the dead of night

[007-332] and lamed their horses; and the story is that once at such an hour,

[007-333] her husband saw her gliding down the stairs and followed her into the

[007-334] stall where his own favourite horse stood. There he seized her by the

[007-335] wrist, and in a struggle or in a fall or through the horse being

[007-336] frightened and lashing out, she was lamed in the hip and from that

[007-337] hour began to pine away.”

[007-338] The housekeeper has dropped her voice to a little more than a

[007-339] whisper.

[007-340] “She had been a lady of a handsome figure and a noble carriage. She

[007-341] never complained of the change; she never spoke to any one of being

[007-342] crippled or of being in pain, but day by day she tried to walk upon

[007-343] the terrace, and with the help of the stone balustrade, went up and

[007-344] down, up and down, up and down, in sun and shadow, with greater

[007-345] difficulty every day. At last, one afternoon her husband (to whom she

[007-346] had never, on any persuasion, opened her lips since that night),

[007-347] standing at the great south window, saw her drop upon the pavement.

[007-348] He hastened down to raise her, but she repulsed him as he bent over

[007-349] her, and looking at him fixedly and coldly, said, ‘I will die here

[007-350] where I have walked. And I will walk here, though I am in my grave. I

[007-351] will walk here until the pride of this house is humbled. And when

[007-352] calamity or when disgrace is coming to it, let the Dedlocks listen

[007-353] for my step!’”

[007-354] Watt looks at Rosa. Rosa in the deepening gloom looks down upon the

[007-355] ground, half frightened and half shy.

[007-356] “There and then she died. And from those days,” says Mrs. Rouncewell,

[007-357] “the name has come down—the Ghost’s Walk. If the tread is an echo,

[007-358] it is an echo that is only heard after dark, and is often unheard for

[007-359] a long while together. But it comes back from time to time; and so

[007-360] sure as there is sickness or death in the family, it will be heard

[007-361] then.”

[007-362] “And disgrace, grandmother—” says Watt.

[007-363] “Disgrace never comes to Chesney Wold,” returns the housekeeper.

[007-364] Her grandson apologizes with “True. True.”

[007-365] “That is the story. Whatever the sound is, it is a worrying sound,”

[007-366] says Mrs. Rouncewell, getting up from her chair; “and what is to be

[007-367] noticed in it is that it MUST BE HEARD. My Lady, who is afraid of

[007-368] nothing, admits that when it is there, it must be heard. You cannot

[007-369] shut it out. Watt, there is a tall French clock behind you (placed

[007-370] there, ’a purpose) that has a loud beat when it is in motion and can

[007-371] play music. You understand how those things are managed?”

[007-372] “Pretty well, grandmother, I think.”

[007-373] “Set it a-going.”

[007-374] Watt sets it a-going—music and all.

[007-375] “Now, come hither,” says the housekeeper. “Hither, child, towards my

[007-376] Lady’s pillow. I am not sure that it is dark enough yet, but listen!

[007-377] Can you hear the sound upon the terrace, through the music, and the

[007-378] beat, and everything?”

[007-379] “I certainly can!”

[007-380] “So my Lady says.”
