---
description: "It was not so easy as it had appeared at first to arrange for"
id: ch-18
label: "Chapter 18: Lady Dedlock"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[018-001] It was not so easy as it had appeared at first to arrange for

[018-002] [[richard-carstone|Richard]]’s making a trial of Mr. Kenge’s office. Richard himself was

[018-003] the chief impediment. As soon as he had it in his power to leave Mr.

[018-004] Badger at any moment, he began to doubt whether he wanted to leave

[018-005] him at all. He didn’t know, he said, really. It wasn’t a bad

[018-006] [[professional-identity|profession]]; he couldn’t assert that he disliked it; perhaps he liked

[018-007] it as well as he liked any other—suppose he gave it one more chance!

[018-008] Upon that, he shut himself up for a few weeks with some books and

[018-009] some bones and seemed to acquire a considerable fund of information

[018-010] with great rapidity. His fervour, after lasting about a month, began

[018-011] to cool, and when it was quite cooled, began to grow warm again. His

[018-012] vacillations between law and medicine lasted so long that midsummer

[018-013] arrived before he finally separated from Mr. Badger and entered on an

[018-014] experimental course of Messrs. [[kenge-and-carboy|Kenge and Carboy]]. For all his

[018-015] waywardness, he took great credit to himself as being determined to

[018-016] be in earnest “this time.” And he was so good-natured throughout, and

[018-017] in such high spirits, and so fond of [[ada-clare|Ada]], that it was very difficult

[018-018] indeed to be otherwise than pleased with him.

[018-019] “As to [[john-jarndyce|Mr. Jarndyce]],” who, I may mention, found the wind much given,

[018-020] during this period, to stick in the east; “As to Mr. Jarndyce,”

[018-021] Richard would say to me, “he is the finest fellow in the world,

[018-022] [[esther-summerson|Esther]]! I must be particularly careful, if it were only for his

[018-023] satisfaction, to take myself well to task and have a regular wind-up

[018-024] of this business now.”

[018-025] The idea of his taking himself well to task, with that laughing face

[018-026] and heedless manner and with a fancy that everything could catch and

[018-027] nothing could hold, was ludicrously anomalous. However, he told us

[018-028] between-whiles that he was doing it to such an extent that he

[018-029] wondered his hair didn’t turn grey. His regular wind-up of the

[018-030] business was (as I have said) that he went to Mr. Kenge’s about

[018-031] midsummer to try how he liked it.

[018-032] All this time he was, in money affairs, what I have described him in

[018-033] a former illustration—generous, profuse, wildly careless, but fully

[018-034] persuaded that he was rather calculating and prudent. I happened to

[018-035] say to Ada, in his presence, half jestingly, half seriously, about

[018-036] the time of his going to Mr. Kenge’s, that he needed to have

[018-037] Fortunatus’ purse, he made so light of money, which he answered in

[018-038] this way, “My jewel of a dear cousin, you hear this old woman! Why

[018-039] does she say that? Because I gave eight pounds odd (or whatever it

[018-040] was) for a certain neat waistcoat and buttons a few days ago. Now, if

[018-041] I had stayed at Badger’s I should have been obliged to spend twelve

[018-042] pounds at a blow for some heart-breaking lecture-fees. So I make four

[018-043] pounds—in a lump—by the transaction!”

[018-044] It was a question much discussed between him and my guardian what

[018-045] arrangements should be made for his living in [[london|London]] while he

[018-046] experimented on the law, for we had long since gone back to Bleak

[018-047] House, and it was too far off to admit of his coming there oftener

[018-048] than once a week. My guardian told me that if Richard were to settle

[018-049] down at Mr. Kenge’s he would take some apartments or chambers where

[018-050] we too could occasionally stay for a few days at a time; “but, little

[018-051] woman,” he added, rubbing his head very significantly, “he hasn’t

[018-052] settled down there yet!” The discussions ended in our hiring for him,

[018-053] by the month, a neat little furnished lodging in a quiet old house

[018-054] near Queen Square. He immediately began to spend all the money he had

[018-055] in buying the oddest little ornaments and luxuries for this lodging;

[018-056] and so often as Ada and I dissuaded him from making any purchase that

[018-057] he had in contemplation which was particularly unnecessary and

[018-058] expensive, he took credit for what it would have cost and made out

[018-059] that to spend anything less on something else was to save the

[018-060] difference.

[018-061] While these affairs were in abeyance, our visit to Mr. Boythorn’s was

[018-062] postponed. At length, Richard having taken possession of his lodging,

[018-063] there was nothing to prevent our departure. He could have gone with

[018-064] us at that time of the year very well, but he was in the full novelty

[018-065] of his new position and was making most energetic attempts to unravel

[018-066] the mysteries of the fatal suit. Consequently we went without him,

[018-067] and my darling was delighted to praise him for being so busy.

[018-068] We made a pleasant journey down into Lincolnshire by the coach and

[018-069] had an entertaining companion in [[harold-skimpole|Mr. Skimpole]]. His furniture had been

[018-070] all cleared off, it appeared, by the person who took possession of it

[018-071] on his blue-eyed daughter’s birthday, but he seemed quite relieved to

[018-072] think that it was gone. Chairs and table, he said, were wearisome

[018-073] objects; they were monotonous ideas, they had no variety of

[018-074] expression, they looked you out of countenance, and you looked them

[018-075] out of countenance. How pleasant, then, to be bound to no particular

[018-076] chairs and tables, but to sport like a butterfly among all the

[018-077] furniture on hire, and to flit from rosewood to mahogany, and from

[018-078] mahogany to walnut, and from this shape to that, as the humour took

[018-079] one!

[018-080] “The oddity of the thing is,” said Mr. Skimpole with a quickened

[018-081] sense of the ludicrous, “that my chairs and tables were not paid for,

[018-082] and yet my landlord walks off with them as composedly as possible.

[018-083] Now, that seems droll! There is something grotesque in it. The chair

[018-084] and table merchant never engaged to pay my landlord my rent. Why

[018-085] should my landlord quarrel with HIM? If I have a pimple on my nose

[018-086] which is disagreeable to my landlord’s peculiar ideas of beauty, my

[018-087] landlord has no business to scratch my chair and table merchant’s

[018-088] nose, which has no pimple on it. His reasoning seems defective!”

[018-089] “Well,” said my guardian good-humouredly, “it’s pretty clear that

[018-090] whoever became security for those chairs and tables will have to pay

[018-091] for them.”

[018-092] “Exactly!” returned Mr. Skimpole. “That’s the crowning point of

[018-093] unreason in the business! I said to my landlord, ‘My good man, you

[018-094] are not aware that my excellent friend Jarndyce will have to pay for

[018-095] those things that you are sweeping off in that indelicate manner.

[018-096] Have you no consideration for HIS [[inheritance-and-property|property]]?’ He hadn’t the least.”

[018-097] “And refused all proposals,” said my guardian.

[018-098] “Refused all proposals,” returned Mr. Skimpole. “I made him business

[018-099] proposals. I had him into my room. I said, ‘You are a man of

[018-100] business, I believe?’ He replied, ‘I am.’ ‘Very well,’ said I, ‘now

[018-101] let us be business-like. Here is an inkstand, here are pens and

[018-102] paper, here are wafers. What do you want? I have occupied your house

[018-103] for a considerable period, I believe to our mutual satisfaction until

[018-104] this unpleasant misunderstanding arose; let us be at once friendly

[018-105] and business-like. What do you want?’ In reply to this, he made use

[018-106] of the figurative expression—which has something Eastern about

[018-107] it—that he had never seen the colour of my money. ‘My amiable

[018-108] friend,’ said I, ‘I never have any money. I never know anything about

[018-109] money.’ ‘Well, sir,’ said he, ‘what do you offer if I give you time?’

[018-110] ‘My good fellow,’ said I, ‘I have no idea of time; but you say you

[018-111] are a man of business, and whatever you can suggest to be done in a

[018-112] business-like way with pen, and ink, and paper—and wafers—I am

[018-113] ready to do. Don’t pay yourself at another man’s expense (which is

[018-114] foolish), but be business-like!’ However, he wouldn’t be, and there

[018-115] was an end of it.”

[018-116] If these were some of the inconveniences of Mr. Skimpole’s childhood,

[018-117] it assuredly possessed its advantages too. On the journey he had a

[018-118] very good appetite for such refreshment as came in our way (including

[018-119] a basket of choice hothouse peaches), but never thought of paying for

[018-120] anything. So when the coachman came round for his fee, he pleasantly

[018-121] asked him what he considered a very good fee indeed, now—a liberal

[018-122] one—and on his replying half a crown for a single passenger, said it

[018-123] was little enough too, all things considered, and left Mr. Jarndyce

[018-124] to give it him.

[018-125] It was delightful weather. The green corn waved so beautifully, the

[018-126] larks sang so joyfully, the hedges were so full of wild flowers, the

[018-127] trees were so thickly out in leaf, the bean-fields, with a light wind

[018-128] blowing over them, filled the air with such a delicious fragrance!

[018-129] Late in the afternoon we came to the market-town where we were to

[018-130] alight from the coach—a dull little town with a church-spire, and a

[018-131] marketplace, and a market-cross, and one intensely sunny street, and

[018-132] a pond with an old horse cooling his legs in it, and a very few men

[018-133] sleepily lying and standing about in narrow little bits of shade.

[018-134] After the rustling of the leaves and the waving of the corn all along

[018-135] the road, it looked as still, as hot, as motionless a little town as

[018-136] England could produce.

[018-137] At the inn we found Mr. Boythorn on horseback, waiting with an open

[018-138] carriage to take us to his house, which was a few miles off. He was

[018-139] overjoyed to see us and dismounted with great alacrity.

[018-140] “By heaven!” said he after giving us a courteous greeting. “This a

[018-141] most infamous coach. It is the most flagrant example of an abominable

[018-142] public vehicle that ever encumbered the face of the earth. It is

[018-143] twenty-five minutes after its time this afternoon. The coachman ought

[018-144] to be put to death!”

[018-145] “IS he after his time?” said Mr. Skimpole, to whom he happened to

[018-146] address himself. “You know my infirmity.”

[018-147] “Twenty-five minutes! Twenty-six minutes!” replied Mr. Boythorn,

[018-148] referring to his watch. “With two ladies in the coach, this scoundrel

[018-149] has deliberately delayed his arrival six and twenty minutes.

[018-150] Deliberately! It is impossible that it can be accidental! But his

[018-151] father—and his uncle—were the most profligate coachmen that ever

[018-152] sat upon a box.”

[018-153] While he said this in tones of the greatest indignation, he handed us

[018-154] into the little phaeton with the utmost gentleness and was all smiles

[018-155] and pleasure.

[018-156] “I am sorry, ladies,” he said, standing bare-headed at the

[018-157] carriage-door when all was ready, “that I am obliged to conduct you

[018-158] nearly two miles out of the way. But our direct road lies through Sir

[018-159] Leicester Dedlock’s park, and in that fellow’s property I have sworn

[018-160] never to set foot of mine, or horse’s foot of mine, pending the

[018-161] present relations between us, while I breathe the breath of life!”

[018-162] And here, catching my guardian’s eye, he broke into one of his

[018-163] tremendous laughs, which seemed to shake even the motionless little

[018-164] market-town.

[018-165] “Are the Dedlocks down here, Lawrence?” said my guardian as we drove

[018-166] along and Mr. Boythorn trotted on the green turf by the roadside.

[018-167] “Sir Arrogant Numskull is here,” replied Mr. Boythorn. “Ha ha ha! Sir

[018-168] Arrogant is here, and I am glad to say, has been laid by the heels

[018-169] here. My Lady,” in naming whom he always made a courtly gesture as if

[018-170] particularly to exclude her from any part in the quarrel, “is

[018-171] expected, I believe, daily. I am not in the least surprised that she

[018-172] postpones her appearance as long as possible. Whatever can have

[018-173] induced that transcendent woman to marry that effigy and figure-head

[018-174] of a baronet is one of the most impenetrable mysteries that ever

[018-175] baffled human inquiry. Ha ha ha ha!”

[018-176] “I suppose,” said my guardian, laughing, “WE may set foot in the park

[018-177] while we are here? The prohibition does not extend to us, does it?”

[018-178] “I can lay no prohibition on my guests,” he said, bending his head to

[018-179] Ada and me with the smiling politeness which sat so gracefully upon

[018-180] him, “except in the matter of their departure. I am only sorry that I

[018-181] cannot have the happiness of being their escort about [[chesney-wold|Chesney Wold]],

[018-182] which is a very fine place! But by the light of this summer day,

[018-183] Jarndyce, if you call upon the owner while you stay with me, you are

[018-184] likely to have but a cool reception. He carries himself like an

[018-185] eight-day clock at all times, like one of a race of eight-day clocks

[018-186] in gorgeous cases that never go and never went—Ha ha ha!—but he

[018-187] will have some extra stiffness, I can promise you, for the friends of

[018-188] his friend and neighbour Boythorn!”

[018-189] “I shall not put him to the proof,” said my guardian. “He is as

[018-190] indifferent to the honour of knowing me, I dare say, as I am to the

[018-191] honour of knowing him. The air of the grounds and perhaps such a view

[018-192] of the house as any other sightseer might get are quite enough for

[018-193] me.”

[018-194] “Well!” said Mr. Boythorn. “I am glad of it on the whole. It’s in

[018-195] better keeping. I am looked upon about here as a second Ajax defying

[018-196] the lightning. Ha ha ha ha! When I go into our little church on a

[018-197] Sunday, a considerable part of the inconsiderable congregation expect

[018-198] to see me drop, scorched and withered, on the pavement under the

[018-199] Dedlock displeasure. Ha ha ha ha! I have no doubt he is surprised

[018-200] that I don’t. For he is, by heaven, the most self-satisfied, and the

[018-201] shallowest, and the most coxcombical and utterly brainless ass!”

[018-202] Our coming to the ridge of a hill we had been ascending enabled our

[018-203] friend to point out Chesney Wold itself to us and diverted his

[018-204] attention from its master.

[018-205] It was a picturesque old house in a fine park richly wooded. Among

[018-206] the trees and not far from the residence he pointed out the spire of

[018-207] the little church of which he had spoken. Oh, the solemn woods over

[018-208] which the light and shadow travelled swiftly, as if heavenly wings

[018-209] were sweeping on benignant errands through the summer air; the smooth

[018-210] green slopes, the glittering water, the garden where the flowers were

[018-211] so symmetrically arranged in clusters of the richest colours, how

[018-212] beautiful they looked! The house, with gable and chimney, and tower,

[018-213] and turret, and dark doorway, and broad terrace-walk, twining among

[018-214] the balustrades of which, and lying heaped upon the vases, there was

[018-215] one great flush of roses, seemed scarcely real in its light solidity

[018-216] and in the serene and peaceful hush that rested on all around it. To

[018-217] Ada and to me, that above all appeared the pervading influence. On

[018-218] everything, house, garden, terrace, green slopes, water, old oaks,

[018-219] fern, moss, woods again, and far away across the openings in the

[018-220] prospect to the distance lying wide before us with a purple bloom

[018-221] upon it, there seemed to be such undisturbed repose.

[018-222] When we came into the little village and passed a small inn with the

[018-223] sign of the Dedlock Arms swinging over the road in front, Mr.

[018-224] Boythorn interchanged greetings with a young gentleman sitting on a

[018-225] bench outside the inn-door who had some fishing-tackle lying beside

[018-226] him.

[018-227] “That’s the housekeeper’s grandson, Mr. Rouncewell by name,” said,

[018-228] he, “and he is in love with a pretty girl up at the house. Lady

[018-229] Dedlock has taken a fancy to the pretty girl and is going to keep her

[018-230] about her own fair person—an honour which my young friend himself

[018-231] does not at all appreciate. However, he can’t marry just yet, even if

[018-232] his Rosebud were willing; so he is fain to make the best of it. In

[018-233] the meanwhile, he comes here pretty often for a day or two at a time

[018-234] to—fish. Ha ha ha ha!”

[018-235] “Are he and the pretty girl engaged, Mr. Boythorn?” asked Ada.

[018-236] “Why, my dear Miss Clare,” he returned, “I think they may perhaps

[018-237] understand each other; but you will see them soon, I dare say, and I

[018-238] must learn from you on such a point—not you from me.”

[018-239] Ada blushed, and Mr. Boythorn, trotting forward on his comely grey

[018-240] horse, dismounted at his own door and stood ready with extended arm

[018-241] and uncovered head to welcome us when we arrived.

[018-242] He lived in a pretty house, formerly the parsonage house, with a lawn

[018-243] in front, a bright flower-garden at the side, and a well-stocked

[018-244] orchard and kitchen-garden in the rear, enclosed with a venerable

[018-245] wall that had of itself a ripened ruddy look. But, indeed, everything

[018-246] about the place wore an aspect of maturity and abundance. The old

[018-247] lime-tree walk was like green cloisters, the very shadows of the

[018-248] cherry-trees and apple-trees were heavy with fruit, the

[018-249] gooseberry-bushes were so laden that their branches arched and rested

[018-250] on the earth, the strawberries and raspberries grew in like

[018-251] profusion, and the peaches basked by the hundred on the wall. Tumbled

[018-252] about among the spread nets and the glass frames sparkling and

[018-253] winking in the sun there were such heaps of drooping pods, and

[018-254] marrows, and cucumbers, that every foot of ground appeared a

[018-255] vegetable treasury, while the smell of sweet herbs and all kinds of

[018-256] wholesome growth (to say nothing of the neighbouring meadows where

[018-257] the hay was carrying) made the whole air a great nosegay. Such

[018-258] stillness and composure reigned within the orderly precincts of the

[018-259] old red wall that even the feathers hung in garlands to scare the

[018-260] birds hardly stirred; and the wall had such a ripening influence that

[018-261] where, here and there high up, a disused nail and scrap of list still

[018-262] clung to it, it was easy to fancy that they had mellowed with the

[018-263] changing seasons and that they had rusted and decayed according to

[018-264] the common fate.

[018-265] The house, though a little disorderly in comparison with the garden,

[018-266] was a real old house with settles in the chimney of the brick-floored

[018-267] kitchen and great beams across the ceilings. On one side of it was

[018-268] the terrible piece of ground in dispute, where Mr. Boythorn

[018-269] maintained a sentry in a smock-frock day and night, whose duty was

[018-270] supposed to be, in cases of aggression, immediately to ring a large

[018-271] bell hung up there for the purpose, to unchain a great bull-dog

[018-272] established in a kennel as his ally, and generally to deal

[018-273] destruction on the enemy. Not content with these precautions, Mr.

[018-274] Boythorn had himself composed and posted there, on painted boards to

[018-275] which his name was attached in large [[document-and-letter|letters]], the following solemn

[018-276] warnings: “Beware of the bull-dog. He is most ferocious. Lawrence

[018-277] Boythorn.” “The blunderbus is loaded with slugs. Lawrence Boythorn.”

[018-278] “Man-traps and spring-guns are set here at all times of the day and

[018-279] night. Lawrence Boythorn.” “Take notice. That any person or persons

[018-280] audaciously presuming to trespass on this property will be punished

[018-281] with the utmost severity of private chastisement and prosecuted with

[018-282] the utmost rigour of the law. Lawrence Boythorn.” These he showed us

[018-283] from the drawing-room window, while his bird was hopping about his

[018-284] head, and he laughed, “Ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha!” to that extent as

[018-285] he pointed them out that I really thought he would have hurt himself.

[018-286] “But this is taking a good deal of trouble,” said Mr. Skimpole in his

[018-287] light way, “when you are not in earnest after all.”

[018-288] “Not in earnest!” returned Mr. Boythorn with unspeakable warmth. “Not

[018-289] in earnest! If I could have hoped to train him, I would have bought a

[018-290] lion instead of that dog and would have turned him loose upon the

[018-291] first intolerable robber who should dare to make an encroachment on

[018-292] my rights. Let [[sir-leicester-dedlock|Sir Leicester Dedlock]] consent to come out and decide

[018-293] this question by single combat, and I will meet him with any weapon

[018-294] known to mankind in any age or country. I am that much in earnest.

[018-295] Not more!”

[018-296] We arrived at his house on a Saturday. On the Sunday morning we all

[018-297] set forth to walk to the little church in the park. Entering the

[018-298] park, almost immediately by the disputed ground, we pursued a

[018-299] pleasant footpath winding among the verdant turf and the beautiful

[018-300] trees until it brought us to the church-porch.

[018-301] The congregation was extremely small and quite a rustic one with the

[018-302] exception of a large muster of servants from the house, some of whom

[018-303] were already in their seats, while others were yet dropping in. There

[018-304] were some stately footmen, and there was a perfect picture of an old

[018-305] coachman, who looked as if he were the official representative of all

[018-306] the pomps and vanities that had ever been put into his coach. There

[018-307] was a very pretty show of young women, and above them, the handsome

[018-308] old face and fine responsible portly figure of the housekeeper

[018-309] towered pre-eminent. The pretty girl of whom Mr. Boythorn had told us

[018-310] was close by her. She was so very pretty that I might have known her

[018-311] by her beauty even if I had not seen how blushingly conscious she was

[018-312] of the eyes of the young fisherman, whom I discovered not far off.

[018-313] One face, and not an agreeable one, though it was handsome, seemed

[018-314] maliciously watchful of this pretty girl, and indeed of every one and

[018-315] everything there. It was a Frenchwoman’s.

[018-316] As the bell was yet ringing and the great people were not yet come, I

[018-317] had leisure to glance over the church, which smelt as earthy as a

[018-318] grave, and to think what a shady, ancient, solemn little church it

[018-319] was. The windows, heavily shaded by trees, admitted a subdued light

[018-320] that made the faces around me pale, and darkened the old brasses in

[018-321] the pavement and the time and damp-worn monuments, and rendered the

[018-322] sunshine in the little porch, where a monotonous ringer was working

[018-323] at the bell, inestimably bright. But a stir in that direction, a

[018-324] gathering of reverential awe in the rustic faces, and a blandly

[018-325] ferocious assumption on the part of Mr. Boythorn of being resolutely

[018-326] unconscious of somebody’s existence forewarned me that the great

[018-327] people were come and that the service was going to begin.

[018-328] “‘Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy

[018-329] sight—’”

[018-330] Shall I ever forget the rapid beating at my heart, occasioned by the

[018-331] look I met as I stood up! Shall I ever forget the manner in which

[018-332] those handsome proud eyes seemed to spring out of their languor and

[018-333] to hold mine! It was only a moment before I cast mine down—released

[018-334] again, if I may say so—on my book; but I knew the beautiful face

[018-335] quite well in that short space of time.

[018-336] And, very strangely, there was something quickened within me,

[018-337] associated with the lonely days at my godmother’s; yes, away even to

[018-338] the days when I had stood on tiptoe to dress myself at my little

[018-339] glass after dressing my doll. And this, although I had never seen

[018-340] this lady’s face before in all my life—I was quite sure of

[018-341] it—absolutely certain.

[018-342] It was easy to know that the ceremonious, gouty, grey-haired

[018-343] gentleman, the only other occupant of the great pew, was Sir

[018-344] Leicester Dedlock, and that the lady was [[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]]. But why her

[018-345] face should be, in a confused way, like a broken glass to me, in

[018-346] which I saw scraps of old remembrances, and why I should be so

[018-347] fluttered and troubled (for I was still) by having casually met her

[018-348] eyes, I could not think.

[018-349] I felt it to be an unmeaning weakness in me and tried to overcome it

[018-350] by attending to the words I heard. Then, very strangely, I seemed to

[018-351] hear them, not in the reader’s voice, but in the well-remembered

[018-352] voice of my godmother. This made me think, did Lady Dedlock’s face

[018-353] accidentally resemble my godmother’s? It might be that it did, a

[018-354] little; but the expression was so different, and the stern decision

[018-355] which had worn into my godmother’s face, like weather into rocks, was

[018-356] so completely wanting in the face before me that it could not be that

[018-357] resemblance which had struck me. Neither did I know the loftiness and

[018-358] haughtiness of Lady Dedlock’s face, at all, in any one. And yet I—I,

[018-359] little Esther Summerson, the child who lived a life apart and on

[018-360] whose birthday there was no rejoicing—seemed to arise before my own

[018-361] eyes, evoked out of the past by some power in this fashionable lady,

[018-362] whom I not only entertained no fancy that I had ever seen, but whom I

[018-363] perfectly well knew I had never seen until that hour.

[018-364] It made me tremble so to be thrown into this unaccountable agitation

[018-365] that I was conscious of being distressed even by the observation of

[018-366] the French maid, though I knew she had been looking watchfully here,

[018-367] and there, and everywhere, from the moment of her coming into the

[018-368] church. By degrees, though very slowly, I at last overcame my strange

[018-369] emotion. After a long time, I looked towards Lady Dedlock again. It

[018-370] was while they were preparing to sing, before the sermon. She took no

[018-371] heed of me, and the beating at my heart was gone. Neither did it

[018-372] revive for more than a few moments when she once or twice afterwards

[018-373] glanced at Ada or at me through her glass.

[018-374] The service being concluded, Sir Leicester gave his arm with much

[018-375] taste and gallantry to Lady Dedlock—though he was obliged to walk by

[018-376] the help of a thick stick—and escorted her out of church to the pony

[018-377] carriage in which they had come. The servants then dispersed, and so

[018-378] did the congregation, whom Sir Leicester had contemplated all along

[018-379] (Mr. Skimpole said to Mr. Boythorn’s infinite delight) as if he were

[018-380] a considerable landed proprietor in heaven.

[018-381] “He believes he is!” said Mr. Boythorn. “He firmly believes it. So

[018-382] did his father, and his grandfather, and his great-grandfather!”

[018-383] “Do you know,” pursued Mr. Skimpole very unexpectedly to Mr.

[018-384] Boythorn, “it’s agreeable to me to see a man of that sort.”

[018-385] “IS it!” said Mr. Boythorn.

[018-386] “Say that he wants to patronize me,” pursued Mr. Skimpole. “Very

[018-387] well! I don’t object.”

[018-388] “I do,” said Mr. Boythorn with great vigour.

[018-389] “Do you really?” returned Mr. Skimpole in his easy light vein. “But

[018-390] that’s taking trouble, surely. And why should you take trouble? Here

[018-391] am I, content to receive things childishly as they fall out, and I

[018-392] never take trouble! I come down here, for instance, and I find a

[018-393] mighty potentate exacting homage. Very well! I say ‘Mighty potentate,

[018-394] here IS my homage! It’s easier to give it than to withhold it. Here

[018-395] it is. If you have anything of an agreeable nature to show me, I

[018-396] shall be happy to see it; if you have anything of an agreeable nature

[018-397] to give me, I shall be happy to accept it.’ Mighty potentate replies

[018-398] in effect, ‘This is a sensible fellow. I find him accord with my

[018-399] digestion and my bilious system. He doesn’t impose upon me the

[018-400] necessity of rolling myself up like a hedgehog with my points

[018-401] outward. I expand, I open, I turn my silver lining outward like

[018-402] Milton’s cloud, and it’s more agreeable to both of us.’ That’s my

[018-403] view of such things, speaking as a child!”

[018-404] “But suppose you went down somewhere else to-morrow,” said Mr.

[018-405] Boythorn, “where there was the opposite of that fellow—or of this

[018-406] fellow. How then?”

[018-407] “How then?” said Mr. Skimpole with an appearance of the utmost

[018-408] simplicity and candour. “Just the same then! I should say, ‘My

[018-409] esteemed Boythorn’—to make you the personification of our imaginary

[018-410] friend—‘my esteemed Boythorn, you object to the mighty potentate?

[018-411] Very good. So do I. I take it that my business in the social system

[018-412] is to be agreeable; I take it that everybody’s business in the social

[018-413] system is to be agreeable. It’s a system of harmony, in short.

[018-414] Therefore if you object, I object. Now, excellent Boythorn, let us go

[018-415] to dinner!’”

[018-416] “But excellent Boythorn might say,” returned our host, swelling and

[018-417] growing very red, “I’ll be—”

[018-418] “I understand,” said Mr. Skimpole. “Very likely he would.”

[018-419] “—if I WILL go to dinner!” cried Mr. Boythorn in a violent burst and

[018-420] stopping to strike his stick upon the ground. “And he would probably

[018-421] add, ‘Is there such a thing as principle, Mr. Harold Skimpole?’”

[018-422] “To which Harold Skimpole would reply, you know,” he returned in his

[018-423] gayest manner and with his most ingenuous smile, “‘Upon my life I

[018-424] have not the least idea! I don’t know what it is you call by that

[018-425] name, or where it is, or who possesses it. If you possess it and find

[018-426] it comfortable, I am quite delighted and congratulate you heartily.

[018-427] But I know nothing about it, I assure you; for I am a mere child, and

[018-428] I lay no claim to it, and I don’t want it!’ So, you see, excellent

[018-429] Boythorn and I would go to dinner after all!”

[018-430] This was one of many little dialogues between them which I always

[018-431] expected to end, and which I dare say would have ended under other

[018-432] circumstances, in some violent explosion on the part of our host. But

[018-433] he had so high a sense of his hospitable and responsible position as

[018-434] our entertainer, and my guardian laughed so sincerely at and with Mr.

[018-435] Skimpole, as a child who blew bubbles and broke them all day long,

[018-436] that matters never went beyond this point. Mr. Skimpole, who always

[018-437] seemed quite unconscious of having been on delicate ground, then

[018-438] betook himself to beginning some sketch in the park which he never

[018-439] finished, or to playing fragments of airs on the piano, or to singing

[018-440] scraps of songs, or to lying down on his back under a tree and

[018-441] looking at the sky—which he couldn’t help thinking, he said, was

[018-442] what he was meant for; it suited him so exactly.

[018-443] “Enterprise and effort,” he would say to us (on his back), “are

[018-444] delightful to me. I believe I am truly cosmopolitan. I have the

[018-445] deepest sympathy with them. I lie in a shady place like this and

[018-446] think of adventurous spirits going to the North Pole or penetrating

[018-447] to the heart of the Torrid Zone with admiration. Mercenary creatures

[018-448] ask, ‘What is the use of a man’s going to the North Pole? What good

[018-449] does it do?’ I can’t say; but, for anything I CAN say, he may go for

[018-450] the purpose—though he don’t know it—of employing my thoughts as I

[018-451] lie here. Take an extreme case. Take the case of the slaves on

[018-452] American plantations. I dare say they are worked hard, I dare say

[018-453] they don’t altogether like it. I dare say theirs is an unpleasant

[018-454] experience on the whole; but they people the landscape for me, they

[018-455] give it a poetry for me, and perhaps that is one of the pleasanter

[018-456] objects of their existence. I am very sensible of it, if it be, and I

[018-457] shouldn’t wonder if it were!”

[018-458] I always wondered on these occasions whether he ever thought of Mrs.

[018-459] Skimpole and the children, and in what point of view they presented

[018-460] themselves to his cosmopolitan mind. So far as I could understand,

[018-461] they rarely presented themselves at all.

[018-462] The week had gone round to the Saturday following that beating of my

[018-463] heart in the church; and every day had been so bright and blue that

[018-464] to ramble in the woods, and to see the light striking down among the

[018-465] transparent leaves and sparkling in the beautiful interlacings of the

[018-466] shadows of the trees, while the birds poured out their songs and the

[018-467] air was drowsy with the hum of insects, had been most delightful. We

[018-468] had one favourite spot, deep in moss and last year’s leaves, where

[018-469] there were some felled trees from which the bark was all stripped

[018-470] off. Seated among these, we looked through a green vista supported by

[018-471] thousands of natural columns, the whitened stems of trees, upon a

[018-472] distant prospect made so radiant by its contrast with the shade in

[018-473] which we sat and made so precious by the arched perspective through

[018-474] which we saw it that it was like a glimpse of the better land. Upon

[018-475] the Saturday we sat here, Mr. Jarndyce, Ada, and I, until we heard

[018-476] thunder muttering in the distance and felt the large raindrops rattle

[018-477] through the leaves.

[018-478] The weather had been all the week extremely sultry, but the storm

[018-479] broke so suddenly—upon us, at least, in that sheltered spot—that

[018-480] before we reached the outskirts of the wood the thunder and lightning

[018-481] were frequent and the rain came plunging through the leaves as if

[018-482] every drop were a great leaden bead. As it was not a time for

[018-483] standing among trees, we ran out of the wood, and up and down the

[018-484] moss-grown steps which crossed the plantation-fence like two

[018-485] broad-staved ladders placed back to back, and made for a keeper’s

[018-486] lodge which was close at hand. We had often noticed the dark beauty

[018-487] of this lodge standing in a deep twilight of trees, and how the ivy

[018-488] clustered over it, and how there was a steep hollow near, where we

[018-489] had once seen the keeper’s dog dive down into the fern as if it were

[018-490] water.

[018-491] The lodge was so dark within, now the sky was overcast, that we only

[018-492] clearly saw the man who came to the door when we took shelter there

[018-493] and put two chairs for Ada and me. The lattice-windows were all

[018-494] thrown open, and we sat just within the doorway watching the storm.

[018-495] It was grand to see how the wind awoke, and bent the trees, and drove

[018-496] the rain before it like a cloud of smoke; and to hear the solemn

[018-497] thunder and to see the lightning; and while thinking with awe of the

[018-498] tremendous powers by which our little lives are encompassed, to

[018-499] consider how beneficent they are and how upon the smallest flower and

[018-500] leaf there was already a freshness poured from all this seeming rage

[018-501] which seemed to make creation new again.

[018-502] “Is it not dangerous to sit in so exposed a place?”

[018-503] “Oh, no, Esther dear!” said Ada quietly.

[018-504] Ada said it to me, but I had not spoken.

[018-505] The beating of my heart came back again. I had never heard the voice,

[018-506] as I had never seen the face, but it affected me in the same strange

[018-507] way. Again, in a moment, there arose before my mind innumerable

[018-508] pictures of myself.

[018-509] Lady Dedlock had taken shelter in the lodge before our arrival there

[018-510] and had come out of the gloom within. She stood behind my chair with

[018-511] her hand upon it. I saw her with her hand close to my shoulder when I

[018-512] turned my head.

[018-513] “I have frightened you?” she said.

[018-514] No. It was not fright. Why should I be frightened!

[018-515] “I believe,” said Lady Dedlock to my guardian, “I have the pleasure

[018-516] of speaking to Mr. Jarndyce.”

[018-517] “Your remembrance does me more honour than I had supposed it would,

[018-518] Lady Dedlock,” he returned.

[018-519] “I recognized you in church on Sunday. I am sorry that any local

[018-520] disputes of Sir Leicester’s—they are not of his seeking, however, I

[018-521] believe—should render it a matter of some absurd difficulty to show

[018-522] you any attention here.”

[018-523] “I am aware of the circumstances,” returned my guardian with a smile,

[018-524] “and am sufficiently obliged.”

[018-525] She had given him her hand in an indifferent way that seemed habitual

[018-526] to her and spoke in a correspondingly indifferent manner, though in a

[018-527] very pleasant voice. She was as graceful as she was beautiful,

[018-528] perfectly self-possessed, and had the air, I thought, of being able

[018-529] to attract and interest any one if she had thought it worth her

[018-530] while. The keeper had brought her a chair on which she sat in the

[018-531] middle of the porch between us.

[018-532] “Is the young gentleman disposed of whom you wrote to Sir Leicester

[018-533] about and whose wishes Sir Leicester was sorry not to have it in his

[018-534] power to advance in any way?” she said over her shoulder to my

[018-535] guardian.

[018-536] “I hope so,” said he.

[018-537] She seemed to respect him and even to wish to conciliate him. There

[018-538] was something very winning in her haughty manner, and it became more

[018-539] familiar—I was going to say more easy, but that could hardly be—as

[018-540] she spoke to him over her shoulder.

[018-541] “I presume this is your other ward, Miss Clare?”

[018-542] He presented Ada, in form.

[018-543] “You will lose the disinterested part of your Don Quixote character,”

[018-544] said Lady Dedlock to Mr. Jarndyce over her shoulder again, “if you

[018-545] only redress the wrongs of beauty like this. But present me,” and she

[018-546] turned full upon me, “to this young lady too!”

[018-547] “Miss Summerson really is my ward,” said Mr. Jarndyce. “I am

[018-548] responsible to no Lord Chancellor in her case.”

[018-549] “Has Miss Summerson lost both her parents?” said my Lady.

[018-550] “Yes.”

[018-551] “She is very fortunate in her guardian.”

[018-552] Lady Dedlock looked at me, and I looked at her and said I was indeed.

[018-553] All at once she turned from me with a hasty air, almost expressive of

[018-554] displeasure or dislike, and spoke to him over her shoulder again.

[018-555] “Ages have passed since we were in the habit of meeting, Mr.

[018-556] Jarndyce.”

[018-557] “A long time. At least I thought it was a long time, until I saw you

[018-558] last Sunday,” he returned.

[018-559] “What! Even you are a courtier, or think it necessary to become one

[018-560] to me!” she said with some disdain. “I have achieved that reputation,

[018-561] I suppose.”

[018-562] “You have achieved so much, Lady Dedlock,” said my guardian, “that

[018-563] you pay some little penalty, I dare say. But none to me.”

[018-564] “So much!” she repeated, slightly laughing. “Yes!”

[018-565] With her air of superiority, and power, and fascination, and I know

[018-566] not what, she seemed to regard Ada and me as little more than

[018-567] children. So, as she slightly laughed and afterwards sat looking at

[018-568] the rain, she was as self-possessed and as free to occupy herself

[018-569] with her own thoughts as if she had been alone.

[018-570] “I think you knew my sister when we were abroad together better than

[018-571] you know me?” she said, looking at him again.

[018-572] “Yes, we happened to meet oftener,” he returned.

[018-573] “We went our several ways,” said Lady Dedlock, “and had little in

[018-574] common even before we agreed to differ. It is to be regretted, I

[018-575] suppose, but it could not be helped.”

[018-576] Lady Dedlock again sat looking at the rain. The storm soon began to

[018-577] pass upon its way. The shower greatly abated, the lightning ceased,

[018-578] the thunder rolled among the distant hills, and the sun began to

[018-579] glisten on the wet leaves and the falling rain. As we sat there,

[018-580] silently, we saw a little pony phaeton coming towards us at a merry

[018-581] pace.

[018-582] “The messenger is coming back, my Lady,” said the keeper, “with the

[018-583] carriage.”

[018-584] As it drove up, we saw that there were two people inside. There

[018-585] alighted from it, with some cloaks and wrappers, first the

[018-586] Frenchwoman whom I had seen in church, and secondly the pretty girl,

[018-587] the Frenchwoman with a defiant confidence, the pretty girl confused

[018-588] and hesitating.

[018-589] “What now?” said Lady Dedlock. “Two!”

[018-590] “I am your maid, my Lady, at the present,” said the Frenchwoman. “The

[018-591] message was for the attendant.”

[018-592] “I was afraid you might mean me, my Lady,” said the pretty girl.

[018-593] “I did mean you, child,” replied her mistress calmly. “Put that shawl

[018-594] on me.”

[018-595] She slightly stooped her shoulders to receive it, and the pretty girl

[018-596] lightly dropped it in its place. The Frenchwoman stood unnoticed,

[018-597] looking on with her lips very tightly set.

[018-598] “I am sorry,” said Lady Dedlock to Mr. Jarndyce, “that we are not

[018-599] likely to renew our former acquaintance. You will allow me to send

[018-600] the carriage back for your two wards. It shall be here directly.”

[018-601] But as he would on no account accept this offer, she took a graceful

[018-602] leave of Ada—none of me—and put her hand upon his proffered arm,

[018-603] and got into the carriage, which was a little, low, park carriage

[018-604] with a hood.

[018-605] “Come in, child,” she said to the pretty girl; “I shall want you. Go

[018-606] on!”

[018-607] The carriage rolled away, and the Frenchwoman, with the wrappers she

[018-608] had brought hanging over her arm, remained standing where she had

[018-609] alighted.

[018-610] I suppose there is nothing pride can so little bear with as pride

[018-611] itself, and that she was punished for her imperious manner. Her

[018-612] retaliation was the most singular I could have imagined. She remained

[018-613] perfectly still until the carriage had turned into the drive, and

[018-614] then, without the least discomposure of countenance, slipped off her

[018-615] shoes, left them on the ground, and walked deliberately in the same

[018-616] direction through the wettest of the wet grass.

[018-617] “Is that young woman mad?” said my guardian.

[018-618] “Oh, no, sir!” said the keeper, who, with his wife, was looking after

[018-619] her. “Hortense is not one of that sort. She has as good a head-piece

[018-620] as the best. But she’s mortal high and passionate—powerful high and

[018-621] passionate; and what with having notice to leave, and having others

[018-622] put above her, she don’t take kindly to it.”

[018-623] “But why should she walk shoeless through all that water?” said my

[018-624] guardian.

[018-625] “Why, indeed, sir, unless it is to cool her down!” said the man.

[018-626] “Or unless she fancies it’s blood,” said the woman. “She’d as soon

[018-627] walk through that as anything else, I think, when her own’s up!”

[018-628] We passed not far from the house a few minutes afterwards. Peaceful

[018-629] as it had looked when we first saw it, it looked even more so now,

[018-630] with a diamond spray glittering all about it, a light wind blowing,

[018-631] the birds no longer hushed but singing strongly, everything refreshed

[018-632] by the late rain, and the little carriage shining at the doorway like

[018-633] a fairy carriage made of silver. Still, very steadfastly and quietly

[018-634] walking towards it, a peaceful figure too in the landscape, went

[018-635] Mademoiselle Hortense, shoeless, through the wet grass.
