---
description: "On the eastern borders of Chancery Lane, that is to say, more"
id: ch-10
label: "Chapter 10: The Law-Writer"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[010-001] On the eastern borders of [[chancery-lane|Chancery Lane]], that is to say, more

[010-002] particularly in Cook’s Court, Cursitor Street, Mr. Snagsby,

[010-003] law-stationer, pursues his lawful calling. In the shade of Cook’s

[010-004] Court, at most times a shady place, Mr. Snagsby has dealt in

[010-005] all sorts of blank forms of legal process; in skins and rolls

[010-006] of parchment; in paper—foolscap, brief, draft, brown, white,

[010-007] whitey-brown, and blotting; in stamps; in office-quills, pens,

[010-008] ink, India-rubber, pounce, pins, pencils, sealing-wax, and

[010-009] wafers; in red tape and green ferret; in pocket-books, almanacs,

[010-010] diaries, and law lists; in string boxes, rulers, inkstands—glass

[010-011] and leaden—pen-knives, scissors, bodkins, and other small

[010-012] office-cutlery; in short, in articles too numerous to mention, ever

[010-013] since he was out of his time and went into partnership with Peffer.

[010-014] On that occasion, Cook’s Court was in a manner revolutionized by the

[010-015] new inscription in fresh paint, PEFFER AND SNAGSBY, displacing the

[010-016] time-honoured and not easily to be deciphered legend PEFFER only. For

[010-017] smoke, which is the [[london|London]] ivy, had so wreathed itself round Peffer’s

[010-018] name and clung to his dwelling-place that the affectionate parasite

[010-019] quite overpowered the parent tree.

[010-020] Peffer is never seen in Cook’s Court now. He is not expected there,

[010-021] for he has been recumbent this quarter of a century in the churchyard

[010-022] of St. Andrews, Holborn, with the waggons and hackney-coaches roaring

[010-023] past him all the day and half the night like one great dragon. If he

[010-024] ever steal forth when the dragon is at rest to air himself again in

[010-025] Cook’s Court until admonished to return by the crowing of the

[010-026] sanguine cock in the cellar at the little dairy in Cursitor Street,

[010-027] whose ideas of daylight it would be curious to ascertain, since he

[010-028] knows from his personal observation next to nothing about it—if

[010-029] Peffer ever do revisit the pale glimpses of Cook’s Court, which no

[010-030] law-stationer in the trade can positively deny, he comes invisibly,

[010-031] and no one is the worse or wiser.

[010-032] In his lifetime, and likewise in the period of Snagsby’s “time”

[010-033] of seven long years, there dwelt with Peffer in the same

[010-034] law-stationering premises a niece—a short, shrewd niece, something

[010-035] too violently compressed about the waist, and with a sharp nose like

[010-036] a sharp autumn evening, inclining to be frosty towards the end. The

[010-037] Cook’s Courtiers had a rumour flying among them that the mother of

[010-038] this niece did, in her daughter’s childhood, moved by too jealous a

[010-039] solicitude that her figure should approach perfection, lace her

[010-040] up every morning with her maternal foot against the bed-post for

[010-041] a stronger hold and purchase; and further, that she exhibited

[010-042] internally pints of vinegar and lemon-juice, which acids, they held,

[010-043] had mounted to the nose and temper of the patient. With whichsoever

[010-044] of the many tongues of Rumour this frothy report originated, it

[010-045] either never reached or never influenced the ears of young Snagsby,

[010-046] who, having wooed and won its fair subject on his arrival at man’s

[010-047] [[inheritance-and-property|estate]], entered into two partnerships at once. So now, in Cook’s

[010-048] Court, Cursitor Street, Mr. Snagsby and the niece are one; and the

[010-049] niece still cherishes her figure, which, however tastes may differ,

[010-050] is unquestionably so far precious that there is mighty little of it.

[010-051] Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby are not only one bone and one flesh, but, to the

[010-052] neighbours’ thinking, one voice too. That voice, appearing to proceed

[010-053] from Mrs. Snagsby alone, is heard in Cook’s Court very often. Mr.

[010-054] Snagsby, otherwise than as he finds expression through these dulcet

[010-055] tones, is rarely heard. He is a mild, bald, timid man with a shining

[010-056] head and a scrubby clump of black hair sticking out at the back. He

[010-057] tends to meekness and obesity. As he stands at his door in Cook’s

[010-058] Court in his grey shop-coat and black calico sleeves, looking up at

[010-059] the clouds, or stands behind a desk in his dark shop with a heavy

[010-060] flat ruler, snipping and slicing at sheepskin in company with his two

[010-061] ’prentices, he is emphatically a retiring and unassuming man. From

[010-062] beneath his feet, at such times, as from a shrill ghost unquiet in

[010-063] its grave, there frequently arise complainings and lamentations in

[010-064] the voice already mentioned; and haply, on some occasions when these

[010-065] reach a sharper pitch than usual, Mr. Snagsby mentions to the

[010-066] ’prentices, “I think my little woman is a-giving it to Guster!”

[010-067] This proper name, so used by Mr. Snagsby, has before now sharpened

[010-068] the wit of the Cook’s Courtiers to remark that it ought to be the

[010-069] name of Mrs. Snagsby, seeing that she might with great force and

[010-070] expression be termed a Guster, in compliment to her stormy character.

[010-071] It is, however, the possession, and the only possession except fifty

[010-072] shillings per annum and a very small box indifferently filled with

[010-073] clothing, of a lean young woman from a workhouse (by some supposed to

[010-074] have been christened Augusta) who, although she was farmed or

[010-075] contracted for during her growing time by an amiable benefactor of

[010-076] his species resident at Tooting, and cannot fail to have been

[010-077] developed under the most favourable circumstances, “has fits,” which

[010-078] the parish can’t account for.

[010-079] Guster, really aged three or four and twenty, but looking a round ten

[010-080] years older, goes cheap with this unaccountable drawback of fits, and

[010-081] is so apprehensive of being returned on the hands of her patron saint

[010-082] that except when she is found with her head in the pail, or the sink,

[010-083] or the copper, or the dinner, or anything else that happens to be

[010-084] near her at the time of her seizure, she is always at work. She is a

[010-085] satisfaction to the parents and guardians of the ’prentices, who feel

[010-086] that there is little danger of her inspiring tender emotions in the

[010-087] breast of youth; she is a satisfaction to Mrs. Snagsby, who can

[010-088] always find fault with her; she is a satisfaction to Mr. Snagsby, who

[010-089] thinks it a charity to keep her. The law-stationer’s establishment

[010-090] is, in Guster’s eyes, a temple of plenty and splendour. She believes

[010-091] the little drawing-room upstairs, always kept, as one may say, with

[010-092] its hair in papers and its pinafore on, to be the most elegant

[010-093] apartment in Christendom. The view it commands of Cook’s Court at one

[010-094] end (not to mention a squint into Cursitor Street) and of Coavinses’

[010-095] the sheriff’s officer’s backyard at the other she regards as a

[010-096] prospect of unequalled beauty. The portraits it displays in oil—and

[010-097] plenty of it too—of Mr. Snagsby looking at Mrs. Snagsby and of Mrs.

[010-098] Snagsby looking at Mr. Snagsby are in her eyes as achievements of

[010-099] Raphael or Titian. Guster has some recompenses for her many

[010-100] privations.

[010-101] Mr. Snagsby refers everything not in the practical mysteries of the

[010-102] business to Mrs. Snagsby. She manages the money, reproaches the

[010-103] tax-gatherers, appoints the times and places of devotion on Sundays,

[010-104] licenses Mr. Snagsby’s entertainments, and acknowledges no

[010-105] responsibility as to what she thinks fit to provide for dinner,

[010-106] insomuch that she is the high standard of comparison among the

[010-107] neighbouring wives a long way down [[chancery-court|Chancery]] Lane on both sides, and

[010-108] even out in Holborn, who in any domestic passages of arms habitually

[010-109] call upon their husbands to look at the difference between their (the

[010-110] wives’) position and Mrs. Snagsby’s, and their (the husbands’)

[010-111] behaviour and Mr. Snagsby’s. Rumour, always flying bat-like about

[010-112] Cook’s Court and skimming in and out at everybody’s windows, does say

[010-113] that Mrs. Snagsby is jealous and inquisitive and that Mr. Snagsby is

[010-114] sometimes worried out of house and home, and that if he had the

[010-115] spirit of a mouse he wouldn’t stand it. It is even observed that the

[010-116] wives who quote him to their self-willed husbands as a shining

[010-117] example in reality look down upon him and that nobody does so with

[010-118] greater superciliousness than one particular lady whose lord is more

[010-119] than suspected of laying his umbrella on her as an instrument of

[010-120] correction. But these vague whisperings may arise from Mr. Snagsby’s

[010-121] being in his way rather a meditative and poetical man, loving to walk

[010-122] in Staple Inn in the summer-time and to observe how countrified the

[010-123] sparrows and the leaves are, also to lounge about the Rolls Yard of a

[010-124] Sunday afternoon and to remark (if in good spirits) that there were

[010-125] old times once and that you’d find a stone coffin or two now under

[010-126] that chapel, he’ll be bound, if you was to dig for it. He solaces his

[010-127] imagination, too, by thinking of the many Chancellors and Vices, and

[010-128] Masters of the Rolls who are deceased; and he gets such a flavour of

[010-129] the country out of telling the two ’prentices how he HAS heard say

[010-130] that a brook “as clear as crystal” once ran right down the middle of

[010-131] Holborn, when Turnstile really was a turnstile, leading slap away

[010-132] into the meadows—gets such a flavour of the country out of this that

[010-133] he never wants to go there.

[010-134] The day is closing in and the gas is lighted, but is not yet fully

[010-135] effective, for it is not quite dark. Mr. Snagsby standing at his

[010-136] shop-door looking up at the clouds sees a crow who is out late skim

[010-137] westward over the slice of sky belonging to Cook’s Court. The crow

[010-138] flies straight across Chancery Lane and Lincoln’s Inn Garden into

[010-139] Lincoln’s Inn Fields.

[010-140] Here, in a large house, formerly a house of state, lives Mr.

[010-141] [[mr-tulkinghorn|Tulkinghorn]]. It is let off in sets of chambers now, and in those

[010-142] shrunken fragments of its greatness, lawyers lie like maggots in

[010-143] nuts. But its roomy staircases, passages, and antechambers still

[010-144] remain; and even its painted ceilings, where Allegory, in Roman

[010-145] helmet and celestial linen, sprawls among balustrades and pillars,

[010-146] flowers, clouds, and big-legged boys, and makes the head ache—as

[010-147] would seem to be Allegory’s object always, more or less. Here, among

[010-148] his many boxes labelled with transcendent names, lives Mr.

[010-149] Tulkinghorn, when not speechlessly at home in country-houses where

[010-150] the great ones of the earth are bored to death. Here he is to-day,

[010-151] quiet at his table. An oyster of the old school whom nobody can open.

[010-152] Like as he is to look at, so is his apartment in the dusk of

[010-153] the present afternoon. Rusty, out of date, withdrawing from

[010-154] attention, able to afford it. Heavy, broad-backed, old-fashioned,

[010-155] mahogany-and-horsehair chairs, not easily lifted; obsolete tables

[010-156] with spindle-legs and dusty baize covers; presentation prints of the

[010-157] holders of great titles in the last generation or the last but one,

[010-158] environ him. A thick and dingy Turkey-carpet muffles the floor where

[010-159] he sits, attended by two candles in old-fashioned silver candlesticks

[010-160] that give a very insufficient light to his large room. The titles on

[010-161] the backs of his books have retired into the binding; everything that

[010-162] can have a lock has got one; no key is visible. Very few loose papers

[010-163] are about. He has some manuscript near him, but is not referring

[010-164] to it. With the round top of an inkstand and two broken bits of

[010-165] sealing-wax he is silently and slowly working out whatever train of

[010-166] indecision is in his mind. Now the inkstand top is in the middle, now

[010-167] the red bit of sealing-wax, now the black bit. That’s not it. Mr.

[010-168] Tulkinghorn must gather them all up and begin again.

[010-169] Here, beneath the painted ceiling, with foreshortened Allegory

[010-170] staring down at his intrusion as if it meant to swoop upon him, and

[010-171] he cutting it dead, Mr. Tulkinghorn has at once his house and office.

[010-172] He keeps no staff, only one middle-aged man, usually a little out at

[010-173] elbows, who sits in a high pew in the hall and is rarely overburdened

[010-174] with business. Mr. Tulkinghorn is not in a common way. He wants no

[010-175] clerks. He is a great reservoir of confidences, not to be so tapped.

[010-176] His clients want HIM; he is all in all. Drafts that he requires to be

[010-177] drawn are drawn by special-pleaders in the temple on mysterious

[010-178] instructions; fair copies that he requires to be made are made at the

[010-179] stationers’, expense being no consideration. The middle-aged man in

[010-180] the pew knows scarcely more of the affairs of the peerage than any

[010-181] crossing-sweeper in Holborn.

[010-182] The red bit, the black bit, the inkstand top, the other inkstand top,

[010-183] the little sand-box. So! You to the middle, you to the right, you to

[010-184] the left. This train of indecision must surely be worked out now or

[010-185] never. Now! Mr. Tulkinghorn gets up, adjusts his spectacles, puts on

[010-186] his hat, puts the manuscript in his pocket, goes out, tells the

[010-187] middle-aged man out at elbows, “I shall be back presently.” Very

[010-188] rarely tells him anything more explicit.

[010-189] Mr. Tulkinghorn goes, as the crow came—not quite so straight, but

[010-190] nearly—to Cook’s Court, Cursitor Street. To Snagsby’s,

[010-191] Law-Stationer’s, Deeds engrossed and copied, Law-Writing executed in

[010-192] all its branches, &c., &c., &c.

[010-193] It is somewhere about five or six o’clock in the afternoon, and a

[010-194] balmy fragrance of warm tea hovers in Cook’s Court. It hovers about

[010-195] Snagsby’s door. The hours are early there: dinner at half-past one

[010-196] and supper at half-past nine. Mr. Snagsby was about to descend into

[010-197] the subterranean regions to take tea when he looked out of his door

[010-198] just now and saw the crow who was out late.

[010-199] “Master at home?”

[010-200] Guster is minding the shop, for the ’prentices take tea in the

[010-201] kitchen with Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby; consequently, the robe-maker’s two

[010-202] daughters, combing their curls at the two glasses in the two

[010-203] second-floor windows of the opposite house, are not driving the two

[010-204] ’prentices to distraction as they fondly suppose, but are merely

[010-205] awakening the unprofitable admiration of Guster, whose hair won’t

[010-206] grow, and never would, and it is confidently thought, never will.

[010-207] “Master at home?” says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

[010-208] Master is at home, and Guster will fetch him. Guster disappears, glad

[010-209] to get out of the shop, which she regards with mingled dread and

[010-210] veneration as a storehouse of awful implements of the great torture

[010-211] of the law—a place not to be entered after the gas is turned off.

[010-212] Mr. Snagsby appears, greasy, warm, herbaceous, and chewing. Bolts a

[010-213] bit of bread and butter. Says, “Bless my soul, sir! Mr. Tulkinghorn!”

[010-214] “I want half a word with you, Snagsby.”

[010-215] “Certainly, sir! Dear me, sir, why didn’t you send your young man

[010-216] round for me? Pray walk into the back shop, sir.” Snagsby has

[010-217] brightened in a moment.

[010-218] The confined room, strong of parchment-grease, is warehouse,

[010-219] counting-house, and copying-office. Mr. Tulkinghorn sits, facing

[010-220] round, on a stool at the desk.

[010-221] “[[jarndyce-and-jarndyce|Jarndyce and Jarndyce]], Snagsby.”

[010-222] “Yes, sir.” Mr. Snagsby turns up the gas and coughs behind his hand,

[010-223] modestly anticipating profit. Mr. Snagsby, as a timid man, is

[010-224] accustomed to cough with a variety of expressions, and so to save

[010-225] words.

[010-226] “You copied some affidavits in that cause for me lately.”

[010-227] “Yes, sir, we did.”

[010-228] “There was one of them,” says Mr. Tulkinghorn, carelessly

[010-229] feeling—tight, unopenable oyster of the old school!—in the wrong

[010-230] coat-pocket, “the handwriting of which is peculiar, and I rather

[010-231] like. As I happened to be passing, and thought I had it about me, I

[010-232] looked in to ask you—but I haven’t got it. No matter, any other time

[010-233] will do. Ah! here it is! I looked in to ask you who copied this.”

[010-234] “Who copied this, sir?” says Mr. Snagsby, taking it, laying it flat

[010-235] on the desk, and separating all the sheets at once with a twirl and a

[010-236] twist of the left hand peculiar to lawstationers. “We gave this out,

[010-237] sir. We were giving out rather a large quantity of work just at that

[010-238] time. I can tell you in a moment who copied it, sir, by referring to

[010-239] my book.”

[010-240] Mr. Snagsby takes his book down from the safe, makes another bolt of

[010-241] the bit of bread and butter which seemed to have stopped short, eyes

[010-242] the affidavit aside, and brings his right forefinger travelling down

[010-243] a page of the book, “Jewby—Packer—Jarndyce.”

[010-244] “Jarndyce! Here we are, sir,” says Mr. Snagsby. “To be sure! I might

[010-245] have remembered it. This was given out, sir, to a writer who lodges

[010-246] just over on the opposite side of the lane.”

[010-247] Mr. Tulkinghorn has seen the entry, found it before the

[010-248] law-stationer, read it while the forefinger was coming down the hill.

[010-249] “WHAT do you call him? Nemo?” says Mr. Tulkinghorn. “Nemo, sir. Here

[010-250] it is. Forty-two folio. Given out on the Wednesday night at eight

[010-251] o’clock, brought in on the Thursday morning at half after nine.”

[010-252] “Nemo!” repeats Mr. Tulkinghorn. “Nemo is Latin for no one.”

[010-253] “It must be English for some one, sir, I think,” Mr. Snagsby submits

[010-254] with his deferential cough. “It is a person’s name. Here it is, you

[010-255] see, sir! Forty-two folio. Given out Wednesday night, eight o’clock;

[010-256] brought in Thursday morning, half after nine.”

[010-257] The tail of Mr. Snagsby’s eye becomes conscious of the head of Mrs.

[010-258] Snagsby looking in at the shop-door to know what he means by

[010-259] deserting his tea. Mr. Snagsby addresses an explanatory cough to Mrs.

[010-260] Snagsby, as who should say, “My dear, a customer!”

[010-261] “Half after nine, sir,” repeats Mr. Snagsby. “Our law-writers, who

[010-262] live by job-work, are a queer lot; and this may not be his name, but

[010-263] it’s the name he goes by. I remember now, sir, that he gives it in a

[010-264] written advertisement he sticks up down at the Rule Office, and the

[010-265] King’s Bench Office, and the Judges’ Chambers, and so forth. You know

[010-266] the kind of document, sir—wanting employ?”

[010-267] Mr. Tulkinghorn glances through the little window at the back of

[010-268] Coavinses’, the sheriff’s officer’s, where lights shine in Coavinses’

[010-269] windows. Coavinses’ coffee-room is at the back, and the shadows of

[010-270] several gentlemen under a cloud loom cloudily upon the blinds. Mr.

[010-271] Snagsby takes the opportunity of slightly turning his head to glance

[010-272] over his shoulder at his little woman and to make apologetic motions

[010-273] with his mouth to this effect: “Tul-king-horn—rich—in-flu-en-tial!”

[010-274] “Have you given this man work before?” asks Mr. Tulkinghorn.

[010-275] “Oh, dear, yes, sir! Work of yours.”

[010-276] “Thinking of more important matters, I forget where you said he

[010-277] lived?”

[010-278] “Across the lane, sir. In fact, he lodges at a—” Mr. Snagsby makes

[010-279] another bolt, as if the bit of bread and butter were insurmountable

[010-280] “—at a rag and bottle shop.”

[010-281] “Can you show me the place as I go back?”

[010-282] “With the greatest pleasure, sir!”

[010-283] Mr. Snagsby pulls off his sleeves and his grey coat, pulls on his

[010-284] black coat, takes his hat from its peg. “Oh! Here is my little

[010-285] woman!” he says aloud. “My dear, will you be so kind as to tell one

[010-286] of the lads to look after the shop while I step across the lane with

[010-287] Mr. Tulkinghorn? Mrs. Snagsby, sir—I shan’t be two minutes, my

[010-288] love!”

[010-289] Mrs. Snagsby bends to the lawyer, retires behind the counter, peeps

[010-290] at them through the window-blind, goes softly into the back office,

[010-291] refers to the entries in the book still lying open. Is evidently

[010-292] curious.

[010-293] “You will find that the place is rough, sir,” says Mr. Snagsby,

[010-294] walking deferentially in the road and leaving the narrow pavement to

[010-295] the lawyer; “and the party is very rough. But they’re a wild lot in

[010-296] general, sir. The advantage of this particular man is that he never

[010-297] wants sleep. He’ll go at it right on end if you want him to, as long

[010-298] as ever you like.”

[010-299] It is quite dark now, and the gas-lamps have acquired their full

[010-300] effect. Jostling against clerks going to post the day’s [[document-and-letter|letters]], and

[010-301] against counsel and attorneys going home to dinner, and against

[010-302] plaintiffs and defendants and suitors of all sorts, and against the

[010-303] general crowd, in whose way the forensic wisdom of ages has

[010-304] interposed a million of obstacles to the transaction of the commonest

[010-305] business of life; diving through law and equity, and through that

[010-306] kindred mystery, the street mud, which is made of nobody knows what

[010-307] and collects about us nobody knows whence or how—we only knowing in

[010-308] general that when there is too much of it we find it necessary to

[010-309] shovel it away—the lawyer and the law-stationer come to a rag and

[010-310] bottle shop and general emporium of much disregarded merchandise,

[010-311] lying and being in the shadow of the wall of Lincoln’s Inn, and kept,

[010-312] as is announced in paint, to all whom it may concern, by one [[krook|Krook]].

[010-313] “This is where he lives, sir,” says the law-stationer.

[010-314] “This is where he lives, is it?” says the lawyer unconcernedly.

[010-315] “Thank you.”

[010-316] “Are you not going in, sir?”

[010-317] “No, thank you, no; I am going on to the Fields at present. Good

[010-318] evening. Thank you!” Mr. Snagsby lifts his hat and returns to his

[010-319] little woman and his tea.

[010-320] But Mr. Tulkinghorn does not go on to the Fields at present. He goes

[010-321] a short way, turns back, comes again to the shop of Mr. Krook, and

[010-322] enters it straight. It is dim enough, with a blot-headed candle or so

[010-323] in the windows, and an old man and a cat sitting in the back part by

[010-324] a fire. The old man rises and comes forward, with another blot-headed

[010-325] candle in his hand.

[010-326] “Pray is your lodger within?”

[010-327] “Male or female, sir?” says Mr. Krook.

[010-328] “Male. The person who does copying.”

[010-329] Mr. Krook has eyed his man narrowly. Knows him by sight. Has an

[010-330] indistinct impression of his aristocratic repute.

[010-331] “Did you wish to see him, sir?”

[010-332] “Yes.”

[010-333] “It’s what I seldom do myself,” says Mr. Krook with a grin. “Shall I

[010-334] call him down? But it’s a weak chance if he’d come, sir!”

[010-335] “I’ll go up to him, then,” says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

[010-336] “Second floor, sir. Take the candle. Up there!” Mr. Krook, with his

[010-337] cat beside him, stands at the bottom of the staircase, looking after

[010-338] Mr. Tulkinghorn. “Hi-hi!” he says when Mr. Tulkinghorn has nearly

[010-339] disappeared. The lawyer looks down over the hand-rail. The cat

[010-340] expands her wicked mouth and snarls at him.

[010-341] “Order, Lady Jane! Behave yourself to visitors, my lady! You know

[010-342] what they say of my lodger?” whispers Krook, going up a step or two.

[010-343] “What do they say of him?”

[010-344] “They say he has sold himself to the enemy, but you and I know

[010-345] better—he don’t buy. I’ll tell you what, though; my lodger is so

[010-346] black-humoured and gloomy that I believe he’d as soon make that

[010-347] bargain as any other. Don’t put him out, sir. That’s my advice!”

[010-348] Mr. Tulkinghorn with a nod goes on his way. He comes to the dark door

[010-349] on the second floor. He knocks, receives no answer, opens it, and

[010-350] accidentally extinguishes his candle in doing so.

[010-351] The air of the room is almost bad enough to have extinguished it if

[010-352] he had not. It is a small room, nearly black with soot, and grease,

[010-353] and dirt. In the rusty skeleton of a grate, pinched at the middle as

[010-354] if poverty had gripped it, a red coke fire burns low. In the corner

[010-355] by the chimney stand a deal table and a broken desk, a wilderness

[010-356] marked with a rain of ink. In another corner a ragged old portmanteau

[010-357] on one of the two chairs serves for cabinet or wardrobe; no larger

[010-358] one is needed, for it collapses like the cheeks of a starved man. The

[010-359] floor is bare, except that one old mat, trodden to shreds of

[010-360] rope-yarn, lies perishing upon the hearth. No curtain veils the

[010-361] darkness of the night, but the discoloured shutters are drawn

[010-362] together, and through the two gaunt holes pierced in them, famine

[010-363] might be staring in—the banshee of the man upon the bed.

[010-364] For, on a low bed opposite the fire, a confusion of dirty patchwork,

[010-365] lean-ribbed ticking, and coarse sacking, the lawyer, hesitating just

[010-366] within the doorway, sees a man. He lies there, dressed in shirt and

[010-367] trousers, with bare feet. He has a yellow look in the spectral

[010-368] darkness of a candle that has guttered down until the whole length of

[010-369] its wick (still burning) has doubled over and left a tower of

[010-370] winding-sheet above it. His hair is ragged, mingling with his

[010-371] whiskers and his beard—the latter, ragged too, and grown, like the

[010-372] scum and mist around him, in neglect. Foul and filthy as the room is,

[010-373] foul and filthy as the air is, it is not easy to perceive what fumes

[010-374] those are which most oppress the senses in it; but through the

[010-375] general sickliness and faintness, and the odour of stale tobacco,

[010-376] there comes into the lawyer’s mouth the bitter, vapid taste of opium.

[010-377] “Hallo, my friend!” he cries, and strikes his iron candlestick

[010-378] against the door.

[010-379] He thinks he has awakened his friend. He lies a little turned away,

[010-380] but his eyes are surely open.

[010-381] “Hallo, my friend!” he cries again. “Hallo! Hallo!”

[010-382] As he rattles on the door, the candle which has drooped so long goes

[010-383] out and leaves him in the dark, with the gaunt eyes in the shutters

[010-384] staring down upon the bed.
