---
description: "Sir Leicester Dedlock has got the better, for the time being, of the"
id: ch-28
label: "Chapter 28: The Ironmaster"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[028-001] [[sir-leicester-dedlock|Sir Leicester Dedlock]] has got the better, for the time being, of the

[028-002] family gout and is once more, in a literal no less than in a

[028-003] figurative point of view, upon his legs. He is at his place in

[028-004] Lincolnshire; but the waters are out again on the low-lying grounds,

[028-005] and the cold and damp steal into [[chesney-wold|Chesney Wold]], though well defended,

[028-006] and eke into Sir Leicester’s bones. The blazing fires of faggot and

[028-007] coal—Dedlock timber and antediluvian forest—that blaze upon the

[028-008] broad wide hearths and wink in the twilight on the frowning woods,

[028-009] sullen to see how trees are sacrificed, do not exclude the enemy. The

[028-010] hot-water pipes that trail themselves all over the house, the

[028-011] cushioned doors and windows, and the screens and curtains fail to

[028-012] supply the fires’ deficiencies and to satisfy Sir Leicester’s need.

[028-013] Hence the fashionable intelligence proclaims one morning to the

[028-014] listening earth that [[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]] is expected shortly to return to

[028-015] town for a few weeks.

[028-016] It is a melancholy truth that even great men have their poor

[028-017] relations. Indeed great men have often more than their fair share of

[028-018] poor relations, inasmuch as very red blood of the superior quality,

[028-019] like inferior blood unlawfully shed, WILL cry aloud and WILL be

[028-020] heard. Sir Leicester’s cousins, in the remotest degree, are so many

[028-021] Murders in the respect that they “will out.” Among whom there are

[028-022] cousins who are so poor that one might almost dare to think it would

[028-023] have been the happier for them never to have been plated links upon

[028-024] the Dedlock chain of gold, but to have been made of common iron at

[028-025] first and done base service.

[028-026] Service, however (with a few limited reservations, genteel but not

[028-027] profitable), they may not do, being of the Dedlock dignity. So they

[028-028] visit their richer cousins, and get into debt when they can, and live

[028-029] but shabbily when they can’t, and find—the women no husbands, and

[028-030] the men no wives—and ride in borrowed carriages, and sit at feasts

[028-031] that are never of their own making, and so go through high life. The

[028-032] rich family sum has been divided by so many figures, and they are the

[028-033] something over that nobody knows what to do with.

[028-034] Everybody on Sir Leicester Dedlock’s side of the question and of his

[028-035] way of thinking would appear to be his cousin more or less. From my

[028-036] Lord Boodle, through the Duke of Foodle, down to Noodle, Sir

[028-037] Leicester, like a glorious spider, stretches his threads of

[028-038] relationship. But while he is stately in the cousinship of the

[028-039] Everybodys, he is a kind and generous man, according to his dignified

[028-040] way, in the cousinship of the Nobodys; and at the present time, in

[028-041] despite of the damp, he stays out the visit of several such cousins

[028-042] at Chesney Wold with the constancy of a martyr.

[028-043] Of these, foremost in the front rank stands Volumnia Dedlock, a young

[028-044] lady (of sixty) who is doubly highly related, having the honour to be

[028-045] a poor relation, by the mother’s side, to another great family. Miss

[028-046] Volumnia, displaying in early life a pretty talent for cutting

[028-047] ornaments out of coloured paper, and also for singing to the guitar

[028-048] in the Spanish tongue, and propounding French conundrums in country

[028-049] houses, passed the twenty years of her existence between twenty and

[028-050] forty in a sufficiently agreeable manner. Lapsing then out of date

[028-051] and being considered to bore mankind by her vocal performances in the

[028-052] Spanish language, she retired to Bath, where she lives slenderly on

[028-053] an annual present from Sir Leicester and whence she makes occasional

[028-054] resurrections in the country houses of her cousins. She has an

[028-055] extensive acquaintance at Bath among appalling old gentlemen with

[028-056] thin legs and nankeen trousers, and is of high standing in that

[028-057] dreary city. But she is a little dreaded elsewhere in consequence of

[028-058] an indiscreet profusion in the article of rouge and persistency in an

[028-059] obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird’s-eggs.

[028-060] In any country in a wholesome state, Volumnia would be a clear case

[028-061] for the pension list. Efforts have been made to get her on it, and

[028-062] when William Buffy came in, it was fully expected that her name would

[028-063] be put down for a couple of hundred a year. But William Buffy somehow

[028-064] discovered, contrary to all expectation, that these were not the

[028-065] times when it could be done, and this was the first clear indication

[028-066] Sir Leicester Dedlock had conveyed to him that the country was going

[028-067] to pieces.

[028-068] There is likewise the Honourable Bob Stables, who can make warm

[028-069] mashes with the skill of a veterinary surgeon and is a better shot

[028-070] than most gamekeepers. He has been for some time particularly

[028-071] desirous to serve his country in a post of good emoluments,

[028-072] unaccompanied by any trouble or responsibility. In a well-regulated

[028-073] body politic this natural desire on the part of a spirited young

[028-074] gentleman so highly connected would be speedily recognized, but

[028-075] somehow William Buffy found when he came in that these were not times

[028-076] in which he could manage that little matter either, and this was the

[028-077] second indication Sir Leicester Dedlock had conveyed to him that the

[028-078] country was going to pieces.

[028-079] The rest of the cousins are ladies and gentlemen of various ages and

[028-080] capacities, the major part amiable and sensible and likely to have

[028-081] done well enough in life if they could have overcome their

[028-082] cousinship; as it is, they are almost all a little worsted by it, and

[028-083] lounge in purposeless and listless paths, and seem to be quite as

[028-084] much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can be

[028-085] how to dispose of them.

[028-086] In this society, and where not, my Lady Dedlock reigns supreme.

[028-087] Beautiful, elegant, accomplished, and powerful in her little world

[028-088] (for the world of fashion does not stretch ALL the way from pole to

[028-089] pole), her influence in Sir Leicester’s house, however haughty and

[028-090] indifferent her manner, is greatly to improve it and refine it. The

[028-091] cousins, even those older cousins who were paralysed when Sir

[028-092] Leicester married her, do her feudal homage; and the Honourable Bob

[028-093] Stables daily repeats to some chosen person between breakfast and

[028-094] lunch his favourite original remark, that she is the best-groomed

[028-095] woman in the whole stud.

[028-096] Such the guests in the long drawing-room at Chesney Wold this dismal

[028-097] night when the step on the Ghost’s Walk (inaudible here, however)

[028-098] might be the step of a deceased cousin shut out in the cold. It is

[028-099] near bed-time. Bedroom fires blaze brightly all over the house,

[028-100] raising ghosts of grim furniture on wall and ceiling. Bedroom

[028-101] candlesticks bristle on the distant table by the door, and cousins

[028-102] yawn on ottomans. Cousins at the piano, cousins at the soda-water

[028-103] tray, cousins rising from the card-table, cousins gathered round the

[028-104] fire. Standing on one side of his own peculiar fire (for there are

[028-105] two), Sir Leicester. On the opposite side of the broad hearth, my

[028-106] Lady at her table. Volumnia, as one of the more privileged cousins,

[028-107] in a luxurious chair between them. Sir Leicester glancing, with

[028-108] magnificent displeasure, at the rouge and the pearl necklace.

[028-109] “I occasionally meet on my staircase here,” drawls Volumnia, whose

[028-110] thoughts perhaps are already hopping up it to bed, after a long

[028-111] evening of very desultory talk, “one of the prettiest girls, I think,

[028-112] that I ever saw in my life.”

[028-113] “A _protégée_ of my Lady’s,” observes Sir Leicester.

[028-114] “I thought so. I felt sure that some uncommon eye must have picked

[028-115] that girl out. She really is a marvel. A dolly sort of beauty

[028-116] perhaps,” says Miss Volumnia, reserving her own sort, “but in its

[028-117] way, perfect; such bloom I never saw!”

[028-118] Sir Leicester, with his magnificent glance of displeasure at the

[028-119] rouge, appears to say so too.

[028-120] “Indeed,” remarks my Lady languidly, “if there is any uncommon eye in

[028-121] the case, it is Mrs. Rouncewell’s, and not mine. Rosa is her

[028-122] discovery.”

[028-123] “Your maid, I suppose?”

[028-124] “No. My anything; pet—secretary—messenger—I don’t know what.”

[028-125] “You like to have her about you, as you would like to have a flower,

[028-126] or a bird, or a picture, or a poodle—no, not a poodle, though—or

[028-127] anything else that was equally pretty?” says Volumnia, sympathizing.

[028-128] “Yes, how charming now! And how well that delightful old soul Mrs.

[028-129] Rouncewell is looking. She must be an immense age, and yet she is as

[028-130] active and handsome! She is the dearest friend I have, positively!”

[028-131] Sir Leicester feels it to be right and fitting that the housekeeper

[028-132] of Chesney Wold should be a remarkable person. Apart from that, he

[028-133] has a real regard for Mrs. Rouncewell and likes to hear her praised.

[028-134] So he says, “You are right, Volumnia,” which Volumnia is extremely

[028-135] glad to hear.

[028-136] “She has no daughter of her own, has she?”

[028-137] “Mrs. Rouncewell? No, Volumnia. She has a son. Indeed, she had two.”

[028-138] My Lady, whose chronic malady of boredom has been sadly aggravated by

[028-139] Volumnia this evening, glances wearily towards the candlesticks and

[028-140] heaves a noiseless sigh.

[028-141] “And it is a remarkable example of the confusion into which the

[028-142] present age has fallen; of the obliteration of landmarks, the opening

[028-143] of floodgates, and the uprooting of distinctions,” says Sir Leicester

[028-144] with stately gloom, “that I have been informed by [[mr-tulkinghorn|Mr. Tulkinghorn]]

[028-145] that Mrs. Rouncewell’s son has been invited to go into [[parliament|Parliament]].”

[028-146] Miss Volumnia utters a little sharp scream.

[028-147] “Yes, indeed,” repeats Sir Leicester. “Into Parliament.”

[028-148] “I never heard of such a thing! Good gracious, what is the man?”

[028-149] exclaims Volumnia.

[028-150] “He is called, I believe—an—ironmaster.” Sir Leicester says it

[028-151] slowly and with gravity and doubt, as not being sure but that he is

[028-152] called a lead-mistress or that the right word may be some other word

[028-153] expressive of some other relationship to some other metal.

[028-154] Volumnia utters another little scream.

[028-155] “He has declined the proposal, if my information from Mr. Tulkinghorn

[028-156] be correct, as I have no doubt it is. Mr. Tulkinghorn being always

[028-157] correct and exact; still that does not,” says Sir Leicester, “that

[028-158] does not lessen the anomaly, which is fraught with strange

[028-159] considerations—startling considerations, as it appears to me.”

[028-160] Miss Volumnia rising with a look candlestick-wards, Sir Leicester

[028-161] politely performs the grand tour of the drawing-room, brings one, and

[028-162] lights it at my Lady’s shaded lamp.

[028-163] “I must beg you, my Lady,” he says while doing so, “to remain a few

[028-164] moments, for this individual of whom I speak arrived this evening

[028-165] shortly before dinner and requested in a very becoming note”—Sir

[028-166] Leicester, with his habitual regard to truth, dwells upon it—“I am

[028-167] bound to say, in a very becoming and well-expressed note, the favour

[028-168] of a short interview with yourself and MYself on the subject of this

[028-169] young girl. As it appeared that he wished to depart to-night, I

[028-170] replied that we would see him before retiring.”

[028-171] Miss Volumnia with a third little scream takes flight, wishing her

[028-172] hosts—O Lud!—well rid of the—what is it?—ironmaster!

[028-173] The other cousins soon disperse, to the last cousin there. Sir

[028-174] Leicester rings the bell, “Make my compliments to Mr. Rouncewell, in

[028-175] the housekeeper’s apartments, and say I can receive him now.”

[028-176] My Lady, who has heard all this with slight attention outwardly,

[028-177] looks towards Mr. Rouncewell as he comes in. He is a little over

[028-178] fifty perhaps, of a good figure, like his mother, and has a clear

[028-179] voice, a broad forehead from which his dark hair has retired, and a

[028-180] shrewd though open face. He is a responsible-looking gentleman

[028-181] dressed in black, portly enough, but strong and active. Has a

[028-182] perfectly natural and easy air and is not in the least embarrassed by

[028-183] the great presence into which he comes.

[028-184] “Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock, as I have already apologized for

[028-185] intruding on you, I cannot do better than be very brief. I thank you,

[028-186] Sir Leicester.”

[028-187] The head of the Dedlocks has motioned towards a sofa between himself

[028-188] and my Lady. Mr. Rouncewell quietly takes his seat there.

[028-189] “In these busy times, when so many great undertakings are in

[028-190] progress, people like myself have so many workmen in so many places

[028-191] that we are always on the flight.”

[028-192] Sir Leicester is content enough that the ironmaster should feel that

[028-193] there is no hurry there; there, in that ancient house, rooted in that

[028-194] quiet park, where the ivy and the moss have had time to mature, and

[028-195] the gnarled and warted elms and the umbrageous oaks stand deep in the

[028-196] fern and leaves of a hundred years; and where the sun-dial on the

[028-197] terrace has dumbly recorded for centuries that time which was as much

[028-198] the [[inheritance-and-property|property]] of every Dedlock—while he lasted—as the house and

[028-199] lands. Sir Leicester sits down in an easy-chair, opposing his repose

[028-200] and that of Chesney Wold to the restless flights of ironmasters.

[028-201] “Lady Dedlock has been so kind,” proceeds Mr. Rouncewell with a

[028-202] respectful glance and a bow that way, “as to place near her a young

[028-203] beauty of the name of Rosa. Now, my son has fallen in love with Rosa

[028-204] and has asked my consent to his proposing marriage to her and to

[028-205] their becoming engaged if she will take him—which I suppose she

[028-206] will. I have never seen Rosa until to-day, but I have some confidence

[028-207] in my son’s good sense—even in love. I find her what he represents

[028-208] her, to the best of my judgment; and my mother speaks of her with

[028-209] great commendation.”

[028-210] “She in all respects deserves it,” says my Lady.

[028-211] “I am happy, Lady Dedlock, that you say so, and I need not comment on

[028-212] the value to me of your kind opinion of her.”

[028-213] “That,” observes Sir Leicester with unspeakable grandeur, for he

[028-214] thinks the ironmaster a little too glib, “must be quite unnecessary.”

[028-215] “Quite unnecessary, Sir Leicester. Now, my son is a very young man,

[028-216] and Rosa is a very young woman. As I made my way, so my son must make

[028-217] his; and his being married at present is out of the question. But

[028-218] supposing I gave my consent to his engaging himself to this pretty

[028-219] girl, if this pretty girl will engage herself to him, I think it a

[028-220] piece of candour to say at once—I am sure, Sir Leicester and Lady

[028-221] Dedlock, you will understand and excuse me—I should make it a

[028-222] condition that she did not remain at Chesney Wold. Therefore, before

[028-223] communicating further with my son, I take the liberty of saying that

[028-224] if her removal would be in any way inconvenient or objectionable, I

[028-225] will hold the matter over with him for any reasonable time and leave

[028-226] it precisely where it is.”

[028-227] Not remain at Chesney Wold! Make it a condition! All Sir Leicester’s

[028-228] old misgivings relative to Wat Tyler and the people in the iron

[028-229] districts who do nothing but turn out by torchlight come in a shower

[028-230] upon his head, the fine grey hair of which, as well as of his

[028-231] whiskers, actually stirs with indignation.

[028-232] “Am I to understand, sir,” says Sir Leicester, “and is my Lady to

[028-233] understand”—he brings her in thus specially, first as a point of

[028-234] gallantry, and next as a point of prudence, having great reliance on

[028-235] her sense—“am I to understand, Mr. Rouncewell, and is my Lady to

[028-236] understand, sir, that you consider this young woman too good for

[028-237] Chesney Wold or likely to be injured by remaining here?”

[028-238] “Certainly not, Sir Leicester,”

[028-239] “I am glad to hear it.” Sir Leicester very lofty indeed.

[028-240] “Pray, Mr. Rouncewell,” says my Lady, warning Sir Leicester off with

[028-241] the slightest gesture of her pretty hand, as if he were a fly,

[028-242] “explain to me what you mean.”

[028-243] “Willingly, Lady Dedlock. There is nothing I could desire more.”

[028-244] Addressing her composed face, whose intelligence, however, is too

[028-245] quick and active to be concealed by any studied impassiveness,

[028-246] however habitual, to the strong Saxon face of the visitor, a picture

[028-247] of resolution and perseverance, my Lady listens with attention,

[028-248] occasionally slightly bending her head.

[028-249] “I am the son of your housekeeper, Lady Dedlock, and passed my

[028-250] childhood about this house. My mother has lived here half a

[028-251] century and will die here I have no doubt. She is one of those

[028-252] examples—perhaps as good a one as there is—of love, and attachment,

[028-253] and fidelity in such a nation, which England may well be proud of,

[028-254] but of which no order can appropriate the whole pride or the whole

[028-255] merit, because such an instance bespeaks high worth on two sides—on

[028-256] the great side assuredly, on the small one no less assuredly.”

[028-257] Sir Leicester snorts a little to hear the law laid down in this way,

[028-258] but in his honour and his love of truth, he freely, though silently,

[028-259] admits the justice of the ironmaster’s proposition.

[028-260] “Pardon me for saying what is so obvious, but I wouldn’t have it

[028-261] hastily supposed,” with the least turn of his eyes towards Sir

[028-262] Leicester, “that I am ashamed of my mother’s position here, or

[028-263] wanting in all just respect for Chesney Wold and the family.

[028-264] I certainly may have desired—I certainly have desired, Lady

[028-265] Dedlock—that my mother should retire after so many years and end

[028-266] her days with me. But as I have found that to sever this strong bond

[028-267] would be to break her heart, I have long abandoned that idea.”

[028-268] Sir Leicester very magnificent again at the notion of Mrs. Rouncewell

[028-269] being spirited off from her natural home to end her days with an

[028-270] ironmaster.

[028-271] “I have been,” proceeds the visitor in a modest, clear way, “an

[028-272] apprentice and a workman. I have lived on workman’s wages, years and

[028-273] years, and beyond a certain point have had to educate myself. My wife

[028-274] was a foreman’s daughter, and plainly brought up. We have three

[028-275] daughters besides this son of whom I have spoken, and being

[028-276] fortunately able to give them greater advantages than we have had

[028-277] ourselves, we have educated them well, very well. It has been one of

[028-278] our great cares and pleasures to make them worthy of any station.”

[028-279] A little boastfulness in his fatherly tone here, as if he added in

[028-280] his heart, “even of the Chesney Wold station.” Not a little more

[028-281] magnificence, therefore, on the part of Sir Leicester.

[028-282] “All this is so frequent, Lady Dedlock, where I live, and among the

[028-283] class to which I belong, that what would be generally called unequal

[028-284] marriages are not of such rare occurrence with us as elsewhere. A son

[028-285] will sometimes make it known to his father that he has fallen in

[028-286] love, say, with a young woman in the factory. The father, who once

[028-287] worked in a factory himself, will be a little disappointed at first

[028-288] very possibly. It may be that he had other views for his son.

[028-289] However, the chances are that having ascertained the young woman to

[028-290] be of unblemished character, he will say to his son, ‘I must be quite

[028-291] sure you are in earnest here. This is a serious matter for both of

[028-292] you. Therefore I shall have this girl educated for two years,’ or it

[028-293] may be, ‘I shall place this girl at the same school with your sisters

[028-294] for such a time, during which you will give me your word and honour

[028-295] to see her only so often. If at the expiration of that time, when she

[028-296] has so far profited by her advantages as that you may be upon a fair

[028-297] equality, you are both in the same mind, I will do my part to make

[028-298] you happy.’ I know of several cases such as I describe, my Lady, and

[028-299] I think they indicate to me my own course now.”

[028-300] Sir Leicester’s magnificence explodes. Calmly, but terribly.

[028-301] “Mr. Rouncewell,” says Sir Leicester with his right hand in the

[028-302] breast of his blue coat, the attitude of state in which he is painted

[028-303] in the gallery, “do you draw a parallel between Chesney Wold and a—”

[028-304] Here he resists a disposition to choke, “a factory?”

[028-305] “I need not reply, Sir Leicester, that the two places are very

[028-306] different; but for the purposes of this case, I think a parallel may

[028-307] be justly drawn between them.”

[028-308] Sir Leicester directs his majestic glance down one side of the long

[028-309] drawing-room and up the other before he can believe that he is awake.

[028-310] “Are you aware, sir, that this young woman whom my Lady—my Lady—has

[028-311] placed near her person was brought up at the village school outside

[028-312] the gates?”

[028-313] “Sir Leicester, I am quite aware of it. A very good school it is, and

[028-314] handsomely supported by this family.”

[028-315] “Then, Mr. Rouncewell,” returns Sir Leicester, “the application of

[028-316] what you have said is, to me, incomprehensible.”

[028-317] “Will it be more comprehensible, Sir Leicester, if I say,” the

[028-318] ironmaster is reddening a little, “that I do not regard the village

[028-319] school as teaching everything desirable to be known by my son’s

[028-320] wife?”

[028-321] From the village school of Chesney Wold, intact as it is this minute,

[028-322] to the whole framework of society; from the whole framework of

[028-323] society, to the aforesaid framework receiving tremendous cracks in

[028-324] consequence of people (iron-masters, lead-mistresses, and what not)

[028-325] not minding their catechism, and getting out of the station unto

[028-326] which they are called—necessarily and for ever, according to Sir

[028-327] Leicester’s rapid logic, the first station in which they happen to

[028-328] find themselves; and from that, to their educating other people out

[028-329] of THEIR stations, and so obliterating the landmarks, and opening the

[028-330] floodgates, and all the rest of it; this is the swift progress of the

[028-331] Dedlock mind.

[028-332] “My Lady, I beg your pardon. Permit me, for one moment!” She has

[028-333] given a faint indication of intending to speak. “Mr. Rouncewell, our

[028-334] views of duty, and our views of station, and our views of education,

[028-335] and our views of—in short, ALL our views—are so diametrically

[028-336] opposed, that to prolong this discussion must be repellent to your

[028-337] feelings and repellent to my own. This young woman is honoured with

[028-338] my Lady’s notice and favour. If she wishes to withdraw herself from

[028-339] that notice and favour or if she chooses to place herself under the

[028-340] influence of any one who may in his peculiar opinions—you will allow

[028-341] me to say, in his peculiar opinions, though I readily admit that he

[028-342] is not accountable for them to me—who may, in his peculiar opinions,

[028-343] withdraw her from that notice and favour, she is at any time at

[028-344] liberty to do so. We are obliged to you for the plainness with which

[028-345] you have spoken. It will have no effect of itself, one way or other,

[028-346] on the young woman’s position here. Beyond this, we can make no

[028-347] terms; and here we beg—if you will be so good—to leave the

[028-348] subject.”

[028-349] The visitor pauses a moment to give my Lady an opportunity, but she

[028-350] says nothing. He then rises and replies, “Sir Leicester and Lady

[028-351] Dedlock, allow me to thank you for your attention and only to observe

[028-352] that I shall very seriously recommend my son to conquer his present

[028-353] inclinations. Good night!”

[028-354] “Mr. Rouncewell,” says Sir Leicester with all the nature of a

[028-355] gentleman shining in him, “it is late, and the roads are dark. I hope

[028-356] your time is not so precious but that you will allow my Lady and

[028-357] myself to offer you the hospitality of Chesney Wold, for to-night at

[028-358] least.”

[028-359] “I hope so,” adds my Lady.

[028-360] “I am much obliged to you, but I have to travel all night in order to

[028-361] reach a distant part of the country punctually at an appointed time

[028-362] in the morning.”

[028-363] Therewith the ironmaster takes his departure, Sir Leicester ringing

[028-364] the bell and my Lady rising as he leaves the room.

[028-365] When my Lady goes to her boudoir, she sits down thoughtfully by the

[028-366] fire, and inattentive to the Ghost’s Walk, looks at Rosa, [[document-and-letter|writing]] in

[028-367] an inner room. Presently my Lady calls her.

[028-368] “Come to me, child. Tell me the truth. Are you in love?”

[028-369] “Oh! My Lady!”

[028-370] My Lady, looking at the downcast and blushing face, says smiling,

[028-371] “Who is it? Is it Mrs. Rouncewell’s grandson?”

[028-372] “Yes, if you please, my Lady. But I don’t know that I am in love with

[028-373] him—yet.”

[028-374] “Yet, you silly little thing! Do you know that he loves YOU, yet?”

[028-375] “I think he likes me a little, my Lady.” And Rosa bursts into tears.

[028-376] Is this Lady Dedlock standing beside the village beauty, smoothing

[028-377] her dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes so

[028-378] full of musing interest? Aye, indeed it is!

[028-379] “Listen to me, child. You are young and true, and I believe you are

[028-380] attached to me.”

[028-381] “Indeed I am, my Lady. Indeed there is nothing in the world I

[028-382] wouldn’t do to show how much.”

[028-383] “And I don’t think you would wish to leave me just yet, Rosa, even

[028-384] for a lover?”

[028-385] “No, my Lady! Oh, no!” Rosa looks up for the first time, quite

[028-386] frightened at the thought.

[028-387] “Confide in me, my child. Don’t fear me. I wish you to be happy, and

[028-388] will make you so—if I can make anybody happy on this earth.”

[028-389] Rosa, with fresh tears, kneels at her feet and kisses her hand. My

[028-390] Lady takes the hand with which she has caught it, and standing with

[028-391] her eyes fixed on the fire, puts it about and about between her own

[028-392] two hands, and gradually lets it fall. Seeing her so absorbed, Rosa

[028-393] softly withdraws; but still my Lady’s eyes are on the fire.

[028-394] In search of what? Of any hand that is no more, of any hand that

[028-395] never was, of any touch that might have magically changed her life?

[028-396] Or does she listen to the Ghost’s Walk and think what step does it

[028-397] most resemble? A man’s? A woman’s? The pattering of a little child’s

[028-398] feet, ever coming on—on—on? Some melancholy influence is upon her,

[028-399] or why should so proud a lady close the doors and sit alone upon the

[028-400] hearth so desolate?

[028-401] Volumnia is away next day, and all the cousins are scattered before

[028-402] dinner. Not a cousin of the batch but is amazed to hear from Sir

[028-403] Leicester at breakfast-time of the obliteration of landmarks, and

[028-404] opening of floodgates, and cracking of the framework of society,

[028-405] manifested through Mrs. Rouncewell’s son. Not a cousin of the batch

[028-406] but is really indignant, and connects it with the feebleness of

[028-407] William Buffy when in office, and really does feel deprived of a

[028-408] stake in the country—or the pension list—or something—by fraud and

[028-409] wrong. As to Volumnia, she is handed down the great staircase by Sir

[028-410] Leicester, as eloquent upon the theme as if there were a general

[028-411] rising in the north of England to obtain her rouge-pot and pearl

[028-412] necklace. And thus, with a clatter of maids and valets—for it is one

[028-413] appurtenance of their cousinship that however difficult they may find

[028-414] it to keep themselves, they MUST keep maids and valets—the cousins

[028-415] disperse to the four winds of heaven; and the one wintry wind that

[028-416] blows to-day shakes a shower from the trees near the deserted house,

[028-417] as if all the cousins had been changed into leaves.
