---
description: "Charley and I did not set off alone upon our expedition into"
id: ch-36
label: "Chapter 36: Chesney Wold"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[036-001] Charley and I did not set off alone upon our expedition into

[036-002] Lincolnshire. My [[john-jarndyce|guardian]] had made up his mind not to lose sight of

[036-003] me until I was safe in Mr. Boythorn’s house, so he accompanied us,

[036-004] and we were two days upon the road. I found every breath of air, and

[036-005] every scent, and every flower and leaf and blade of grass, and every

[036-006] passing cloud, and everything in nature, more beautiful and wonderful

[036-007] to me than I had ever found it yet. This was my first gain from my

[036-008] illness. How little I had lost, when the wide world was so full of

[036-009] delight for me.

[036-010] My guardian intending to go back immediately, we appointed, on our

[036-011] way down, a day when my dear girl should come. I wrote her a letter,

[036-012] of which he took charge, and he left us within half an hour of our

[036-013] arrival at our destination, on a delightful evening in the early

[036-014] summer-time.

[036-015] If a good fairy had built the house for me with a wave of her wand,

[036-016] and I had been a princess and her favoured god-child, I could not

[036-017] have been more considered in it. So many preparations were made for

[036-018] me and such an endearing remembrance was shown of all my little

[036-019] tastes and likings that I could have sat down, overcome, a dozen

[036-020] times before I had revisited half the rooms. I did better than that,

[036-021] however, by showing them all to Charley instead. Charley’s delight

[036-022] calmed mine; and after we had had a walk in the garden, and Charley

[036-023] had exhausted her whole vocabulary of admiring expressions, I was as

[036-024] tranquilly happy as I ought to have been. It was a great comfort to

[036-025] be able to say to myself after tea, “[[esther-summerson|Esther]], my dear, I think you are

[036-026] quite sensible enough to sit down now and write a note of thanks to

[036-027] your host.” He had left a note of welcome for me, as sunny as his own

[036-028] face, and had confided his bird to my care, which I knew to be his

[036-029] highest mark of confidence. Accordingly I wrote a little note to him

[036-030] in [[london|London]], telling him how all his favourite plants and trees were

[036-031] looking, and how the most astonishing of birds had chirped the

[036-032] honours of the house to me in the most hospitable manner, and how,

[036-033] after singing on my shoulder, to the inconceivable rapture of my

[036-034] little maid, he was then at roost in the usual corner of his cage,

[036-035] but whether dreaming or no I could not report. My note finished and

[036-036] sent off to the post, I made myself very busy in unpacking and

[036-037] arranging; and I sent Charley to bed in good time and told her I

[036-038] should want her no more that night.

[036-039] For I had not yet looked in the glass and had never asked to have my

[036-040] own restored to me. I knew this to be a weakness which must be

[036-041] overcome, but I had always said to myself that I would begin afresh

[036-042] when I got to where I now was. Therefore I had wanted to be alone,

[036-043] and therefore I said, now alone, in my own room, “Esther, if you are

[036-044] to be happy, if you are to have any right to pray to be true-hearted,

[036-045] you must keep your word, my dear.” I was quite resolved to keep it,

[036-046] but I sat down for a little while first to reflect upon all my

[036-047] blessings. And then I said my prayers and thought a little more.

[036-048] My hair had not been cut off, though it had been in danger more than

[036-049] once. It was long and thick. I let it down, and shook it out, and

[036-050] went up to the glass upon the dressing-table. There was a little

[036-051] muslin curtain drawn across it. I drew it back and stood for a moment

[036-052] looking through such a veil of my own hair that I could see nothing

[036-053] else. Then I put my hair aside and looked at the reflection in the

[036-054] mirror, encouraged by seeing how placidly it looked at me. I was very

[036-055] much changed—oh, very, very much. At first my face was so strange to

[036-056] me that I think I should have put my hands before it and started back

[036-057] but for the encouragement I have mentioned. Very soon it became more

[036-058] familiar, and then I knew the extent of the alteration in it better

[036-059] than I had done at first. It was not like what I had expected, but I

[036-060] had expected nothing definite, and I dare say anything definite would

[036-061] have surprised me.

[036-062] I had never been a beauty and had never thought myself one, but I had

[036-063] been very different from this. It was all gone now. Heaven was so

[036-064] good to me that I could let it go with a few not bitter tears and

[036-065] could stand there arranging my hair for the night quite thankfully.

[036-066] One thing troubled me, and I considered it for a long time before I

[036-067] went to sleep. I had kept [[allan-woodcourt|Mr. Woodcourt]]’s flowers. When they were

[036-068] withered I had dried them and put them in a book that I was fond of.

[036-069] Nobody knew this, not even [[ada-clare|Ada]]. I was doubtful whether I had a right

[036-070] to preserve what he had sent to one so different—whether it was

[036-071] generous towards him to do it. I wished to be generous to him, even

[036-072] in the secret depths of my heart, which he would never know, because

[036-073] I could have loved him—could have been devoted to him. At last I

[036-074] came to the conclusion that I might keep them if I treasured them

[036-075] only as a remembrance of what was irrevocably past and gone, never to

[036-076] be looked back on any more, in any other light. I hope this may not

[036-077] seem trivial. I was very much in earnest.

[036-078] I took care to be up early in the morning and to be before the glass

[036-079] when Charley came in on tiptoe.

[036-080] “Dear, dear, miss!” cried Charley, starting. “Is that you?”

[036-081] “Yes, Charley,” said I, quietly putting up my hair. “And I am very

[036-082] well indeed, and very happy.”

[036-083] I saw it was a weight off Charley’s mind, but it was a greater weight

[036-084] off mine. I knew the worst now and was composed to it. I shall not

[036-085] conceal, as I go on, the weaknesses I could not quite conquer, but

[036-086] they always passed from me soon and the happier frame of mind stayed

[036-087] by me faithfully.

[036-088] Wishing to be fully re-established in my strength and my good spirits

[036-089] before Ada came, I now laid down a little series of plans with

[036-090] Charley for being in the fresh air all day long. We were to be out

[036-091] before breakfast, and were to dine early, and were to be out again

[036-092] before and after dinner, and were to talk in the garden after tea,

[036-093] and were to go to rest betimes, and were to climb every hill and

[036-094] explore every road, lane, and field in the neighbourhood. As to

[036-095] restoratives and strengthening delicacies, Mr. Boythorn’s good

[036-096] housekeeper was for ever trotting about with something to eat or

[036-097] drink in her hand; I could not even be heard of as resting in the

[036-098] park but she would come trotting after me with a basket, her cheerful

[036-099] face shining with a lecture on the importance of frequent

[036-100] nourishment. Then there was a pony expressly for my riding, a chubby

[036-101] pony with a short neck and a mane all over his eyes who could

[036-102] canter—when he would—so easily and quietly that he was a treasure.

[036-103] In a very few days he would come to me in the paddock when I called

[036-104] him, and eat out of my hand, and follow me about. We arrived at such

[036-105] a capital understanding that when he was jogging with me lazily, and

[036-106] rather obstinately, down some shady lane, if I patted his neck and

[036-107] said, “Stubbs, I am surprised you don’t canter when you know how much

[036-108] I like it; and I think you might oblige me, for you are only getting

[036-109] stupid and going to sleep,” he would give his head a comical shake or

[036-110] two and set off directly, while Charley would stand still and laugh

[036-111] with such enjoyment that her laughter was like music. I don’t know

[036-112] who had given Stubbs his name, but it seemed to belong to him as

[036-113] naturally as his rough coat. Once we put him in a little chaise and

[036-114] drove him triumphantly through the green lanes for five miles; but

[036-115] all at once, as we were extolling him to the skies, he seemed to take

[036-116] it ill that he should have been accompanied so far by the circle of

[036-117] tantalizing little gnats that had been hovering round and round his

[036-118] ears the whole way without appearing to advance an inch, and stopped

[036-119] to think about it. I suppose he came to the decision that it was not

[036-120] to be borne, for he steadily refused to move until I gave the reins

[036-121] to Charley and got out and walked, when he followed me with a sturdy

[036-122] sort of good humour, putting his head under my arm and rubbing his

[036-123] ear against my sleeve. It was in vain for me to say, “Now, Stubbs, I

[036-124] feel quite sure from what I know of you that you will go on if I ride

[036-125] a little while,” for the moment I left him, he stood stock still

[036-126] again. Consequently I was obliged to lead the way, as before; and in

[036-127] this order we returned home, to the great delight of the village.

[036-128] Charley and I had reason to call it the most friendly of villages, I

[036-129] am sure, for in a week’s time the people were so glad to see us go

[036-130] by, though ever so frequently in the course of a day, that there were

[036-131] faces of greeting in every cottage. I had known many of the grown

[036-132] people before and almost all the children, but now the very steeple

[036-133] began to wear a familiar and affectionate look. Among my new friends

[036-134] was an old old woman who lived in such a little thatched and

[036-135] whitewashed dwelling that when the outside shutter was turned up on

[036-136] its hinges, it shut up the whole house-front. This old lady had a

[036-137] grandson who was a sailor, and I wrote a letter to him for her and

[036-138] drew at the top of it the chimney-corner in which she had brought him

[036-139] up and where his old stool yet occupied its old place. This was

[036-140] considered by the whole village the most wonderful achievement in the

[036-141] world, but when an answer came back all the way from Plymouth, in

[036-142] which he mentioned that he was going to take the picture all the way

[036-143] to America, and from America would write again, I got all the credit

[036-144] that ought to have been given to the post-office and was invested

[036-145] with the merit of the whole system.

[036-146] Thus, what with being so much in the air, playing with so many

[036-147] children, gossiping with so many people, sitting on invitation in so

[036-148] many cottages, going on with Charley’s education, and [[document-and-letter|writing]] long

[036-149] letters to Ada every day, I had scarcely any time to think about that

[036-150] little loss of mine and was almost always cheerful. If I did think of

[036-151] it at odd moments now and then, I had only to be busy and forget it.

[036-152] I felt it more than I had hoped I should once when a child said,

[036-153] “Mother, why is the lady not a pretty lady now like she used to be?”

[036-154] But when I found the child was not less fond of me, and drew its soft

[036-155] hand over my face with a kind of pitying protection in its touch,

[036-156] that soon set me up again. There were many little occurrences which

[036-157] suggested to me, with great consolation, how natural it is to gentle

[036-158] hearts to be considerate and delicate towards any inferiority. One of

[036-159] these particularly touched me. I happened to stroll into the little

[036-160] church when a marriage was just concluded, and the young couple had

[036-161] to sign the register.

[036-162] The bridegroom, to whom the pen was handed first, made a rude cross

[036-163] for his mark; the bride, who came next, did the same. Now, I had

[036-164] known the bride when I was last there, not only as the prettiest girl

[036-165] in the place, but as having quite distinguished herself in the

[036-166] school, and I could not help looking at her with some surprise. She

[036-167] came aside and whispered to me, while tears of honest love and

[036-168] admiration stood in her bright eyes, “He’s a dear good fellow, miss;

[036-169] but he can’t write yet—he’s going to learn of me—and I wouldn’t

[036-170] [[secret-and-shame|shame]] him for the world!” Why, what had I to fear, I thought, when

[036-171] there was this nobility in the soul of a labouring man’s daughter!

[036-172] The air blew as freshly and revivingly upon me as it had ever blown,

[036-173] and the healthy colour came into my new face as it had come into my

[036-174] old one. Charley was wonderful to see, she was so radiant and so

[036-175] rosy; and we both enjoyed the whole day and slept soundly the whole

[036-176] night.

[036-177] There was a favourite spot of mine in the park-woods of [[chesney-wold|Chesney Wold]]

[036-178] where a seat had been erected commanding a lovely view. The wood had

[036-179] been cleared and opened to improve this point of sight, and the

[036-180] bright sunny landscape beyond was so beautiful that I rested there at

[036-181] least once every day. A picturesque part of the Hall, called the

[036-182] Ghost’s Walk, was seen to advantage from this higher ground; and the

[036-183] startling name, and the old legend in the Dedlock family which I had

[036-184] heard from Mr. Boythorn accounting for it, mingled with the view and

[036-185] gave it something of a mysterious interest in addition to its real

[036-186] charms. There was a bank here, too, which was a famous one for

[036-187] violets; and as it was a daily delight of Charley’s to gather wild

[036-188] flowers, she took as much to the spot as I did.

[036-189] It would be idle to inquire now why I never went close to the house

[036-190] or never went inside it. The family were not there, I had heard on my

[036-191] arrival, and were not expected. I was far from being incurious or

[036-192] uninterested about the building; on the contrary, I often sat in this

[036-193] place wondering how the rooms ranged and whether any echo like a

[036-194] footstep really did resound at times, as the story said, upon the

[036-195] lonely Ghost’s Walk. The indefinable feeling with which [[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]]

[036-196] had impressed me may have had some influence in keeping me from the

[036-197] house even when she was absent. I am not sure. Her face and figure

[036-198] were associated with it, naturally; but I cannot say that they

[036-199] repelled me from it, though something did. For whatever reason or no

[036-200] reason, I had never once gone near it, down to the day at which my

[036-201] story now arrives.

[036-202] I was resting at my favourite point after a long ramble, and Charley

[036-203] was gathering violets at a little distance from me. I had been

[036-204] looking at the Ghost’s Walk lying in a deep shade of masonry afar off

[036-205] and picturing to myself the female shape that was said to haunt it

[036-206] when I became aware of a figure approaching through the wood. The

[036-207] perspective was so long and so darkened by leaves, and the shadows of

[036-208] the branches on the ground made it so much more intricate to the eye,

[036-209] that at first I could not discern what figure it was. By little and

[036-210] little it revealed itself to be a woman’s—a lady’s—Lady Dedlock’s.

[036-211] She was alone and coming to where I sat with a much quicker step, I

[036-212] observed to my surprise, than was usual with her.

[036-213] I was fluttered by her being unexpectedly so near (she was almost

[036-214] within speaking distance before I knew her) and would have risen to

[036-215] continue my walk. But I could not. I was rendered motionless. Not so

[036-216] much by her hurried gesture of entreaty, not so much by her quick

[036-217] advance and outstretched hands, not so much by the great change in

[036-218] her manner and the absence of her haughty self-restraint, as by a

[036-219] something in her face that I had pined for and dreamed of when I was

[036-220] a little child, something I had never seen in any face, something I

[036-221] had never seen in hers before.

[036-222] A dread and faintness fell upon me, and I called to Charley. Lady

[036-223] Dedlock stopped upon the instant and changed back almost to what I

[036-224] had known her.

[036-225] “Miss Summerson, I am afraid I have startled you,” she said, now

[036-226] advancing slowly. “You can scarcely be strong yet. You have been very

[036-227] ill, I know. I have been much concerned to hear it.”

[036-228] I could no more have removed my eyes from her pale face than I could

[036-229] have stirred from the bench on which I sat. She gave me her hand, and

[036-230] its deadly coldness, so at variance with the enforced composure of

[036-231] her features, deepened the fascination that overpowered me. I cannot

[036-232] say what was in my whirling thoughts.

[036-233] “You are recovering again?” she asked kindly.

[036-234] “I was quite well but a moment ago, Lady Dedlock.”

[036-235] “Is this your young attendant?”

[036-236] “Yes.”

[036-237] “Will you send her on before and walk towards your house with me?”

[036-238] “Charley,” said I, “take your flowers home, and I will follow you

[036-239] directly.”

[036-240] Charley, with her best curtsy, blushingly tied on her bonnet and went

[036-241] her way. When she was gone, Lady Dedlock sat down on the seat beside

[036-242] me.

[036-243] I cannot tell in any words what the state of my mind was when I saw

[036-244] in her hand my handkerchief with which I had covered the dead baby.

[036-245] I looked at her, but I could not see her, I could not hear her, I

[036-246] could not draw my breath. The beating of my heart was so violent and

[036-247] wild that I felt as if my life were breaking from me. But when she

[036-248] caught me to her breast, kissed me, wept over me, compassionated me,

[036-249] and called me back to myself; when she fell down on her knees and

[036-250] cried to me, “Oh, my child, my child, I am your wicked and unhappy

[036-251] mother! Oh, try to forgive me!”—when I saw her at my feet on the

[036-252] bare earth in her great agony of mind, I felt, through all my tumult

[036-253] of emotion, a burst of gratitude to the providence of God that I was

[036-254] so changed as that I never could disgrace her by any trace of

[036-255] likeness, as that nobody could ever now look at me and look at her

[036-256] and remotely think of any near tie between us.

[036-257] I raised my mother up, praying and beseeching her not to stoop before

[036-258] me in such affliction and humiliation. I did so in broken, incoherent

[036-259] words, for besides the trouble I was in, it frightened me to see her

[036-260] at MY feet. I told her—or I tried to tell her—that if it were for

[036-261] me, her child, under any circumstances to take upon me to forgive

[036-262] her, I did it, and had done it, many, many years. I told her that my

[036-263] heart overflowed with love for her, that it was natural love which

[036-264] nothing in the past had changed or could change. That it was not for

[036-265] me, then resting for the first time on my mother’s bosom, to take her

[036-266] to account for having given me life, but that my duty was to bless

[036-267] her and receive her, though the whole world turned from her, and that

[036-268] I only asked her leave to do it. I held my mother in my embrace, and

[036-269] she held me in hers, and among the still woods in the silence of the

[036-270] summer day there seemed to be nothing but our two troubled minds that

[036-271] was not at peace.

[036-272] “To bless and receive me,” groaned my mother, “it is far too late. I

[036-273] must travel my dark road alone, and it will lead me where it will.

[036-274] From day to day, sometimes from hour to hour, I do not see the way

[036-275] before my guilty feet. This is the earthly punishment I have brought

[036-276] upon myself. I bear it, and I hide it.”

[036-277] Even in the thinking of her endurance, she drew her habitual air of

[036-278] proud indifference about her like a veil, though she soon cast it off

[036-279] again.

[036-280] “I must keep this secret, if by any means it can be kept, not wholly

[036-281] for myself. I have a husband, wretched and dishonouring creature that

[036-282] I am!”

[036-283] These words she uttered with a suppressed cry of despair, more

[036-284] terrible in its sound than any shriek. Covering her face with her

[036-285] hands, she shrank down in my embrace as if she were unwilling that I

[036-286] should touch her; nor could I, by my utmost persuasions or by any

[036-287] endearments I could use, prevail upon her to rise. She said, no, no,

[036-288] no, she could only speak to me so; she must be proud and disdainful

[036-289] everywhere else; she would be humbled and ashamed there, in the only

[036-290] natural moments of her life.

[036-291] My unhappy mother told me that in my illness she had been nearly

[036-292] frantic. She had but then known that her child was living. She could

[036-293] not have suspected me to be that child before. She had followed me

[036-294] down here to speak to me but once in all her life. We never could

[036-295] associate, never could communicate, never probably from that time

[036-296] forth could interchange another word on earth. She put into my hands

[036-297] a letter she had written for my reading only and said when I had read

[036-298] it and destroyed it—but not so much for her sake, since she asked

[036-299] nothing, as for her husband’s and my own—I must evermore consider

[036-300] her as dead. If I could believe that she loved me, in this agony in

[036-301] which I saw her, with a mother’s love, she asked me to do that, for

[036-302] then I might think of her with a greater pity, imagining what she

[036-303] suffered. She had put herself beyond all hope and beyond all help.

[036-304] Whether she preserved her secret until death or it came to be

[036-305] discovered and she brought dishonour and disgrace upon the name she

[036-306] had taken, it was her solitary struggle always; and no affection

[036-307] could come near her, and no human creature could render her any aid.

[036-308] “But is the secret safe so far?” I asked. “Is it safe now, dearest

[036-309] mother?”

[036-310] “No,” replied my mother. “It has been very near discovery. It was

[036-311] saved by an accident. It may be lost by another accident—to-morrow,

[036-312] any day.”

[036-313] “Do you dread a particular person?”

[036-314] “Hush! Do not tremble and cry so much for me. I am not worthy of

[036-315] these tears,” said my mother, kissing my hands. “I dread one person

[036-316] very much.”

[036-317] “An enemy?”

[036-318] “Not a friend. One who is too passionless to be either. He is Sir

[036-319] Leicester Dedlock’s lawyer, mechanically faithful without attachment,

[036-320] and very jealous of the profit, privilege, and reputation of being

[036-321] master of the mysteries of great houses.”

[036-322] “Has he any suspicions?”

[036-323] “Many.”

[036-324] “Not of you?” I said alarmed.

[036-325] “Yes! He is always vigilant and always near me. I may keep him at a

[036-326] standstill, but I can never shake him off.”

[036-327] “Has he so little pity or compunction?”

[036-328] “He has none, and no anger. He is indifferent to everything but his

[036-329] calling. His calling is the acquisition of secrets and the holding

[036-330] possession of such power as they give him, with no sharer or opponent

[036-331] in it.”

[036-332] “Could you trust in him?”

[036-333] “I shall never try. The dark road I have trodden for so many years

[036-334] will end where it will. I follow it alone to the end, whatever the

[036-335] end be. It may be near, it may be distant; while the road lasts,

[036-336] nothing turns me.”

[036-337] “Dear mother, are you so resolved?”

[036-338] “I AM resolved. I have long outbidden folly with folly, pride with

[036-339] pride, scorn with scorn, insolence with insolence, and have outlived

[036-340] many vanities with many more. I will outlive this danger, and outdie

[036-341] it, if I can. It has closed around me almost as awfully as if these

[036-342] woods of Chesney Wold had closed around the house, but my course

[036-343] through it is the same. I have but one; I can have but one.”

[036-344] “Mr. Jarndyce—” I was beginning when my mother hurriedly inquired,

[036-345] “Does HE suspect?”

[036-346] “No,” said I. “No, indeed! Be assured that he does not!” And I told

[036-347] her what he had related to me as his knowledge of my story. “But he

[036-348] is so good and sensible,” said I, “that perhaps if he knew—”

[036-349] My mother, who until this time had made no change in her position,

[036-350] raised her hand up to my lips and stopped me.

[036-351] “Confide fully in him,” she said after a little while. “You have my

[036-352] free consent—a small gift from such a mother to her injured

[036-353] child!—but do not tell me of it. Some pride is left in me even yet.”

[036-354] I explained, as nearly as I could then, or can recall now—for my

[036-355] agitation and distress throughout were so great that I scarcely

[036-356] understood myself, though every word that was uttered in the mother’s

[036-357] voice, so unfamiliar and so melancholy to me, which in my childhood I

[036-358] had never learned to love and recognize, had never been sung to sleep

[036-359] with, had never heard a blessing from, had never had a hope inspired

[036-360] by, made an enduring impression on my memory—I say I explained, or

[036-361] tried to do it, how I had only hoped that Mr. Jarndyce, who had been

[036-362] the best of fathers to me, might be able to afford some counsel and

[036-363] support to her. But my mother answered no, it was impossible; no one

[036-364] could help her. Through the desert that lay before her, she must go

[036-365] alone.

[036-366] “My child, my child!” she said. “For the last time! These kisses for

[036-367] the last time! These arms upon my neck for the last time! We shall

[036-368] meet no more. To hope to do what I seek to do, I must be what I have

[036-369] been so long. Such is my reward and doom. If you hear of Lady

[036-370] Dedlock, brilliant, prosperous, and flattered, think of your wretched

[036-371] mother, conscience-stricken, underneath that mask! Think that the

[036-372] reality is in her suffering, in her useless remorse, in her murdering

[036-373] within her breast the only love and truth of which it is capable! And

[036-374] then forgive her if you can, and cry to heaven to forgive her, which

[036-375] it never can!”

[036-376] We held one another for a little space yet, but she was so firm that

[036-377] she took my hands away, and put them back against my breast, and with

[036-378] a last kiss as she held them there, released them, and went from me

[036-379] into the wood. I was alone, and calm and quiet below me in the sun

[036-380] and shade lay the old house, with its terraces and turrets, on which

[036-381] there had seemed to me to be such complete repose when I first saw

[036-382] it, but which now looked like the obdurate and unpitying watcher of

[036-383] my mother’s misery.

[036-384] Stunned as I was, as weak and helpless at first as I had ever been in

[036-385] my sick chamber, the necessity of guarding against the danger of

[036-386] discovery, or even of the remotest suspicion, did me service. I took

[036-387] such precautions as I could to hide from Charley that I had been

[036-388] crying, and I constrained myself to think of every sacred obligation

[036-389] that there was upon me to be careful and collected. It was not a

[036-390] little while before I could succeed or could even restrain bursts of

[036-391] grief, but after an hour or so I was better and felt that I might

[036-392] return. I went home very slowly and told Charley, whom I found at the

[036-393] gate looking for me, that I had been tempted to extend my walk after

[036-394] Lady Dedlock had left me and that I was over-tired and would lie

[036-395] down. Safe in my own room, I read the letter. I clearly derived from

[036-396] it—and that was much then—that I had not been abandoned by my

[036-397] mother. Her elder and only sister, the godmother of my childhood,

[036-398] discovering signs of life in me when I had been laid aside as dead,

[036-399] had in her stern sense of duty, with no desire or willingness that I

[036-400] should live, reared me in rigid secrecy and had never again beheld my

[036-401] mother’s face from within a few hours of my birth. So strangely did I

[036-402] hold my place in this world that until within a short time back I had

[036-403] never, to my own mother’s knowledge, breathed—had been buried—had

[036-404] never been endowed with life—had never borne a name. When she had

[036-405] first seen me in the church she had been startled and had thought of

[036-406] what would have been like me if it had ever lived, and had lived on,

[036-407] but that was all then.

[036-408] What more the letter told me needs not to be repeated here. It has

[036-409] its own times and places in my story.

[036-410] My first care was to burn what my mother had written and to consume

[036-411] even its ashes. I hope it may not appear very unnatural or bad in me

[036-412] that I then became heavily sorrowful to think I had ever been reared.

[036-413] That I felt as if I knew it would have been better and happier for

[036-414] many people if indeed I had never breathed. That I had a terror of

[036-415] myself as the danger and the possible disgrace of my own mother and

[036-416] of a proud family name. That I was so confused and shaken as to be

[036-417] possessed by a belief that it was right and had been intended that I

[036-418] should die in my birth, and that it was wrong and not intended that I

[036-419] should be then alive.

[036-420] These are the real feelings that I had. I fell asleep worn out, and

[036-421] when I awoke I cried afresh to think that I was back in the world

[036-422] with my load of trouble for others. I was more than ever frightened

[036-423] of myself, thinking anew of her against whom I was a witness, of the

[036-424] owner of Chesney Wold, of the new and terrible meaning of the old

[036-425] words now moaning in my ear like a surge upon the shore, “Your

[036-426] mother, Esther, was your disgrace, and you are hers. The time will

[036-427] come—and soon enough—when you will understand this better, and will

[036-428] feel it too, as no one save a woman can.” With them, those other

[036-429] words returned, “Pray daily that the sins of others be not visited

[036-430] upon your head.” I could not disentangle all that was about me, and I

[036-431] felt as if the blame and the shame were all in me, and the visitation

[036-432] had come down.

[036-433] The day waned into a gloomy evening, overcast and sad, and I still

[036-434] contended with the same distress. I went out alone, and after walking

[036-435] a little in the park, watching the dark shades falling on the trees

[036-436] and the fitful flight of the bats, which sometimes almost touched me,

[036-437] was attracted to the house for the first time. Perhaps I might not

[036-438] have gone near it if I had been in a stronger frame of mind. As it

[036-439] was, I took the path that led close by it.

[036-440] I did not dare to linger or to look up, but I passed before the

[036-441] terrace garden with its fragrant odours, and its broad walks, and its

[036-442] well-kept beds and smooth turf; and I saw how beautiful and grave it

[036-443] was, and how the old stone balustrades and parapets, and wide flights

[036-444] of shallow steps, were seamed by time and weather; and how the

[036-445] trained moss and ivy grew about them, and around the old stone

[036-446] pedestal of the sun-dial; and I heard the fountain falling. Then the

[036-447] way went by long lines of dark windows diversified by turreted towers

[036-448] and porches of eccentric shapes, where old stone lions and grotesque

[036-449] monsters bristled outside dens of shadow and snarled at the evening

[036-450] gloom over the escutcheons they held in their grip. Thence the path

[036-451] wound underneath a gateway, and through a court-yard where the

[036-452] principal entrance was (I hurried quickly on), and by the stables

[036-453] where none but deep voices seemed to be, whether in the murmuring of

[036-454] the wind through the strong mass of ivy holding to a high red wall,

[036-455] or in the low complaining of the weathercock, or in the barking of

[036-456] the dogs, or in the slow striking of a clock. So, encountering

[036-457] presently a sweet smell of limes, whose rustling I could hear, I

[036-458] turned with the turning of the path to the south front, and there

[036-459] above me were the balustrades of the Ghost’s Walk and one lighted

[036-460] window that might be my mother’s.

[036-461] The way was paved here, like the terrace overhead, and my footsteps

[036-462] from being noiseless made an echoing sound upon the flags. Stopping

[036-463] to look at nothing, but seeing all I did see as I went, I was passing

[036-464] quickly on, and in a few moments should have passed the lighted

[036-465] window, when my echoing footsteps brought it suddenly into my mind

[036-466] that there was a dreadful truth in the legend of the Ghost’s Walk,

[036-467] that it was I who was to bring calamity upon the stately house and

[036-468] that my warning feet were haunting it even then. Seized with an

[036-469] augmented terror of myself which turned me cold, I ran from myself

[036-470] and everything, retraced the way by which I had come, and never

[036-471] paused until I had gained the lodge-gate, and the park lay sullen and

[036-472] black behind me.

[036-473] Not before I was alone in my own room for the night and had again

[036-474] been dejected and unhappy there did I begin to know how wrong and

[036-475] thankless this state was. But from my darling who was coming on the

[036-476] morrow, I found a joyful letter, full of such loving anticipation

[036-477] that I must have been of marble if it had not moved me; from my

[036-478] guardian, too, I found another letter, asking me to tell Dame Durden,

[036-479] if I should see that little woman anywhere, that they had moped most

[036-480] pitiably without her, that the housekeeping was going to rack and

[036-481] ruin, that nobody else could manage the keys, and that everybody in

[036-482] and about the house declared it was not the same house and was

[036-483] becoming rebellious for her return. Two such letters together made me

[036-484] think how far beyond my deserts I was beloved and how happy I ought

[036-485] to be. That made me think of all my past life; and that brought me,

[036-486] as it ought to have done before, into a better condition.

[036-487] For I saw very well that I could not have been intended to die, or I

[036-488] should never have lived; not to say should never have been reserved

[036-489] for such a happy life. I saw very well how many things had worked

[036-490] together for my welfare, and that if the sins of the fathers were

[036-491] sometimes visited upon the children, the phrase did not mean what I

[036-492] had in the morning feared it meant. I knew I was as innocent of my

[036-493] birth as a queen of hers and that before my Heavenly Father I should

[036-494] not be punished for birth nor a queen rewarded for it. I had had

[036-495] experience, in the shock of that very day, that I could, even thus

[036-496] soon, find comforting reconcilements to the change that had fallen on

[036-497] me. I renewed my resolutions and prayed to be strengthened in them,

[036-498] pouring out my heart for myself and for my unhappy mother and feeling

[036-499] that the darkness of the morning was passing away. It was not upon my

[036-500] sleep; and when the next day’s light awoke me, it was gone.

[036-501] My dear girl was to arrive at five o’clock in the afternoon. How to

[036-502] help myself through the intermediate time better than by taking a

[036-503] long walk along the road by which she was to come, I did not know; so

[036-504] Charley and I and Stubbs—Stubbs saddled, for we never drove him

[036-505] after the one great occasion—made a long expedition along that road

[036-506] and back. On our return, we held a great review of the house and

[036-507] garden and saw that everything was in its prettiest condition, and

[036-508] had the bird out ready as an important part of the establishment.

[036-509] There were more than two full hours yet to elapse before she could

[036-510] come, and in that interval, which seemed a long one, I must confess I

[036-511] was nervously anxious about my altered looks. I loved my darling so

[036-512] well that I was more concerned for their effect on her than on any

[036-513] one. I was not in this slight distress because I at all repined—I am

[036-514] quite certain I did not, that day—but, I thought, would she be

[036-515] wholly prepared? When she first saw me, might she not be a little

[036-516] shocked and disappointed? Might it not prove a little worse than she

[036-517] expected? Might she not look for her old Esther and not find her?

[036-518] Might she not have to grow used to me and to begin all over again?

[036-519] I knew the various expressions of my sweet girl’s face so well, and

[036-520] it was such an honest face in its loveliness, that I was sure

[036-521] beforehand she could not hide that first look from me. And I

[036-522] considered whether, if it should signify any one of these meanings,

[036-523] which was so very likely, could I quite answer for myself?

[036-524] Well, I thought I could. After last night, I thought I could. But to

[036-525] wait and wait, and expect and expect, and think and think, was such

[036-526] bad preparation that I resolved to go along the road again and meet

[036-527] her.

[036-528] So I said to Charley, “Charley, I will go by myself and walk along

[036-529] the road until she comes.” Charley highly approving of anything that

[036-530] pleased me, I went and left her at home.

[036-531] But before I got to the second milestone, I had been in so many

[036-532] palpitations from seeing dust in the distance (though I knew it was

[036-533] not, and could not, be the coach yet) that I resolved to turn back

[036-534] and go home again. And when I had turned, I was in such fear of the

[036-535] coach coming up behind me (though I still knew that it neither would,

[036-536] nor could, do any such thing) that I ran the greater part of the way

[036-537] to avoid being overtaken.

[036-538] Then, I considered, when I had got safe back again, this was a nice

[036-539] thing to have done! Now I was hot and had made the worst of it

[036-540] instead of the best.

[036-541] At last, when I believed there was at least a quarter of an hour more

[036-542] yet, Charley all at once cried out to me as I was trembling in the

[036-543] garden, “Here she comes, miss! Here she is!”

[036-544] I did not mean to do it, but I ran upstairs into my room and hid

[036-545] myself behind the door. There I stood trembling, even when I heard my

[036-546] darling calling as she came upstairs, “Esther, my dear, my love,

[036-547] where are you? Little woman, dear Dame Durden!”

[036-548] She ran in, and was running out again when she saw me. Ah, my angel

[036-549] girl! The old dear look, all love, all fondness, all affection.

[036-550] Nothing else in it—no, nothing, nothing!

[036-551] Oh, how happy I was, down upon the floor, with my sweet beautiful

[036-552] girl down upon the floor too, holding my scarred face to her lovely

[036-553] cheek, bathing it with tears and kisses, rocking me to and fro like a

[036-554] child, calling me by every tender name that she could think of, and

[036-555] pressing me to her faithful heart.
