---
description: "The name of Mr. Vholes, preceded by the legend Ground-Floor, is"
id: ch-39
label: "Chapter 39: Attorney and Client"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[039-001] The name of [[mr-vholes|Mr. Vholes]], preceded by the legend Ground-Floor, is

[039-002] inscribed upon a door-post in Symond’s Inn, [[chancery-lane|Chancery Lane]]—a little,

[039-003] pale, wall-eyed, woebegone inn like a large dust-binn of two

[039-004] compartments and a sifter. It looks as if Symond were a sparing man

[039-005] in his way and constructed his inn of old building materials which

[039-006] took kindly to the dry rot and to dirt and all things decaying and

[039-007] dismal, and perpetuated Symond’s memory with congenial shabbiness.

[039-008] Quartered in this dingy hatchment commemorative of Symond are the

[039-009] legal bearings of Mr. Vholes.

[039-010] Mr. Vholes’s office, in disposition retiring and in situation

[039-011] retired, is squeezed up in a corner and blinks at a dead wall. Three

[039-012] feet of knotty-floored dark passage bring the client to Mr. Vholes’s

[039-013] jet-black door, in an angle profoundly dark on the brightest

[039-014] midsummer morning and encumbered by a black bulk-head of cellarage

[039-015] staircase against which belated civilians generally strike their

[039-016] brows. Mr. Vholes’s chambers are on so small a scale that one clerk

[039-017] can open the door without getting off his stool, while the other who

[039-018] elbows him at the same desk has equal facilities for poking the fire.

[039-019] A smell as of unwholesome sheep blending with the smell of must and

[039-020] dust is referable to the nightly (and often daily) consumption of

[039-021] mutton fat in candles and to the fretting of parchment forms and

[039-022] skins in greasy drawers. The atmosphere is otherwise stale and close.

[039-023] The place was last painted or whitewashed beyond the memory of man,

[039-024] and the two chimneys smoke, and there is a loose outer surface of

[039-025] soot everywhere, and the dull cracked windows in their heavy frames

[039-026] have but one piece of character in them, which is a determination to

[039-027] be always dirty and always shut unless coerced. This accounts for the

[039-028] phenomenon of the weaker of the two usually having a bundle of

[039-029] firewood thrust between its jaws in hot weather.

[039-030] Mr. Vholes is a very respectable man. He has not a large business,

[039-031] but he is a very respectable man. He is allowed by the greater

[039-032] attorneys who have made good fortunes or are making them to be a most

[039-033] respectable man. He never misses a chance in his practice, which is a

[039-034] mark of respectability. He never takes any pleasure, which is another

[039-035] mark of respectability. He is reserved and serious, which is another

[039-036] mark of respectability. His digestion is impaired, which is highly

[039-037] respectable. And he is making hay of the grass which is flesh, for

[039-038] his three daughters. And his father is dependent on him in the Vale

[039-039] of Taunton.

[039-040] The one great principle of the English law is to make business for

[039-041] itself. There is no other principle distinctly, certainly, and

[039-042] consistently maintained through all its narrow turnings. Viewed by

[039-043] this light it becomes a coherent scheme and not the monstrous maze

[039-044] the laity are apt to think it. Let them but once clearly perceive

[039-045] that its grand principle is to make business for itself at their

[039-046] expense, and surely they will cease to grumble.

[039-047] But not perceiving this quite plainly—only seeing it by halves in a

[039-048] confused way—the laity sometimes suffer in peace and pocket, with a

[039-049] bad grace, and DO grumble very much. Then this respectability of Mr.

[039-050] Vholes is brought into powerful play against them. “Repeal this

[039-051] statute, my good sir?” says Mr. Kenge to a smarting client. “Repeal

[039-052] it, my dear sir? Never, with my consent. Alter this law, sir, and

[039-053] what will be the effect of your rash proceeding on a class of

[039-054] practitioners very worthily represented, allow me to say to you, by

[039-055] the opposite attorney in the case, Mr. Vholes? Sir, that class of

[039-056] practitioners would be swept from the face of the earth. Now you

[039-057] cannot afford—I will say, the social system cannot afford—to lose

[039-058] an order of men like Mr. Vholes. Diligent, persevering, steady, acute

[039-059] in business. My dear sir, I understand your present feelings against

[039-060] the existing state of things, which I grant to be a little hard in

[039-061] your case; but I can never raise my voice for the demolition of a

[039-062] class of men like Mr. Vholes.” The respectability of Mr. Vholes has

[039-063] even been cited with crushing effect before Parliamentary committees,

[039-064] as in the following blue minutes of a distinguished attorney’s

[039-065] evidence. “Question (number five hundred and seventeen thousand eight

[039-066] hundred and sixty-nine): If I understand you, these forms of practice

[039-067] indisputably occasion delay? Answer: Yes, some delay. Question: And

[039-068] great expense? Answer: Most assuredly they cannot be gone through for

[039-069] nothing. Question: And unspeakable vexation? Answer: I am not

[039-070] prepared to say that. They have never given ME any vexation; quite

[039-071] the contrary. Question: But you think that their abolition would

[039-072] damage a class of practitioners? Answer: I have no doubt of it.

[039-073] Question: Can you instance any type of that class? Answer: Yes. I

[039-074] would unhesitatingly mention Mr. Vholes. He would be ruined.

[039-075] Question: Mr. Vholes is considered, in the [[professional-identity|profession]], a respectable

[039-076] man? Answer:”—which proved fatal to the inquiry for ten years—“Mr.

[039-077] Vholes is considered, in the profession, a MOST respectable man.”

[039-078] So in familiar conversation, private authorities no less

[039-079] disinterested will remark that they don’t know what this age is

[039-080] coming to, that we are plunging down precipices, that now here is

[039-081] something else gone, that these changes are death to people like

[039-082] Vholes—a man of undoubted respectability, with a father in the Vale

[039-083] of Taunton, and three daughters at home. Take a few steps more in

[039-084] this direction, say they, and what is to become of Vholes’s father?

[039-085] Is he to perish? And of Vholes’s daughters? Are they to be

[039-086] shirt-makers, or governesses? As though, Mr. Vholes and his relations

[039-087] being minor cannibal chiefs and it being proposed to abolish

[039-088] cannibalism, indignant champions were to put the case thus: Make

[039-089] man-eating unlawful, and you starve the Vholeses!

[039-090] In a word, Mr. Vholes, with his three daughters and his father in the

[039-091] Vale of Taunton, is continually doing duty, like a piece of timber,

[039-092] to shore up some decayed foundation that has become a pitfall and a

[039-093] nuisance. And with a great many people in a great many instances, the

[039-094] question is never one of a change from wrong to right (which is quite

[039-095] an extraneous consideration), but is always one of injury or

[039-096] advantage to that eminently respectable legion, Vholes.

[039-097] The Chancellor is, within these ten minutes, “up” for the long

[039-098] vacation. Mr. Vholes, and his young client, and several blue bags

[039-099] hastily stuffed out of all regularity of form, as the larger sort of

[039-100] serpents are in their first gorged state, have returned to the

[039-101] official den. Mr. Vholes, quiet and unmoved, as a man of so much

[039-102] respectability ought to be, takes off his close black gloves as if he

[039-103] were skinning his hands, lifts off his tight hat as if he were

[039-104] scalping himself, and sits down at his desk. The client throws his

[039-105] hat and gloves upon the ground—tosses them anywhere, without looking

[039-106] after them or caring where they go; flings himself into a chair, half

[039-107] sighing and half groaning; rests his aching head upon his hand and

[039-108] looks the portrait of young despair.

[039-109] “Again nothing done!” says [[richard-carstone|Richard]]. “Nothing, nothing done!”

[039-110] “Don’t say nothing done, sir,” returns the placid Vholes. “That is

[039-111] scarcely fair, sir, scarcely fair!”

[039-112] “Why, what IS done?” says Richard, turning gloomily upon him.

[039-113] “That may not be the whole question,” returns Vholes, “The question

[039-114] may branch off into what is doing, what is doing?”

[039-115] “And what is doing?” asks the moody client.

[039-116] Vholes, sitting with his arms on the desk, quietly bringing the tips

[039-117] of his five right fingers to meet the tips of his five left fingers,

[039-118] and quietly separating them again, and fixedly and slowly looking at

[039-119] his client, replies, “A good deal is doing, sir. We have put our

[039-120] shoulders to the wheel, Mr. Carstone, and the wheel is going round.”

[039-121] “Yes, with Ixion on it. How am I to get through the next four or five

[039-122] accursed months?” exclaims the young man, rising from his chair and

[039-123] walking about the room.

[039-124] “Mr. C.,” returns Vholes, following him close with his eyes wherever

[039-125] he goes, “your spirits are hasty, and I am sorry for it on your

[039-126] account. Excuse me if I recommend you not to chafe so much, not to be

[039-127] so impetuous, not to wear yourself out so. You should have more

[039-128] patience. You should sustain yourself better.”

[039-129] “I ought to imitate you, in fact, Mr. Vholes?” says Richard, sitting

[039-130] down again with an impatient laugh and beating the devil’s tattoo

[039-131] with his boot on the patternless carpet.

[039-132] “Sir,” returns Vholes, always looking at the client as if he were

[039-133] making a lingering meal of him with his eyes as well as with his

[039-134] professional appetite. “Sir,” returns Vholes with his inward manner

[039-135] of speech and his bloodless quietude, “I should not have had the

[039-136] presumption to propose myself as a model for your imitation or any

[039-137] man’s. Let me but leave the good name to my three daughters, and that

[039-138] is enough for me; I am not a self-seeker. But since you mention me so

[039-139] pointedly, I will acknowledge that I should like to impart to you a

[039-140] little of my—come, sir, you are disposed to call it insensibility,

[039-141] and I am sure I have no objection—say insensibility—a little of my

[039-142] insensibility.”

[039-143] “Mr. Vholes,” explains the client, somewhat abashed, “I had no

[039-144] intention to accuse you of insensibility.”

[039-145] “I think you had, sir, without knowing it,” returns the equable

[039-146] Vholes. “Very naturally. It is my duty to attend to your interests

[039-147] with a cool head, and I can quite understand that to your excited

[039-148] feelings I may appear, at such times as the present, insensible. My

[039-149] daughters may know me better; my aged father may know me better. But

[039-150] they have known me much longer than you have, and the confiding eye

[039-151] of affection is not the distrustful eye of business. Not that I

[039-152] complain, sir, of the eye of business being distrustful; quite the

[039-153] contrary. In attending to your interests, I wish to have all possible

[039-154] checks upon me; it is right that I should have them; I court inquiry.

[039-155] But your interests demand that I should be cool and methodical, Mr.

[039-156] Carstone; and I cannot be otherwise—no, sir, not even to please

[039-157] you.”

[039-158] Mr. Vholes, after glancing at the official cat who is patiently

[039-159] watching a mouse’s hole, fixes his charmed gaze again on his young

[039-160] client and proceeds in his buttoned-up, half-audible voice as if

[039-161] there were an unclean spirit in him that will neither come out nor

[039-162] speak out, “What are you to do, sir, you inquire, during the

[039-163] vacation. I should hope you gentlemen of the army may find many means

[039-164] of amusing yourselves if you give your minds to it. If you had asked

[039-165] me what I was to do during the vacation, I could have answered you

[039-166] more readily. I am to attend to your interests. I am to be found

[039-167] here, day by day, attending to your interests. That is my duty, Mr.

[039-168] C., and term-time or vacation makes no difference to me. If you wish

[039-169] to consult me as to your interests, you will find me here at all

[039-170] times alike. Other professional men go out of town. I don’t. Not that

[039-171] I blame them for going; I merely say I don’t go. This desk is your

[039-172] rock, sir!”

[039-173] Mr. Vholes gives it a rap, and it sounds as hollow as a coffin. Not

[039-174] to Richard, though. There is encouragement in the sound to him.

[039-175] Perhaps Mr. Vholes knows there is.

[039-176] “I am perfectly aware, Mr. Vholes,” says Richard, more familiarly and

[039-177] good-humouredly, “that you are the most reliable fellow in the world

[039-178] and that to have to do with you is to have to do with a man of

[039-179] business who is not to be hoodwinked. But put yourself in my case,

[039-180] dragging on this dislocated life, sinking deeper and deeper into

[039-181] difficulty every day, continually hoping and continually

[039-182] disappointed, conscious of change upon change for the worse in

[039-183] myself, and of no change for the better in anything else, and you

[039-184] will find it a dark-looking case sometimes, as I do.”

[039-185] “You know,” says Mr. Vholes, “that I never give hopes, sir. I told

[039-186] you from the first, Mr. C., that I never give hopes. Particularly in

[039-187] a case like this, where the greater part of the costs comes out of

[039-188] the [[inheritance-and-property|estate]], I should not be considerate of my good name if I gave

[039-189] hopes. It might seem as if costs were my object. Still, when you say

[039-190] there is no change for the better, I must, as a bare matter of fact,

[039-191] deny that.”

[039-192] “Aye?” returns Richard, brightening. “But how do you make it out?”

[039-193] “Mr. Carstone, you are represented by—”

[039-194] “You said just now—a rock.”

[039-195] “Yes, sir,” says Mr. Vholes, gently shaking his head and rapping the

[039-196] hollow desk, with a sound as if ashes were falling on ashes, and dust

[039-197] on dust, “a rock. That’s something. You are separately represented,

[039-198] and no longer hidden and lost in the interests of others. THAT’S

[039-199] something. The suit does not sleep; we wake it up, we air it, we walk

[039-200] it about. THAT’S something. It’s not all Jarndyce, in fact as well as

[039-201] in name. THAT’S something. Nobody has it all his own way now, sir.

[039-202] And THAT’S something, surely.”

[039-203] Richard, his face flushing suddenly, strikes the desk with his

[039-204] clenched hand.

[039-205] “Mr. Vholes! If any man had told me when I first went to John

[039-206] Jarndyce’s house that he was anything but the disinterested friend he

[039-207] seemed—that he was what he has gradually turned out to be—I could

[039-208] have found no words strong enough to repel the slander; I could not

[039-209] have defended him too ardently. So little did I know of the world!

[039-210] Whereas now I do declare to you that he becomes to me the embodiment

[039-211] of the suit; that in place of its being an abstraction, it is John

[039-212] Jarndyce; that the more I suffer, the more indignant I am with him;

[039-213] that every new delay and every new disappointment is only a new

[039-214] injury from [[john-jarndyce|John Jarndyce]]’s hand.”

[039-215] “No, no,” says Vholes. “Don’t say so. We ought to have patience, all

[039-216] of us. Besides, I never disparage, sir. I never disparage.”

[039-217] “Mr. Vholes,” returns the angry client. “You know as well as I that

[039-218] he would have strangled the suit if he could.”

[039-219] “He was not active in it,” Mr. Vholes admits with an appearance of

[039-220] reluctance. “He certainly was not active in it. But however, but

[039-221] however, he might have had amiable intentions. Who can read the

[039-222] heart, Mr. C.!”

[039-223] “You can,” returns Richard.

[039-224] “I, Mr. C.?”

[039-225] “Well enough to know what his intentions were. Are or are not our

[039-226] interests conflicting? Tell—me—that!” says Richard, accompanying

[039-227] his last three words with three raps on his rock of trust.

[039-228] “Mr. C.,” returns Vholes, immovable in attitude and never winking his

[039-229] hungry eyes, “I should be wanting in my duty as your professional

[039-230] adviser, I should be departing from my fidelity to your interests, if

[039-231] I represented those interests as identical with the interests of Mr.

[039-232] Jarndyce. They are no such thing, sir. I never impute motives; I both

[039-233] have and am a father, and I never impute motives. But I must not

[039-234] shrink from a professional duty, even if it sows dissensions in

[039-235] families. I understand you to be now consulting me professionally as

[039-236] to your interests? You are so? I reply, then, they are not identical

[039-237] with those of Mr. Jarndyce.”

[039-238] “Of course they are not!” cries Richard. “You found that out long

[039-239] ago.”

[039-240] “Mr. C.,” returns Vholes, “I wish to say no more of any third party

[039-241] than is necessary. I wish to leave my good name unsullied, together

[039-242] with any little property of which I may become possessed through

[039-243] industry and perseverance, to my daughters Emma, Jane, and Caroline.

[039-244] I also desire to live in amity with my professional brethren. When

[039-245] [[harold-skimpole|Mr. Skimpole]] did me the honour, sir—I will not say the very high

[039-246] honour, for I never stoop to flattery—of bringing us together in

[039-247] this room, I mentioned to you that I could offer no opinion or advice

[039-248] as to your interests while those interests were entrusted to another

[039-249] member of the profession. And I spoke in such terms as I was bound to

[039-250] speak of [[kenge-and-carboy|Kenge and Carboy]]’s office, which stands high. You, sir,

[039-251] thought fit to withdraw your interests from that keeping nevertheless

[039-252] and to offer them to me. You brought them with clean hands, sir, and

[039-253] I accepted them with clean hands. Those interests are now paramount

[039-254] in this office. My digestive functions, as you may have heard me

[039-255] mention, are not in a good state, and rest might improve them; but I

[039-256] shall not rest, sir, while I am your representative. Whenever you

[039-257] want me, you will find me here. Summon me anywhere, and I will come.

[039-258] During the long vacation, sir, I shall devote my leisure to studying

[039-259] your interests more and more closely and to making arrangements for

[039-260] moving heaven and earth (including, of course, the Chancellor) after

[039-261] Michaelmas term; and when I ultimately congratulate you, sir,” says

[039-262] Mr. Vholes with the severity of a determined man, “when I ultimately

[039-263] congratulate you, sir, with all my heart, on your accession to

[039-264] fortune—which, but that I never give hopes, I might say something

[039-265] further about—you will owe me nothing beyond whatever little balance

[039-266] may be then outstanding of the costs as between solicitor and client

[039-267] not included in the taxed costs allowed out of the estate. I pretend

[039-268] to no claim upon you, Mr. C., but for the zealous and active

[039-269] discharge—not the languid and routine discharge, sir: that much

[039-270] credit I stipulate for—of my professional duty. My duty prosperously

[039-271] ended, all between us is ended.”

[039-272] Vholes finally adds, by way of rider to this declaration of his

[039-273] principles, that as Mr. Carstone is about to rejoin his regiment,

[039-274] perhaps Mr. C. will favour him with an order on his agent for twenty

[039-275] pounds on account.

[039-276] “For there have been many little consultations and attendances of

[039-277] late, sir,” observes Vholes, turning over the leaves of his diary,

[039-278] “and these things mount up, and I don’t profess to be a man of

[039-279] capital. When we first entered on our present relations I stated to

[039-280] you openly—it is a principle of mine that there never can be too

[039-281] much openness between solicitor and client—that I was not a man of

[039-282] capital and that if capital was your object you had better leave your

[039-283] papers in Kenge’s office. No, Mr. C., you will find none of the

[039-284] advantages or disadvantages of capital here, sir. This,” Vholes gives

[039-285] the desk one hollow blow again, “is your rock; it pretends to be

[039-286] nothing more.”

[039-287] The client, with his dejection insensibly relieved and his vague

[039-288] hopes rekindled, takes pen and ink and writes the draft, not without

[039-289] perplexed consideration and calculation of the date it may bear,

[039-290] implying scant effects in the agent’s hands. All the while, Vholes,

[039-291] buttoned up in body and mind, looks at him attentively. All the

[039-292] while, Vholes’s official cat watches the mouse’s hole.

[039-293] Lastly, the client, shaking hands, beseeches Mr. Vholes, for heaven’s

[039-294] sake and earth’s sake, to do his utmost to “pull him through” the

[039-295] [[chancery-court|Court of Chancery]]. Mr. Vholes, who never gives hopes, lays his palm

[039-296] upon the client’s shoulder and answers with a smile, “Always here,

[039-297] sir. Personally, or by letter, you will always find me here, sir,

[039-298] with my shoulder to the wheel.” Thus they part, and Vholes, left

[039-299] alone, employs himself in carrying sundry little matters out of his

[039-300] diary into his draft bill book for the ultimate behoof of his three

[039-301] daughters. So might an industrious fox or bear make up his account of

[039-302] chickens or stray travellers with an eye to his cubs, not to

[039-303] disparage by that word the three raw-visaged, lank, and buttoned-up

[039-304] maidens who dwell with the parent Vholes in an earthy cottage

[039-305] situated in a damp garden at Kennington.

[039-306] Richard, emerging from the heavy shade of Symond’s Inn into the

[039-307] sunshine of Chancery Lane—for there happens to be sunshine there

[039-308] to-day—walks thoughtfully on, and turns into Lincoln’s Inn, and

[039-309] passes under the shadow of the Lincoln’s Inn trees. On many such

[039-310] loungers have the speckled shadows of those trees often fallen; on

[039-311] the like bent head, the bitten nail, the lowering eye, the lingering

[039-312] step, the purposeless and dreamy air, the good consuming and

[039-313] consumed, the life turned sour. This lounger is not shabby yet, but

[039-314] that may come. Chancery, which knows no wisdom but in precedent, is

[039-315] very rich in such precedents; and why should one be different from

[039-316] ten thousand?

[039-317] Yet the time is so short since his depreciation began that as he

[039-318] saunters away, reluctant to leave the spot for some long months

[039-319] together, though he hates it, Richard himself may feel his own case

[039-320] as if it were a startling one. While his heart is heavy with

[039-321] corroding care, suspense, distrust, and doubt, it may have room for

[039-322] some sorrowful wonder when he recalls how different his first visit

[039-323] there, how different he, how different all the colours of his mind.

[039-324] But injustice breeds injustice; the fighting with shadows and being

[039-325] defeated by them necessitates the setting up of substances to combat;

[039-326] from the impalpable suit which no man alive can understand, the time

[039-327] for that being long gone by, it has become a gloomy relief to turn to

[039-328] the palpable figure of the friend who would have saved him from this

[039-329] ruin and make HIM his enemy. Richard has told Vholes the truth. Is he

[039-330] in a hardened or a softened mood, he still lays his injuries equally

[039-331] at that door; he was thwarted, in that quarter, of a set purpose, and

[039-332] that purpose could only originate in the one subject that is

[039-333] resolving his existence into itself; besides, it is a justification

[039-334] to him in his own eyes to have an embodied antagonist and oppressor.

[039-335] Is Richard a monster in all this, or would Chancery be found rich in

[039-336] such precedents too if they could be got for citation from the

[039-337] Recording Angel?

[039-338] Two pairs of eyes not unused to such people look after him, as,

[039-339] biting his nails and brooding, he crosses the square and is swallowed

[039-340] up by the shadow of the southern gateway. Mr. Guppy and Mr. Weevle

[039-341] are the possessors of those eyes, and they have been leaning in

[039-342] conversation against the low stone parapet under the trees. He passes

[039-343] close by them, seeing nothing but the ground.

[039-344] “William,” says Mr. Weevle, adjusting his whiskers, “there’s

[039-345] combustion going on there! It’s not a case of spontaneous, but it’s

[039-346] smouldering combustion it is.”

[039-347] “Ah!” says Mr. Guppy. “He wouldn’t keep out of Jarndyce, and I

[039-348] suppose he’s over head and ears in debt. I never knew much of him. He

[039-349] was as high as the monument when he was on trial at our place. A good

[039-350] riddance to me, whether as clerk or client! Well, Tony, that as I was

[039-351] mentioning is what they’re up to.”

[039-352] Mr. Guppy, refolding his arms, resettles himself against the parapet,

[039-353] as resuming a conversation of interest.

[039-354] “They are still up to it, sir,” says Mr. Guppy, “still taking stock,

[039-355] still examining papers, still going over the heaps and heaps of

[039-356] rubbish. At this rate they’ll be at it these seven years.”

[039-357] “And Small is helping?”

[039-358] “Small left us at a week’s notice. Told Kenge his grandfather’s

[039-359] business was too much for the old gentleman and he could better

[039-360] himself by undertaking it. There had been a coolness between myself

[039-361] and Small on account of his being so close. But he said you and I

[039-362] began it, and as he had me there—for we did—I put our acquaintance

[039-363] on the old footing. That’s how I come to know what they’re up to.”

[039-364] “You haven’t looked in at all?”

[039-365] “Tony,” says Mr. Guppy, a little disconcerted, “to be unreserved with

[039-366] you, I don’t greatly relish the house, except in your company, and

[039-367] therefore I have not; and therefore I proposed this little

[039-368] appointment for our fetching away your things. There goes the hour by

[039-369] the clock! Tony”—Mr. Guppy becomes mysteriously and tenderly

[039-370] eloquent—“it is necessary that I should impress upon your mind once

[039-371] more that circumstances over which I have no control have made a

[039-372] melancholy alteration in my most cherished plans and in that

[039-373] unrequited image which I formerly mentioned to you as a friend. That

[039-374] image is shattered, and that idol is laid low. My only wish now in

[039-375] connexion with the objects which I had an idea of carrying out in the

[039-376] court with your aid as a friend is to let ’em alone and bury ’em in

[039-377] oblivion. Do you think it possible, do you think it at all likely (I

[039-378] put it to you, Tony, as a friend), from your knowledge of that

[039-379] capricious and deep old character who fell a prey to the—spontaneous

[039-380] element, do you, Tony, think it at all likely that on second thoughts

[039-381] he put those [[document-and-letter|letters]] away anywhere, after you saw him alive, and that

[039-382] they were not destroyed that night?”

[039-383] Mr. Weevle reflects for some time. Shakes his head. Decidedly thinks

[039-384] not.

[039-385] “Tony,” says Mr. Guppy as they walk towards the court, “once again

[039-386] understand me, as a friend. Without entering into further

[039-387] explanations, I may repeat that the idol is down. I have no purpose

[039-388] to serve now but burial in oblivion. To that I have pledged myself. I

[039-389] owe it to myself, and I owe it to the shattered image, as also to the

[039-390] circumstances over which I have no control. If you was to express to

[039-391] me by a gesture, by a wink, that you saw lying anywhere in your late

[039-392] lodgings any papers that so much as looked like the papers in

[039-393] question, I would pitch them into the fire, sir, on my own

[039-394] responsibility.”

[039-395] Mr. Weevle nods. Mr. Guppy, much elevated in his own opinion by

[039-396] having delivered these observations, with an air in part forensic and

[039-397] in part romantic—this gentleman having a passion for conducting

[039-398] anything in the form of an examination, or delivering anything in the

[039-399] form of a summing up or a speech—accompanies his friend with dignity

[039-400] to the court.

[039-401] Never since it has been a court has it had such a Fortunatus’ purse

[039-402] of gossip as in the proceedings at the rag and bottle shop.

[039-403] Regularly, every morning at eight, is the elder Mr. Smallweed brought

[039-404] down to the corner and carried in, accompanied by Mrs. Smallweed,

[039-405] Judy, and Bart; and regularly, all day, do they all remain there

[039-406] until nine at night, solaced by gipsy dinners, not abundant in

[039-407] quantity, from the cook’s shop, rummaging and searching, digging,

[039-408] delving, and diving among the treasures of the late lamented. What

[039-409] those treasures are they keep so secret that the court is maddened.

[039-410] In its delirium it imagines guineas pouring out of tea-pots,

[039-411] crown-pieces overflowing punch-bowls, old chairs and mattresses

[039-412] stuffed with Bank of England notes. It possesses itself of the

[039-413] sixpenny history (with highly coloured folding frontispiece) of Mr.

[039-414] Daniel Dancer and his sister, and also of Mr. Elwes, of Suffolk, and

[039-415] transfers all the facts from those authentic narratives to Mr. [[krook|Krook]].

[039-416] Twice when the dustman is called in to carry off a cartload of old

[039-417] paper, ashes, and broken bottles, the whole court assembles and pries

[039-418] into the baskets as they come forth. Many times the two gentlemen who

[039-419] write with the ravenous little pens on the tissue-paper are seen

[039-420] prowling in the neighbourhood—shy of each other, their late

[039-421] partnership being dissolved. The Sol skilfully carries a vein of the

[039-422] prevailing interest through the Harmonic nights. Little Swills, in

[039-423] what are professionally known as “patter” allusions to the subject,

[039-424] is received with loud applause; and the same vocalist “gags” in the

[039-425] regular business like a man inspired. Even Miss M. Melvilleson, in

[039-426] the revived Caledonian melody of “We’re a-Nodding,” points the

[039-427] sentiment that “the dogs love broo” (whatever the nature of that

[039-428] refreshment may be) with such archness and such a turn of the head

[039-429] towards next door that she is immediately understood to mean Mr.

[039-430] Smallweed loves to find money, and is nightly honoured with a double

[039-431] encore. For all this, the court discovers nothing; and as Mrs. Piper

[039-432] and Mrs. Perkins now communicate to the late lodger whose appearance

[039-433] is the signal for a general rally, it is in one continual ferment to

[039-434] discover everything, and more.

[039-435] Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy, with every eye in the court’s head upon

[039-436] them, knock at the closed door of the late lamented’s house, in a

[039-437] high state of popularity. But being contrary to the court’s

[039-438] expectation admitted, they immediately become unpopular and are

[039-439] considered to mean no good.

[039-440] The shutters are more or less closed all over the house, and the

[039-441] ground-floor is sufficiently dark to require candles. Introduced into

[039-442] the back shop by Mr. Smallweed the younger, they, fresh from the

[039-443] sunlight, can at first see nothing save darkness and shadows; but

[039-444] they gradually discern the elder Mr. Smallweed seated in his chair

[039-445] upon the brink of a well or grave of waste-paper, the virtuous Judy

[039-446] groping therein like a female sexton, and Mrs. Smallweed on the level

[039-447] ground in the vicinity snowed up in a heap of paper fragments, print,

[039-448] and manuscript which would appear to be the accumulated compliments

[039-449] that have been sent flying at her in the course of the day. The whole

[039-450] party, Small included, are blackened with dust and dirt and present a

[039-451] fiendish appearance not relieved by the general aspect of the room.

[039-452] There is more litter and lumber in it than of old, and it is dirtier

[039-453] if possible; likewise, it is ghostly with traces of its dead

[039-454] inhabitant and even with his chalked writing on the wall.

[039-455] On the entrance of visitors, Mr. Smallweed and Judy simultaneously

[039-456] fold their arms and stop in their researches.

[039-457] “Aha!” croaks the old gentleman. “How de do, gentlemen, how de do!

[039-458] Come to fetch your property, Mr. Weevle? That’s well, that’s well.

[039-459] Ha! Ha! We should have been forced to sell you up, sir, to pay your

[039-460] warehouse room if you had left it here much longer. You feel quite at

[039-461] home here again, I dare say? Glad to see you, glad to see you!”

[039-462] Mr. Weevle, thanking him, casts an eye about. Mr. Guppy’s eye follows

[039-463] Mr. Weevle’s eye. Mr. Weevle’s eye comes back without any new

[039-464] intelligence in it. Mr. Guppy’s eye comes back and meets Mr.

[039-465] Smallweed’s eye. That engaging old gentleman is still murmuring, like

[039-466] some wound-up instrument running down, “How de do, sir—how

[039-467] de—how—” And then having run down, he lapses into grinning silence,

[039-468] as Mr. Guppy starts at seeing [[mr-tulkinghorn|Mr. Tulkinghorn]] standing in the

[039-469] darkness opposite with his hands behind him.

[039-470] “Gentleman so kind as to act as my solicitor,” says Grandfather

[039-471] Smallweed. “I am not the sort of client for a gentleman of such note,

[039-472] but he is so good!”

[039-473] Mr. Guppy, slightly nudging his friend to take another look, makes a

[039-474] shuffling bow to Mr. Tulkinghorn, who returns it with an easy nod.

[039-475] Mr. Tulkinghorn is looking on as if he had nothing else to do and

[039-476] were rather amused by the novelty.

[039-477] “A good deal of property here, sir, I should say,” Mr. Guppy observes

[039-478] to Mr. Smallweed.

[039-479] “Principally rags and rubbish, my dear friend! Rags and rubbish! Me

[039-480] and Bart and my granddaughter Judy are endeavouring to make out an

[039-481] inventory of what’s worth anything to sell. But we haven’t come to

[039-482] much as yet; we—haven’t—come—to—hah!”

[039-483] Mr. Smallweed has run down again, while Mr. Weevle’s eye, attended by

[039-484] Mr. Guppy’s eye, has again gone round the room and come back.

[039-485] “Well, sir,” says Mr. Weevle. “We won’t intrude any longer if you’ll

[039-486] allow us to go upstairs.”

[039-487] “Anywhere, my dear sir, anywhere! You’re at home. Make yourself so,

[039-488] pray!”

[039-489] As they go upstairs, Mr. Guppy lifts his eyebrows inquiringly and

[039-490] looks at Tony. Tony shakes his head. They find the old room very dull

[039-491] and dismal, with the ashes of the fire that was burning on that

[039-492] memorable night yet in the discoloured grate. They have a great

[039-493] disinclination to touch any object, and carefully blow the dust from

[039-494] it first. Nor are they desirous to prolong their visit, packing the

[039-495] few movables with all possible speed and never speaking above a

[039-496] whisper.

[039-497] “Look here,” says Tony, recoiling. “Here’s that horrible cat coming

[039-498] in!”

[039-499] Mr. Guppy retreats behind a chair. “Small told me of her. She went

[039-500] leaping and bounding and tearing about that night like a dragon, and

[039-501] got out on the house-top, and roamed about up there for a fortnight,

[039-502] and then came tumbling down the chimney very thin. Did you ever see

[039-503] such a brute? Looks as if she knew all about it, don’t she? Almost

[039-504] looks as if she was Krook. Shoohoo! Get out, you goblin!”

[039-505] Lady Jane, in the doorway, with her tiger snarl from ear to ear and

[039-506] her club of a tail, shows no intention of obeying; but Mr.

[039-507] Tulkinghorn stumbling over her, she spits at his rusty legs, and

[039-508] swearing wrathfully, takes her arched back upstairs. Possibly to roam

[039-509] the house-tops again and return by the chimney.

[039-510] “Mr. Guppy,” says Mr. Tulkinghorn, “could I have a word with you?”

[039-511] Mr. Guppy is engaged in collecting the Galaxy Gallery of British

[039-512] Beauty from the wall and depositing those works of art in their old

[039-513] ignoble band-box. “Sir,” he returns, reddening, “I wish to act with

[039-514] courtesy towards every member of the profession, and especially, I am

[039-515] sure, towards a member of it so well known as yourself—I will truly

[039-516] add, sir, so distinguished as yourself. Still, Mr. Tulkinghorn, sir,

[039-517] I must stipulate that if you have any word with me, that word is

[039-518] spoken in the presence of my friend.”

[039-519] “Oh, indeed?” says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

[039-520] “Yes, sir. My reasons are not of a personal nature at all, but they

[039-521] are amply sufficient for myself.”

[039-522] “No doubt, no doubt.” Mr. Tulkinghorn is as imperturbable as the

[039-523] hearthstone to which he has quietly walked. “The matter is not of

[039-524] that consequence that I need put you to the trouble of making any

[039-525] conditions, Mr. Guppy.” He pauses here to smile, and his smile is as

[039-526] dull and rusty as his pantaloons. “You are to be congratulated, Mr.

[039-527] Guppy; you are a fortunate young man, sir.”

[039-528] “Pretty well so, Mr. Tulkinghorn; I don’t complain.”

[039-529] “Complain? High friends, free admission to great houses, and access

[039-530] to elegant ladies! Why, Mr. Guppy, there are people in [[london|London]] who

[039-531] would give their ears to be you.”

[039-532] Mr. Guppy, looking as if he would give his own reddening and still

[039-533] reddening ears to be one of those people at present instead of

[039-534] himself, replies, “Sir, if I attend to my profession and do what is

[039-535] right by Kenge and Carboy, my friends and acquaintances are of no

[039-536] consequence to them nor to any member of the profession, not

[039-537] excepting Mr. Tulkinghorn of the Fields. I am not under any

[039-538] obligation to explain myself further; and with all respect for you,

[039-539] sir, and without offence—I repeat, without offence—”

[039-540] “Oh, certainly!”

[039-541] “—I don’t intend to do it.”

[039-542] “Quite so,” says Mr. Tulkinghorn with a calm nod. “Very good; I see

[039-543] by these portraits that you take a strong interest in the fashionable

[039-544] great, sir?”

[039-545] He addresses this to the astounded Tony, who admits the soft

[039-546] impeachment.

[039-547] “A virtue in which few Englishmen are deficient,” observes Mr.

[039-548] Tulkinghorn. He has been standing on the hearthstone with his back to

[039-549] the smoked chimney-piece, and now turns round with his glasses to his

[039-550] eyes. “Who is this? ‘[[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]].’ Ha! A very good likeness in its

[039-551] way, but it wants force of character. Good day to you, gentlemen;

[039-552] good day!”

[039-553] When he has walked out, Mr. Guppy, in a great perspiration, nerves

[039-554] himself to the hasty completion of the taking down of the Galaxy

[039-555] Gallery, concluding with Lady Dedlock.

[039-556] “Tony,” he says hurriedly to his astonished companion, “let us be

[039-557] quick in putting the things together and in getting out of this

[039-558] place. It were in vain longer to conceal from you, Tony, that between

[039-559] myself and one of the members of a swan-like aristocracy whom I now

[039-560] hold in my hand, there has been undivulged communication and

[039-561] association. The time might have been when I might have revealed it

[039-562] to you. It never will be more. It is due alike to the oath I have

[039-563] taken, alike to the shattered idol, and alike to circumstances over

[039-564] which I have no control, that the whole should be buried in oblivion.

[039-565] I charge you as a friend, by the interest you have ever testified in

[039-566] the fashionable intelligence, and by any little advances with which I

[039-567] may have been able to accommodate you, so to bury it without a word

[039-568] of inquiry!”

[039-569] This charge Mr. Guppy delivers in a state little short of forensic

[039-570] lunacy, while his friend shows a dazed mind in his whole head of hair

[039-571] and even in his cultivated whiskers.
