---
description: "Inspector Bucket of the Detective has not yet struck his great blow,"
id: ch-55
label: "Chapter 55: Flight"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[055-001] Inspector Bucket of the Detective has not yet struck his great blow,

[055-002] as just now chronicled, but is yet refreshing himself with sleep

[055-003] preparatory to his field-day, when through the night and along the

[055-004] freezing wintry roads a chaise and pair comes out of Lincolnshire,

[055-005] making its way towards [[london|London]].

[055-006] Railroads shall soon traverse all this country, and with a rattle and

[055-007] a glare the engine and train shall shoot like a meteor over the wide

[055-008] night-landscape, turning the moon paler; but as yet such things are

[055-009] non-existent in these parts, though not wholly unexpected.

[055-010] Preparations are afoot, measurements are made, ground is staked out.

[055-011] Bridges are begun, and their not yet united piers desolately look at

[055-012] one another over roads and streams like brick and mortar couples with

[055-013] an obstacle to their union; fragments of embankments are thrown up

[055-014] and left as precipices with torrents of rusty carts and barrows

[055-015] tumbling over them; tripods of tall poles appear on hilltops, where

[055-016] there are rumours of tunnels; everything looks chaotic and abandoned

[055-017] in full hopelessness. Along the freezing roads, and through the

[055-018] night, the post-chaise makes its way without a railroad on its mind.

[055-019] Mrs. Rouncewell, so many years housekeeper at [[chesney-wold|Chesney Wold]], sits

[055-020] within the chaise; and by her side sits Mrs. Bagnet with her grey

[055-021] cloak and umbrella. The old girl would prefer the bar in front, as

[055-022] being exposed to the weather and a primitive sort of perch more in

[055-023] accordance with her usual course of travelling, but Mrs. Rouncewell

[055-024] is too thoughtful of her comfort to admit of her proposing it. The

[055-025] old lady cannot make enough of the old girl. She sits, in her stately

[055-026] manner, holding her hand, and regardless of its roughness, puts it

[055-027] often to her lips. “You are a mother, my dear soul,” says she many

[055-028] times, “and you found out my [[george-rouncewell|George]]’s mother!”

[055-029] “Why, George,” returns Mrs. Bagnet, “was always free with me, ma’am,

[055-030] and when he said at our house to my Woolwich that of all the things

[055-031] my Woolwich could have to think of when he grew to be a man, the

[055-032] comfortablest would be that he had never brought a sorrowful line

[055-033] into his mother’s face or turned a hair of her head grey, then I felt

[055-034] sure, from his way, that something fresh had brought his own mother

[055-035] into his mind. I had often known him say to me, in past times, that

[055-036] he had behaved bad to her.”

[055-037] “Never, my dear!” returns Mrs. Rouncewell, bursting into tears. “My

[055-038] blessing on him, never! He was always fond of me, and loving to me,

[055-039] was my George! But he had a bold spirit, and he ran a little wild and

[055-040] went for a soldier. And I know he waited at first, in letting us know

[055-041] about himself, till he should rise to be an officer; and when he

[055-042] didn’t rise, I know he considered himself beneath us, and wouldn’t be

[055-043] a disgrace to us. For he had a lion heart, had my George, always from

[055-044] a baby!”

[055-045] The old lady’s hands stray about her as of yore, while she recalls,

[055-046] all in a tremble, what a likely lad, what a fine lad, what a gay

[055-047] good-humoured clever lad he was; how they all took to him down at

[055-048] Chesney Wold; how [[sir-leicester-dedlock|Sir Leicester]] took to him when he was a young

[055-049] gentleman; how the dogs took to him; how even the people who had been

[055-050] angry with him forgave him the moment he was gone, poor boy. And now

[055-051] to see him after all, and in a prison too! And the broad stomacher

[055-052] heaves, and the quaint upright old-fashioned figure bends under its

[055-053] load of affectionate distress.

[055-054] Mrs. Bagnet, with the instinctive skill of a good warm heart, leaves

[055-055] the old housekeeper to her emotions for a little while—not without

[055-056] passing the back of her hand across her own motherly eyes—and

[055-057] presently chirps up in her cheery manner, “So I says to George when I

[055-058] goes to call him in to tea (he pretended to be smoking his pipe

[055-059] outside), ‘What ails you this afternoon, George, for gracious sake? I

[055-060] have seen all sorts, and I have seen you pretty often in season and

[055-061] out of season, abroad and at home, and I never see you so melancholy

[055-062] penitent.’ ‘Why, Mrs. Bagnet,’ says George, ‘it’s because I AM

[055-063] melancholy and penitent both, this afternoon, that you see me so.’

[055-064] ‘What have you done, old fellow?’ I says. ‘Why, Mrs. Bagnet,’ says

[055-065] George, shaking his head, ‘what I have done has been done this many a

[055-066] long year, and is best not tried to be undone now. If I ever get to

[055-067] heaven it won’t be for being a good son to a widowed mother; I say no

[055-068] more.’ Now, ma’am, when George says to me that it’s best not tried to

[055-069] be undone now, I have my thoughts as I have often had before, and I

[055-070] draw it out of George how he comes to have such things on him that

[055-071] afternoon. Then George tells me that he has seen by chance, at the

[055-072] lawyer’s office, a fine old lady that has brought his mother plain

[055-073] before him, and he runs on about that old lady till he quite forgets

[055-074] himself and paints her picture to me as she used to be, years upon

[055-075] years back. So I says to George when he has done, who is this old

[055-076] lady he has seen? And George tells me it’s Mrs. Rouncewell,

[055-077] housekeeper for more than half a century to the Dedlock family down

[055-078] at Chesney Wold in Lincolnshire. George has frequently told me before

[055-079] that he’s a Lincolnshire man, and I says to my old Lignum that night,

[055-080] ‘Lignum, that’s his mother for five and for-ty pound!’”

[055-081] All this Mrs. Bagnet now relates for the twentieth time at least

[055-082] within the last four hours. Trilling it out like a kind of bird, with

[055-083] a pretty high note, that it may be audible to the old lady above the

[055-084] hum of the wheels.

[055-085] “Bless you, and thank you,” says Mrs. Rouncewell. “Bless you, and

[055-086] thank you, my worthy soul!”

[055-087] “Dear heart!” cries Mrs. Bagnet in the most natural manner. “No

[055-088] thanks to me, I am sure. Thanks to yourself, ma’am, for being so

[055-089] ready to pay ’em! And mind once more, ma’am, what you had best do

[055-090] on finding George to be your own son is to make him—for your

[055-091] sake—have every sort of help to put himself in the right and clear

[055-092] himself of a charge of which he is as innocent as you or me. It won’t

[055-093] do to have truth and justice on his side; he must have law and

[055-094] lawyers,” exclaims the old girl, apparently persuaded that the latter

[055-095] form a separate establishment and have dissolved partnership with

[055-096] truth and justice for ever and a day.

[055-097] “He shall have,” says Mrs. Rouncewell, “all the help that can be got

[055-098] for him in the world, my dear. I will spend all I have, and

[055-099] thankfully, to procure it. Sir Leicester will do his best, the whole

[055-100] family will do their best. I—I know something, my dear; and will

[055-101] make my own appeal, as his mother parted from him all these years,

[055-102] and finding him in a jail at last.”

[055-103] The extreme disquietude of the old housekeeper’s manner in saying

[055-104] this, her broken words, and her wringing of her hands make a powerful

[055-105] impression on Mrs. Bagnet and would astonish her but that she refers

[055-106] them all to her sorrow for her son’s condition. And yet Mrs. Bagnet

[055-107] wonders too why Mrs. Rouncewell should murmur so distractedly, “My

[055-108] Lady, my Lady, my Lady!” over and over again.

[055-109] The frosty night wears away, and the dawn breaks, and the post-chaise

[055-110] comes rolling on through the early mist like the ghost of a chaise

[055-111] departed. It has plenty of spectral company in ghosts of trees and

[055-112] hedges, slowly vanishing and giving place to the realities of day.

[055-113] London reached, the travellers alight, the old housekeeper in great

[055-114] tribulation and confusion, Mrs. Bagnet quite fresh and collected—as

[055-115] she would be if her next point, with no new equipage and outfit, were

[055-116] the Cape of Good Hope, the Island of Ascension, Hong Kong, or any

[055-117] other military station.

[055-118] But when they set out for the prison where the trooper is

[055-119] confined, the old lady has managed to draw about her, with her

[055-120] lavender-coloured dress, much of the staid calmness which is its

[055-121] usual accompaniment. A wonderfully grave, precise, and handsome piece

[055-122] of old china she looks, though her heart beats fast and her stomacher

[055-123] is ruffled more than even the remembrance of this wayward son has

[055-124] ruffled it these many years.

[055-125] Approaching the cell, they find the door opening and a warder in the

[055-126] act of coming out. The old girl promptly makes a sign of entreaty to

[055-127] him to say nothing; assenting with a nod, he suffers them to enter as

[055-128] he shuts the door.

[055-129] So George, who is [[document-and-letter|writing]] at his table, supposing himself to be

[055-130] alone, does not raise his eyes, but remains absorbed. The old

[055-131] housekeeper looks at him, and those wandering hands of hers are quite

[055-132] enough for Mrs. Bagnet’s confirmation, even if she could see the

[055-133] mother and the son together, knowing what she knows, and doubt their

[055-134] relationship.

[055-135] Not a rustle of the housekeeper’s dress, not a gesture, not a word

[055-136] betrays her. She stands looking at him as he writes on, all

[055-137] unconscious, and only her fluttering hands give utterance to her

[055-138] emotions. But they are very eloquent, very, very eloquent. Mrs.

[055-139] Bagnet understands them. They speak of gratitude, of joy, of grief,

[055-140] of hope; of inextinguishable affection, cherished with no return

[055-141] since this stalwart man was a stripling; of a better son loved less,

[055-142] and this son loved so fondly and so proudly; and they speak in such

[055-143] touching language that Mrs. Bagnet’s eyes brim up with tears and they

[055-144] run glistening down her sun-brown face.

[055-145] “George Rouncewell! Oh, my dear child, turn and look at me!”

[055-146] The trooper starts up, clasps his mother round the neck, and falls

[055-147] down on his knees before her. Whether in a late repentance, whether

[055-148] in the first association that comes back upon him, he puts his hands

[055-149] together as a child does when it says its prayers, and raising them

[055-150] towards her breast, bows down his head, and cries.

[055-151] “My George, my dearest son! Always my favourite, and my favourite

[055-152] still, where have you been these cruel years and years? Grown such a

[055-153] man too, grown such a fine strong man. Grown so like what I knew he

[055-154] must be, if it pleased God he was alive!”

[055-155] She can ask, and he can answer, nothing connected for a time. All

[055-156] that time the old girl, turned away, leans one arm against the

[055-157] whitened wall, leans her honest forehead upon it, wipes her eyes with

[055-158] her serviceable grey cloak, and quite enjoys herself like the best of

[055-159] old girls as she is.

[055-160] “Mother,” says the trooper when they are more composed, “forgive me

[055-161] first of all, for I know my need of it.”

[055-162] Forgive him! She does it with all her heart and soul. She always has

[055-163] done it. She tells him how she has had it written in her will, these

[055-164] many years, that he was her beloved son George. She has never

[055-165] believed any ill of him, never. If she had died without this

[055-166] happiness—and she is an old woman now and can’t look to live very

[055-167] long—she would have blessed him with her last breath, if she had had

[055-168] her senses, as her beloved son George.

[055-169] “Mother, I have been an undutiful trouble to you, and I have my

[055-170] reward; but of late years I have had a kind of glimmering of a

[055-171] purpose in me too. When I left home I didn’t care much, mother—I am

[055-172] afraid not a great deal—for leaving; and went away and ’listed,

[055-173] harum-scarum, making believe to think that I cared for nobody, no not

[055-174] I, and that nobody cared for me.”

[055-175] The trooper has dried his eyes and put away his handkerchief, but

[055-176] there is an extraordinary contrast between his habitual manner of

[055-177] expressing himself and carrying himself and the softened tone in

[055-178] which he speaks, interrupted occasionally by a half-stifled sob.

[055-179] “So I wrote a line home, mother, as you too well know, to say I had

[055-180] ’listed under another name, and I went abroad. Abroad, at one time I

[055-181] thought I would write home next year, when I might be better off; and

[055-182] when that year was out, I thought I would write home next year, when

[055-183] I might be better off; and when that year was out again, perhaps I

[055-184] didn’t think much about it. So on, from year to year, through a

[055-185] service of ten years, till I began to get older, and to ask myself

[055-186] why should I ever write.”

[055-187] “I don’t find any fault, child—but not to ease my mind, George? Not

[055-188] a word to your loving mother, who was growing older too?”

[055-189] This almost overturns the trooper afresh, but he sets himself up with

[055-190] a great, rough, sounding clearance of his throat.

[055-191] “Heaven forgive me, mother, but I thought there would be small

[055-192] consolation then in hearing anything about me. There were you,

[055-193] respected and esteemed. There was my brother, as I read in chance

[055-194] North Country papers now and then, rising to be prosperous and

[055-195] famous. There was I a dragoon, roving, unsettled, not self-made like

[055-196] him, but self-unmade—all my earlier advantages thrown away, all my

[055-197] little learning unlearnt, nothing picked up but what unfitted me for

[055-198] most things that I could think of. What business had I to make myself

[055-199] known? After letting all that time go by me, what good could come of

[055-200] it? The worst was past with you, mother. I knew by that time (being a

[055-201] man) how you had mourned for me, and wept for me, and prayed for me;

[055-202] and the pain was over, or was softened down, and I was better in your

[055-203] mind as it was.”

[055-204] The old lady sorrowfully shakes her head, and taking one of his

[055-205] powerful hands, lays it lovingly upon her shoulder.

[055-206] “No, I don’t say that it was so, mother, but that I made it out to be

[055-207] so. I said just now, what good could come of it? Well, my dear

[055-208] mother, some good might have come of it to myself—and there was the

[055-209] meanness of it. You would have sought me out; you would have

[055-210] purchased my discharge; you would have taken me down to Chesney Wold;

[055-211] you would have brought me and my brother and my brother’s family

[055-212] together; you would all have considered anxiously how to do something

[055-213] for me and set me up as a respectable civilian. But how could any of

[055-214] you feel sure of me when I couldn’t so much as feel sure of myself?

[055-215] How could you help regarding as an incumbrance and a discredit to you

[055-216] an idle dragooning chap who was an incumbrance and a discredit to

[055-217] himself, excepting under discipline? How could I look my brother’s

[055-218] children in the face and pretend to set them an example—I, the

[055-219] vagabond boy who had run away from home and been the grief and

[055-220] unhappiness of my mother’s life? ‘No, George.’ Such were my words,

[055-221] mother, when I passed this in review before me: ‘You have made your

[055-222] bed. Now, lie upon it.’”

[055-223] Mrs. Rouncewell, drawing up her stately form, shakes her head at the

[055-224] old girl with a swelling pride upon her, as much as to say, “I told

[055-225] you so!” The old girl relieves her feelings and testifies her

[055-226] interest in the conversation by giving the trooper a great poke

[055-227] between the shoulders with her umbrella; this action she afterwards

[055-228] repeats, at intervals, in a species of affectionate lunacy, never

[055-229] failing, after the administration of each of these remonstrances, to

[055-230] resort to the whitened wall and the grey cloak again.

[055-231] “This was the way I brought myself to think, mother, that my best

[055-232] amends was to lie upon that bed I had made, and die upon it. And I

[055-233] should have done it (though I have been to see you more than once

[055-234] down at Chesney Wold, when you little thought of me) but for my old

[055-235] comrade’s wife here, who I find has been too many for me. But I thank

[055-236] her for it. I thank you for it, Mrs. Bagnet, with all my heart and

[055-237] might.”

[055-238] To which Mrs. Bagnet responds with two pokes.

[055-239] And now the old lady impresses upon her son George, her own dear

[055-240] recovered boy, her joy and pride, the light of her eyes, the happy

[055-241] close of her life, and every fond name she can think of, that he must

[055-242] be governed by the best advice obtainable by money and influence,

[055-243] that he must yield up his case to the greatest lawyers that can be

[055-244] got, that he must act in this serious plight as he shall be advised

[055-245] to act and must not be self-willed, however right, but must promise

[055-246] to think only of his poor old mother’s anxiety and suffering until he

[055-247] is released, or he will break her heart.

[055-248] “Mother, ’tis little enough to consent to,” returns the trooper,

[055-249] stopping her with a kiss; “tell me what I shall do, and I’ll make a

[055-250] late beginning and do it. Mrs. Bagnet, you’ll take care of my mother,

[055-251] I know?”

[055-252] A very hard poke from the old girl’s umbrella.

[055-253] “If you’ll bring her acquainted with [[john-jarndyce|Mr. Jarndyce]] and Miss Summerson,

[055-254] she will find them of her way of thinking, and they will give her the

[055-255] best advice and assistance.”

[055-256] “And, George,” says the old lady, “we must send with all haste for

[055-257] your brother. He is a sensible sound man as they tell me—out in the

[055-258] world beyond Chesney Wold, my dear, though I don’t know much of it

[055-259] myself—and will be of great service.”

[055-260] “Mother,” returns the trooper, “is it too soon to ask a favour?”

[055-261] “Surely not, my dear.”

[055-262] “Then grant me this one great favour. Don’t let my brother know.”

[055-263] “Not know what, my dear?”

[055-264] “Not know of me. In fact, mother, I can’t bear it; I can’t make up my

[055-265] mind to it. He has proved himself so different from me and has done

[055-266] so much to raise himself while I’ve been soldiering that I haven’t

[055-267] brass enough in my composition to see him in this place and under

[055-268] this charge. How could a man like him be expected to have any

[055-269] pleasure in such a discovery? It’s impossible. No, keep my secret

[055-270] from him, mother; do me a greater kindness than I deserve and keep my

[055-271] secret from my brother, of all men.”

[055-272] “But not always, dear George?”

[055-273] “Why, mother, perhaps not for good and all—though I may come to ask

[055-274] that too—but keep it now, I do entreat you. If it’s ever broke to

[055-275] him that his rip of a brother has turned up, I could wish,” says the

[055-276] trooper, shaking his head very doubtfully, “to break it myself and be

[055-277] governed as to advancing or retreating by the way in which he seems

[055-278] to take it.”

[055-279] As he evidently has a rooted feeling on this point, and as the depth

[055-280] of it is recognized in Mrs. Bagnet’s face, his mother yields her

[055-281] implicit assent to what he asks. For this he thanks her kindly.

[055-282] “In all other respects, my dear mother, I’ll be as tractable and

[055-283] obedient as you can wish; on this one alone, I stand out. So now I am

[055-284] ready even for the lawyers. I have been drawing up,” he glances at

[055-285] his writing on the table, “an exact account of what I knew of the

[055-286] deceased and how I came to be involved in this unfortunate affair.

[055-287] It’s entered, plain and regular, like an orderly-book; not a word in

[055-288] it but what’s wanted for the facts. I did intend to read it, straight

[055-289] on end, whensoever I was called upon to say anything in my defence. I

[055-290] hope I may be let to do it still; but I have no longer a will of my

[055-291] own in this case, and whatever is said or done, I give my promise not

[055-292] to have any.”

[055-293] Matters being brought to this so far satisfactory pass, and time

[055-294] being on the wane, Mrs. Bagnet proposes a departure. Again and again

[055-295] the old lady hangs upon her son’s neck, and again and again the

[055-296] trooper holds her to his broad chest.

[055-297] “Where are you going to take my mother, Mrs. Bagnet?”

[055-298] “I am going to the town house, my dear, the family house. I have some

[055-299] business there that must be looked to directly,” Mrs. Rouncewell

[055-300] answers.

[055-301] “Will you see my mother safe there in a coach, Mrs. Bagnet? But of

[055-302] course I know you will. Why should I ask it!”

[055-303] Why indeed, Mrs. Bagnet expresses with the umbrella.

[055-304] “Take her, my old friend, and take my gratitude along with you.

[055-305] Kisses to Quebec and Malta, love to my godson, a hearty shake of the

[055-306] hand to Lignum, and this for yourself, and I wish it was ten thousand

[055-307] pound in gold, my dear!” So saying, the trooper puts his lips to the

[055-308] old girl’s tanned forehead, and the door shuts upon him in his cell.

[055-309] No entreaties on the part of the good old housekeeper will induce

[055-310] Mrs. Bagnet to retain the coach for her own conveyance home. Jumping

[055-311] out cheerfully at the door of the Dedlock mansion and handing Mrs.

[055-312] Rouncewell up the steps, the old girl shakes hands and trudges off,

[055-313] arriving soon afterwards in the bosom of the Bagnet family and

[055-314] falling to washing the greens as if nothing had happened.

[055-315] My Lady is in that room in which she held her last conference with

[055-316] the murdered man, and is sitting where she sat that night, and is

[055-317] looking at the spot where he stood upon the hearth studying her so

[055-318] leisurely, when a tap comes at the door. Who is it? Mrs. Rouncewell.

[055-319] What has brought Mrs. Rouncewell to town so unexpectedly?

[055-320] “Trouble, my Lady. Sad trouble. Oh, my Lady, may I beg a word with

[055-321] you?”

[055-322] What new occurrence is it that makes this tranquil old woman tremble

[055-323] so? Far happier than her Lady, as her Lady has often thought, why

[055-324] does she falter in this manner and look at her with such strange

[055-325] mistrust?

[055-326] “What is the matter? Sit down and take your breath.”

[055-327] “Oh, my Lady, my Lady. I have found my son—my youngest, who went

[055-328] away for a soldier so long ago. And he is in prison.”

[055-329] “For debt?”

[055-330] “Oh, no, my Lady; I would have paid any debt, and joyful.”

[055-331] “For what is he in prison then?”

[055-332] “Charged with a murder, my Lady, of which he is as innocent as—as I

[055-333] am. Accused of the murder of [[mr-tulkinghorn|Mr. Tulkinghorn]].”

[055-334] What does she mean by this look and this imploring gesture? Why does

[055-335] she come so close? What is the letter that she holds?

[055-336] “[[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]], my dear Lady, my good Lady, my kind Lady! You must

[055-337] have a heart to feel for me, you must have a heart to forgive me. I

[055-338] was in this family before you were born. I am devoted to it. But

[055-339] think of my dear son wrongfully accused.”

[055-340] “I do not accuse him.”

[055-341] “No, my Lady, no. But others do, and he is in prison and in danger.

[055-342] Oh, Lady Dedlock, if you can say but a word to help to clear him, say

[055-343] it!”

[055-344] What delusion can this be? What power does she suppose is in the

[055-345] person she petitions to avert this unjust suspicion, if it be unjust?

[055-346] Her Lady’s handsome eyes regard her with astonishment, almost with

[055-347] fear.

[055-348] “My Lady, I came away last night from Chesney Wold to find my son in

[055-349] my old age, and the step upon the Ghost’s Walk was so constant and so

[055-350] solemn that I never heard the like in all these years. Night after

[055-351] night, as it has fallen dark, the sound has echoed through your

[055-352] rooms, but last night it was awfullest. And as it fell dark last

[055-353] night, my Lady, I got this letter.”

[055-354] “What letter is it?”

[055-355] “Hush! Hush!” The housekeeper looks round and answers in a frightened

[055-356] whisper, “My Lady, I have not breathed a word of it, I don’t believe

[055-357] what’s written in it, I know it can’t be true, I am sure and certain

[055-358] that it is not true. But my son is in danger, and you must have a

[055-359] heart to pity me. If you know of anything that is not known to

[055-360] others, if you have any suspicion, if you have any clue at all, and

[055-361] any reason for keeping it in your own breast, oh, my dear Lady, think

[055-362] of me, and conquer that reason, and let it be known! This is the most

[055-363] I consider possible. I know you are not a hard lady, but you go your

[055-364] own way always without help, and you are not familiar with your

[055-365] friends; and all who admire you—and all do—as a beautiful and

[055-366] elegant lady, know you to be one far away from themselves who can’t

[055-367] be approached close. My Lady, you may have some proud or angry

[055-368] reasons for disdaining to utter something that you know; if so, pray,

[055-369] oh, pray, think of a faithful servant whose whole life has been

[055-370] passed in this family which she dearly loves, and relent, and help to

[055-371] clear my son! My Lady, my good Lady,” the old housekeeper pleads with

[055-372] genuine simplicity, “I am so humble in my place and you are by nature

[055-373] so high and distant that you may not think what I feel for my child,

[055-374] but I feel so much that I have come here to make so bold as to beg

[055-375] and pray you not to be scornful of us if you can do us any right or

[055-376] justice at this fearful time!”

[055-377] Lady Dedlock raises her without one word, until she takes the letter

[055-378] from her hand.

[055-379] “Am I to read this?”

[055-380] “When I am gone, my Lady, if you please, and then remembering the

[055-381] most that I consider possible.”

[055-382] “I know of nothing I can do. I know of nothing I reserve that can

[055-383] affect your son. I have never accused him.”

[055-384] “My Lady, you may pity him the more under a false accusation after

[055-385] reading the letter.”

[055-386] The old housekeeper leaves her with the letter in her hand. In truth

[055-387] she is not a hard lady naturally, and the time has been when the

[055-388] sight of the venerable figure suing to her with such strong

[055-389] earnestness would have moved her to great compassion. But so long

[055-390] accustomed to suppress emotion and keep down reality, so long

[055-391] schooled for her own purposes in that destructive school which shuts

[055-392] up the natural feelings of the heart like flies in amber and spreads

[055-393] one uniform and dreary gloss over the good and bad, the feeling and

[055-394] the unfeeling, the sensible and the senseless, she had subdued even

[055-395] her wonder until now.

[055-396] She opens the letter. Spread out upon the paper is a printed account

[055-397] of the discovery of the body as it lay face downward on the floor,

[055-398] shot through the heart; and underneath is written her own name, with

[055-399] the word “murderess” attached.

[055-400] It falls out of her hand. How long it may have lain upon the ground

[055-401] she knows not, but it lies where it fell when a servant stands before

[055-402] her announcing the young man of the name of Guppy. The words have

[055-403] probably been repeated several times, for they are ringing in her

[055-404] head before she begins to understand them.

[055-405] “Let him come in!”

[055-406] He comes in. Holding the letter in her hand, which she has taken from

[055-407] the floor, she tries to collect her thoughts. In the eyes of Mr.

[055-408] Guppy she is the same Lady Dedlock, holding the same prepared, proud,

[055-409] chilling state.

[055-410] “Your ladyship may not be at first disposed to excuse this visit from

[055-411] one who has never been welcome to your ladyship”—which he don’t

[055-412] complain of, for he is bound to confess that there never has been any

[055-413] particular reason on the face of things why he should be—“but I hope

[055-414] when I mention my motives to your ladyship you will not find fault

[055-415] with me,” says Mr. Guppy.

[055-416] “Do so.”

[055-417] “Thank your ladyship. I ought first to explain to your ladyship,” Mr.

[055-418] Guppy sits on the edge of a chair and puts his hat on the carpet at

[055-419] his feet, “that Miss Summerson, whose image, as I formerly mentioned

[055-420] to your ladyship, was at one period of my life imprinted on my ’eart

[055-421] until erased by circumstances over which I had no control,

[055-422] communicated to me, after I had the pleasure of waiting on your

[055-423] ladyship last, that she particularly wished me to take no steps

[055-424] whatever in any manner at all relating to her. And Miss Summerson’s

[055-425] wishes being to me a law (except as connected with circumstances over

[055-426] which I have no control), I consequently never expected to have the

[055-427] distinguished honour of waiting on your ladyship again.”

[055-428] And yet he is here now, Lady Dedlock moodily reminds him.

[055-429] “And yet I am here now,” Mr. Guppy admits. “My object being to

[055-430] communicate to your ladyship, under the seal of confidence, why I am

[055-431] here.”

[055-432] He cannot do so, she tells him, too plainly or too briefly. “Nor can

[055-433] I,” Mr. Guppy returns with a sense of injury upon him, “too

[055-434] particularly request your ladyship to take particular notice that

[055-435] it’s no personal affair of mine that brings me here. I have no

[055-436] interested views of my own to serve in coming here. If it was not for

[055-437] my promise to Miss Summerson and my keeping of it sacred—I, in point

[055-438] of fact, shouldn’t have darkened these doors again, but should have

[055-439] seen ’em further first.”

[055-440] Mr. Guppy considers this a favourable moment for sticking up his hair

[055-441] with both hands.

[055-442] “Your ladyship will remember when I mention it that the last time I

[055-443] was here I run against a party very eminent in our [[professional-identity|profession]] and

[055-444] whose loss we all deplore. That party certainly did from that time

[055-445] apply himself to cutting in against me in a way that I will call

[055-446] sharp practice, and did make it, at every turn and point, extremely

[055-447] difficult for me to be sure that I hadn’t inadvertently led up to

[055-448] something contrary to Miss Summerson’s wishes. Self-praise is no

[055-449] recommendation, but I may say for myself that I am not so bad a man

[055-450] of business neither.”

[055-451] Lady Dedlock looks at him in stern inquiry. Mr. Guppy immediately

[055-452] withdraws his eyes from her face and looks anywhere else.

[055-453] “Indeed, it has been made so hard,” he goes on, “to have any idea

[055-454] what that party was up to in combination with others that until the

[055-455] loss which we all deplore I was gravelled—an expression which your

[055-456] ladyship, moving in the higher circles, will be so good as to

[055-457] consider tantamount to knocked over. Small likewise—a name by which

[055-458] I refer to another party, a friend of mine that your ladyship is not

[055-459] acquainted with—got to be so close and double-faced that at times it

[055-460] wasn’t easy to keep one’s hands off his ’ead. However, what with the

[055-461] exertion of my humble abilities, and what with the help of a mutual

[055-462] friend by the name of Mr. Tony Weevle (who is of a high aristocratic

[055-463] turn and has your ladyship’s portrait always hanging up in his room),

[055-464] I have now reasons for an apprehension as to which I come to put your

[055-465] ladyship upon your guard. First, will your ladyship allow me to ask

[055-466] you whether you have had any strange visitors this morning? I don’t

[055-467] mean fashionable visitors, but such visitors, for instance, as Miss

[055-468] Barbary’s old servant, or as a person without the use of his lower

[055-469] extremities, carried upstairs similarly to a guy?”

[055-470] “No!”

[055-471] “Then I assure your ladyship that such visitors have been here and

[055-472] have been received here. Because I saw them at the door, and waited

[055-473] at the corner of the square till they came out, and took half an

[055-474] hour’s turn afterwards to avoid them.”

[055-475] “What have I to do with that, or what have you? I do not understand

[055-476] you. What do you mean?”

[055-477] “Your ladyship, I come to put you on your guard. There may be no

[055-478] occasion for it. Very well. Then I have only done my best to keep my

[055-479] promise to Miss Summerson. I strongly suspect (from what Small has

[055-480] dropped, and from what we have corkscrewed out of him) that those

[055-481] letters I was to have brought to your ladyship were not destroyed

[055-482] when I supposed they were. That if there was anything to be blown

[055-483] upon, it IS blown upon. That the visitors I have alluded to have been

[055-484] here this morning to make money of it. And that the money is made, or

[055-485] making.”

[055-486] Mr. Guppy picks up his hat and rises.

[055-487] “Your ladyship, you know best whether there’s anything in what I say

[055-488] or whether there’s nothing. Something or nothing, I have acted up to

[055-489] Miss Summerson’s wishes in letting things alone and in undoing what I

[055-490] had begun to do, as far as possible; that’s sufficient for me. In

[055-491] case I should be taking a liberty in putting your ladyship on your

[055-492] guard when there’s no necessity for it, you will endeavour, I should

[055-493] hope, to outlive my presumption, and I shall endeavour to outlive

[055-494] your disapprobation. I now take my farewell of your ladyship, and

[055-495] assure you that there’s no danger of your ever being waited on by me

[055-496] again.”

[055-497] She scarcely acknowledges these parting words by any look, but when

[055-498] he has been gone a little while, she rings her bell.

[055-499] “Where is Sir Leicester?”

[055-500] Mercury reports that he is at present shut up in the library alone.

[055-501] “Has Sir Leicester had any visitors this morning?”

[055-502] Several, on business. Mercury proceeds to a description of them,

[055-503] which has been anticipated by Mr. Guppy. Enough; he may go.

[055-504] So! All is broken down. Her name is in these many mouths, her husband

[055-505] knows his wrongs, her [[secret-and-shame|shame]] will be published—may be spreading while

[055-506] she thinks about it—and in addition to the thunderbolt so long

[055-507] foreseen by her, so unforeseen by him, she is denounced by an

[055-508] invisible accuser as the murderess of her enemy.

[055-509] Her enemy he was, and she has often, often, often wished him dead.

[055-510] Her enemy he is, even in his grave. This dreadful accusation comes

[055-511] upon her like a new torment at his lifeless hand. And when she

[055-512] recalls how she was secretly at his door that night, and how she may

[055-513] be represented to have sent her favourite girl away so soon before

[055-514] merely to release herself from observation, she shudders as if the

[055-515] hangman’s hands were at her neck.

[055-516] She has thrown herself upon the floor and lies with her hair all

[055-517] wildly scattered and her face buried in the cushions of a couch. She

[055-518] rises up, hurries to and fro, flings herself down again, and rocks

[055-519] and moans. The horror that is upon her is unutterable. If she really

[055-520] were the murderess, it could hardly be, for the moment, more intense.

[055-521] For as her murderous perspective, before the doing of the deed,

[055-522] however subtle the precautions for its commission, would have been

[055-523] closed up by a gigantic dilatation of the hateful figure, preventing

[055-524] her from seeing any consequences beyond it; and as those consequences

[055-525] would have rushed in, in an unimagined flood, the moment the figure

[055-526] was laid low—which always happens when a murder is done; so, now she

[055-527] sees that when he used to be on the watch before her, and she used to

[055-528] think, “if some mortal stroke would but fall on this old man and take

[055-529] him from my way!” it was but wishing that all he held against her in

[055-530] his hand might be flung to the winds and chance-sown in many places.

[055-531] So, too, with the wicked relief she has felt in his death. What was

[055-532] his death but the key-stone of a gloomy arch removed, and now the

[055-533] arch begins to fall in a thousand fragments, each crushing and

[055-534] mangling piecemeal!

[055-535] Thus, a terrible impression steals upon and overshadows her that from

[055-536] this pursuer, living or dead—obdurate and imperturbable before her

[055-537] in his well-remembered shape, or not more obdurate and imperturbable

[055-538] in his coffin-bed—there is no escape but in death. Hunted, she

[055-539] flies. The complication of her shame, her dread, remorse, and misery,

[055-540] overwhelms her at its height; and even her strength of self-reliance

[055-541] is overturned and whirled away like a leaf before a mighty wind.

[055-542] She hurriedly addresses these lines to her husband, seals, and leaves

[055-543] them on her table:

[055-544] If I am sought for, or accused of, his murder, believe

[055-545] that I am wholly innocent. Believe no other good of me,

[055-546] for I am innocent of nothing else that you have heard,

[055-547] or will hear, laid to my charge. He prepared me, on that

[055-548] fatal night, for his disclosure of my guilt to you. After

[055-549] he had left me, I went out on pretence of walking in the

[055-550] garden where I sometimes walk, but really to follow him

[055-551] and make one last petition that he would not protract the

[055-552] dreadful suspense on which I have been racked by him, you

[055-553] do not know how long, but would mercifully strike next

[055-554] morning.

[055-555] I found his house dark and silent. I rang twice at his

[055-556] door, but there was no reply, and I came home.

[055-557] I have no home left. I will encumber you no more. May

[055-558] you, in your just resentment, be able to forget the

[055-559] unworthy woman on whom you have wasted a most generous

[055-560] devotion—who avoids you only with a deeper shame than

[055-561] that with which she hurries from herself—and who writes

[055-562] this last adieu.

[055-563] She veils and dresses quickly, leaves all her jewels and her money,

[055-564] listens, goes downstairs at a moment when the hall is empty, opens

[055-565] and shuts the great door, flutters away in the shrill frosty wind.
