---
description: "It happened that when I came home from Deal I found a note from Caddy"
id: ch-50
label: "Chapter 50: Esther’s Narrative"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[050-001] It happened that when I came home from Deal I found a note from [[caddy-jellyby|Caddy]]

[050-002] Jellyby (as we always continued to call her), informing me that her

[050-003] health, which had been for some time very delicate, was worse and

[050-004] that she would be more glad than she could tell me if I would go to

[050-005] see her. It was a note of a few lines, written from the couch on

[050-006] which she lay and enclosed to me in another from her husband, in

[050-007] which he seconded her entreaty with much solicitude. Caddy was now

[050-008] the mother, and I the godmother, of such a poor little baby—such a

[050-009] tiny old-faced mite, with a countenance that seemed to be scarcely

[050-010] anything but cap-border, and a little lean, long-fingered hand,

[050-011] always clenched under its chin. It would lie in this attitude all

[050-012] day, with its bright specks of eyes open, wondering (as I used to

[050-013] imagine) how it came to be so small and weak. Whenever it was moved

[050-014] it cried, but at all other times it was so patient that the sole

[050-015] desire of its life appeared to be to lie quiet and think. It had

[050-016] curious little dark veins in its face and curious little dark marks

[050-017] under its eyes like faint remembrances of poor Caddy’s inky days, and

[050-018] altogether, to those who were not used to it, it was quite a piteous

[050-019] little sight.

[050-020] But it was enough for Caddy that SHE was used to it. The projects

[050-021] with which she beguiled her illness, for little [[esther-summerson|Esther]]’s education,

[050-022] and little Esther’s marriage, and even for her own old age as the

[050-023] grandmother of little Esther’s little Esthers, was so prettily

[050-024] expressive of devotion to this pride of her life that I should be

[050-025] tempted to recall some of them but for the timely remembrance that I

[050-026] am getting on irregularly as it is.

[050-027] To return to the letter. Caddy had a superstition about me which had

[050-028] been strengthening in her mind ever since that night long ago when

[050-029] she had lain asleep with her head in my lap. She almost—I think I

[050-030] must say quite—believed that I did her good whenever I was near her.

[050-031] Now although this was such a fancy of the affectionate girl’s that I

[050-032] am almost ashamed to mention it, still it might have all the force of

[050-033] a fact when she was really ill. Therefore I set off to Caddy, with my

[050-034] [[john-jarndyce|guardian]]’s consent, post-haste; and she and Prince made so much of me

[050-035] that there never was anything like it.

[050-036] Next day I went again to sit with her, and next day I went again. It

[050-037] was a very easy journey, for I had only to rise a little earlier in

[050-038] the morning, and keep my accounts, and attend to housekeeping matters

[050-039] before leaving home.

[050-040] But when I had made these three visits, my guardian said to me, on my

[050-041] return at night, “Now, little woman, little woman, this will never

[050-042] do. Constant dropping will wear away a stone, and constant coaching

[050-043] will wear out a Dame Durden. We will go to [[london|London]] for a while and

[050-044] take possession of our old lodgings.”

[050-045] “Not for me, dear guardian,” said I, “for I never feel tired,” which

[050-046] was strictly true. I was only too happy to be in such request.

[050-047] “For me then,” returned my guardian, “or for [[ada-clare|Ada]], or for both of us.

[050-048] It is somebody’s birthday to-morrow, I think.”

[050-049] “Truly I think it is,” said I, kissing my darling, who would be

[050-050] twenty-one to-morrow.

[050-051] “Well,” observed my guardian, half pleasantly, half seriously,

[050-052] “that’s a great occasion and will give my fair cousin some necessary

[050-053] business to transact in assertion of her independence, and will make

[050-054] London a more convenient place for all of us. So to London we will

[050-055] go. That being settled, there is another thing—how have you left

[050-056] Caddy?”

[050-057] “Very unwell, guardian. I fear it will be some time before she

[050-058] regains her health and strength.”

[050-059] “What do you call some time, now?” asked my guardian thoughtfully.

[050-060] “Some weeks, I am afraid.”

[050-061] “Ah!” He began to walk about the room with his hands in his pockets,

[050-062] showing that he had been thinking as much. “Now, what do you say

[050-063] about her doctor? Is he a good doctor, my love?”

[050-064] I felt obliged to confess that I knew nothing to the contrary but

[050-065] that Prince and I had agreed only that evening that we would like his

[050-066] opinion to be confirmed by some one.

[050-067] “Well, you know,” returned my guardian quickly, “there’s [[allan-woodcourt|Woodcourt]].”

[050-068] I had not meant that, and was rather taken by surprise. For a moment

[050-069] all that I had had in my mind in connexion with Mr. Woodcourt seemed

[050-070] to come back and confuse me.

[050-071] “You don’t object to him, little woman?”

[050-072] “Object to him, guardian? Oh no!”

[050-073] “And you don’t think the patient would object to him?”

[050-074] So far from that, I had no doubt of her being prepared to have a

[050-075] great reliance on him and to like him very much. I said that he was

[050-076] no stranger to her personally, for she had seen him often in his kind

[050-077] attendance on [[miss-flite|Miss Flite]].

[050-078] “Very good,” said my guardian. “He has been here to-day, my dear, and

[050-079] I will see him about it to-morrow.”

[050-080] I felt in this short conversation—though I did not know how, for she

[050-081] was quiet, and we interchanged no look—that my dear girl well

[050-082] remembered how merrily she had clasped me round the waist when no

[050-083] other hands than Caddy’s had brought me the little parting token.

[050-084] This caused me to feel that I ought to tell her, and Caddy too, that

[050-085] I was going to be the mistress of [[bleak-house|Bleak House]] and that if I avoided

[050-086] that disclosure any longer I might become less worthy in my own eyes

[050-087] of its master’s love. Therefore, when we went upstairs and had waited

[050-088] listening until the clock struck twelve in order that only I might be

[050-089] the first to wish my darling all good wishes on her birthday and to

[050-090] take her to my heart, I set before her, just as I had set before

[050-091] myself, the goodness and honour of her cousin John and the happy life

[050-092] that was in store for me. If ever my darling were fonder of me at

[050-093] one time than another in all our intercourse, she was surely fondest

[050-094] of me that night. And I was so rejoiced to know it and so comforted

[050-095] by the sense of having done right in casting this last idle

[050-096] reservation away that I was ten times happier than I had been before.

[050-097] I had scarcely thought it a reservation a few hours ago, but now that

[050-098] it was gone I felt as if I understood its nature better.

[050-099] Next day we went to London. We found our old lodging vacant, and in

[050-100] half an hour were quietly established there, as if we had never gone

[050-101] away. Mr. Woodcourt dined with us to celebrate my darling’s birthday,

[050-102] and we were as pleasant as we could be with the great blank among us

[050-103] that [[richard-carstone|Richard]]’s absence naturally made on such an occasion. After that

[050-104] day I was for some weeks—eight or nine as I remember—very much with

[050-105] Caddy, and thus it fell out that I saw less of Ada at this time than

[050-106] any other since we had first come together, except the time of my own

[050-107] illness. She often came to Caddy’s, but our function there was to

[050-108] amuse and cheer her, and we did not talk in our usual confidential

[050-109] manner. Whenever I went home at night we were together, but Caddy’s

[050-110] rest was broken by pain, and I often remained to nurse her.

[050-111] With her husband and her poor little mite of a baby to love and their

[050-112] home to strive for, what a good creature Caddy was! So self-denying,

[050-113] so uncomplaining, so anxious to get well on their account, so afraid

[050-114] of giving trouble, and so thoughtful of the unassisted labours of her

[050-115] husband and the comforts of old Mr. Turveydrop; I had never known the

[050-116] best of her until now. And it seemed so curious that her pale face

[050-117] and helpless figure should be lying there day after day where dancing

[050-118] was the business of life, where the kit and the apprentices began

[050-119] early every morning in the ball-room, and where the untidy little boy

[050-120] waltzed by himself in the kitchen all the afternoon.

[050-121] At Caddy’s request I took the supreme direction of her apartment,

[050-122] trimmed it up, and pushed her, couch and all, into a lighter and more

[050-123] airy and more cheerful corner than she had yet occupied; then, every

[050-124] day, when we were in our neatest array, I used to lay my small small

[050-125] namesake in her arms and sit down to chat or work or read to her. It

[050-126] was at one of the first of these quiet times that I told Caddy about

[050-127] Bleak House.

[050-128] We had other visitors besides Ada. First of all we had Prince, who in

[050-129] his hurried intervals of teaching used to come softly in and sit

[050-130] softly down, with a face of loving anxiety for Caddy and the very

[050-131] little child. Whatever Caddy’s condition really was, she never failed

[050-132] to declare to Prince that she was all but well—which I, heaven

[050-133] forgive me, never failed to confirm. This would put Prince in such

[050-134] good spirits that he would sometimes take the kit from his pocket and

[050-135] play a chord or two to astonish the baby, which I never knew it to do

[050-136] in the least degree, for my tiny namesake never noticed it at all.

[050-137] Then there was Mrs. Jellyby. She would come occasionally, with her

[050-138] usual distraught manner, and sit calmly looking miles beyond her

[050-139] grandchild as if her attention were absorbed by a young Borrioboolan

[050-140] on its native shores. As bright-eyed as ever, as serene, and as

[050-141] untidy, she would say, “Well, Caddy, child, and how do you do

[050-142] to-day?” And then would sit amiably smiling and taking no notice of

[050-143] the reply or would sweetly glide off into a calculation of the number

[050-144] of [[document-and-letter|letters]] she had lately received and answered or of the

[050-145] coffee-bearing power of [[telescopic-philanthropy|Borrioboola-Gha]]. This she would always do

[050-146] with a serene contempt for our limited sphere of action, not to be

[050-147] disguised.

[050-148] Then there was old Mr. Turveydrop, who was from morning to night and

[050-149] from night to morning the subject of innumerable precautions. If the

[050-150] baby cried, it was nearly stifled lest the noise should make him

[050-151] uncomfortable. If the fire wanted stirring in the night, it was

[050-152] surreptitiously done lest his rest should be broken. If Caddy

[050-153] required any little comfort that the house contained, she first

[050-154] carefully discussed whether he was likely to require it too. In

[050-155] return for this consideration he would come into the room once a day,

[050-156] all but blessing it—showing a condescension, and a patronage, and a

[050-157] grace of manner in dispensing the light of his high-shouldered

[050-158] presence from which I might have supposed him (if I had not known

[050-159] better) to have been the benefactor of Caddy’s life.

[050-160] “My Caroline,” he would say, making the nearest approach that he

[050-161] could to bending over her. “Tell me that you are better to-day.”

[050-162] “Oh, much better, thank you, Mr. Turveydrop,” Caddy would reply.

[050-163] “Delighted! Enchanted! And our dear Miss Summerson. She is not quite

[050-164] prostrated by fatigue?” Here he would crease up his eyelids and kiss

[050-165] his fingers to me, though I am happy to say he had ceased to be

[050-166] particular in his attentions since I had been so altered.

[050-167] “Not at all,” I would assure him.

[050-168] “Charming! We must take care of our dear Caroline, Miss Summerson. We

[050-169] must spare nothing that will restore her. We must nourish her. My

[050-170] dear Caroline”—he would turn to his daughter-in-law with infinite

[050-171] generosity and protection—“want for nothing, my love. Frame a wish

[050-172] and gratify it, my daughter. Everything this house contains,

[050-173] everything my room contains, is at your service, my dear. Do not,” he

[050-174] would sometimes add in a burst of deportment, “even allow my simple

[050-175] requirements to be considered if they should at any time interfere

[050-176] with your own, my Caroline. Your necessities are greater than mine.”

[050-177] He had established such a long prescriptive right to this deportment

[050-178] (his son’s [[inheritance-and-property|inheritance]] from his mother) that I several times knew

[050-179] both Caddy and her husband to be melted to tears by these

[050-180] affectionate self-sacrifices.

[050-181] “Nay, my dears,” he would remonstrate; and when I saw Caddy’s thin

[050-182] arm about his fat neck as he said it, I would be melted too, though

[050-183] not by the same process. “Nay, nay! I have promised never to leave

[050-184] ye. Be dutiful and affectionate towards me, and I ask no other

[050-185] return. Now, bless ye! I am going to the Park.”

[050-186] He would take the air there presently and get an appetite for his

[050-187] hotel dinner. I hope I do old Mr. Turveydrop no wrong, but I never

[050-188] saw any better traits in him than these I faithfully record, except

[050-189] that he certainly conceived a liking for Peepy and would take the

[050-190] child out walking with great pomp, always on those occasions sending

[050-191] him home before he went to dinner himself, and occasionally with a

[050-192] halfpenny in his pocket. But even this disinterestedness was attended

[050-193] with no inconsiderable cost, to my knowledge, for before Peepy was

[050-194] sufficiently decorated to walk hand in hand with the professor of

[050-195] deportment, he had to be newly dressed, at the expense of Caddy and

[050-196] her husband, from top to toe.

[050-197] Last of our visitors, there was Mr. Jellyby. Really when he used to

[050-198] come in of an evening, and ask Caddy in his meek voice how she was,

[050-199] and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no attempt

[050-200] to say anything more, I liked him very much. If he found me bustling

[050-201] about doing any little thing, he sometimes half took his coat off, as

[050-202] if with an intention of helping by a great exertion; but he never got

[050-203] any further. His sole occupation was to sit with his head against the

[050-204] wall, looking hard at the thoughtful baby; and I could not quite

[050-205] divest my mind of a fancy that they understood one another.

[050-206] I have not counted Mr. Woodcourt among our visitors because he was

[050-207] now Caddy’s regular attendant. She soon began to improve under his

[050-208] care, but he was so gentle, so skilful, so unwearying in the pains he

[050-209] took that it is not to be wondered at, I am sure. I saw a good deal

[050-210] of Mr. Woodcourt during this time, though not so much as might be

[050-211] supposed, for knowing Caddy to be safe in his hands, I often slipped

[050-212] home at about the hours when he was expected. We frequently met,

[050-213] notwithstanding. I was quite reconciled to myself now, but I still

[050-214] felt glad to think that he was sorry for me, and he still WAS sorry

[050-215] for me I believed. He helped Mr. Badger in his professional

[050-216] engagements, which were numerous, and had as yet no settled projects

[050-217] for the future.

[050-218] It was when Caddy began to recover that I began to notice a change in

[050-219] my dear girl. I cannot say how it first presented itself to me,

[050-220] because I observed it in many slight particulars which were nothing

[050-221] in themselves and only became something when they were pieced

[050-222] together. But I made it out, by putting them together, that Ada was

[050-223] not so frankly cheerful with me as she used to be. Her tenderness for

[050-224] me was as loving and true as ever; I did not for a moment doubt that;

[050-225] but there was a quiet sorrow about her which she did not confide to

[050-226] me, and in which I traced some hidden regret.

[050-227] Now, I could not understand this, and I was so anxious for the

[050-228] happiness of my own pet that it caused me some uneasiness and set me

[050-229] thinking often. At length, feeling sure that Ada suppressed this

[050-230] something from me lest it should make me unhappy too, it came into my

[050-231] head that she was a little grieved—for me—by what I had told her

[050-232] about Bleak House.

[050-233] How I persuaded myself that this was likely, I don’t know. I had no

[050-234] idea that there was any selfish reference in my doing so. I was not

[050-235] grieved for myself: I was quite contented and quite happy. Still,

[050-236] that Ada might be thinking—for me, though I had abandoned all such

[050-237] thoughts—of what once was, but was now all changed, seemed so easy

[050-238] to believe that I believed it.

[050-239] What could I do to reassure my darling (I considered then) and show

[050-240] her that I had no such feelings? Well! I could only be as brisk and

[050-241] busy as possible, and that I had tried to be all along. However, as

[050-242] Caddy’s illness had certainly interfered, more or less, with my home

[050-243] duties—though I had always been there in the morning to make my

[050-244] guardian’s breakfast, and he had a hundred times laughed and said

[050-245] there must be two little women, for his little woman was never

[050-246] missing—I resolved to be doubly diligent and gay. So I went about

[050-247] the house humming all the tunes I knew, and I sat working and working

[050-248] in a desperate manner, and I talked and talked, morning, noon, and

[050-249] night.

[050-250] And still there was the same shade between me and my darling.

[050-251] “So, Dame Trot,” observed my guardian, shutting up his book one night

[050-252] when we were all three together, “so Woodcourt has restored Caddy

[050-253] Jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?”

[050-254] “Yes,” I said; “and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be

[050-255] made rich, guardian.”

[050-256] “I wish it was,” he returned, “with all my heart.”

[050-257] So did I too, for that matter. I said so.

[050-258] “Aye! We would make him as rich as a Jew if we knew how. Would we

[050-259] not, little woman?”

[050-260] I laughed as I worked and replied that I was not sure about that, for

[050-261] it might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there might be

[050-262] many who could ill spare him. As Miss Flite, and Caddy herself, and

[050-263] many others.

[050-264] “True,” said my guardian. “I had forgotten that. But we would agree

[050-265] to make him rich enough to live, I suppose? Rich enough to work with

[050-266] tolerable peace of mind? Rich enough to have his own happy home and

[050-267] his own household gods—and household goddess, too, perhaps?”

[050-268] That was quite another thing, I said. We must all agree in that.

[050-269] “To be sure,” said my guardian. “All of us. I have a great regard for

[050-270] Woodcourt, a high esteem for him; and I have been sounding him

[050-271] delicately about his plans. It is difficult to offer aid to an

[050-272] independent man with that just kind of pride which he possesses. And

[050-273] yet I would be glad to do it if I might or if I knew how. He seems

[050-274] half inclined for another voyage. But that appears like casting such

[050-275] a man away.”

[050-276] “It might open a new world to him,” said I.

[050-277] “So it might, little woman,” my guardian assented. “I doubt if he

[050-278] expects much of the old world. Do you know I have fancied that he

[050-279] sometimes feels some particular disappointment or misfortune

[050-280] encountered in it. You never heard of anything of that sort?”

[050-281] I shook my head.

[050-282] “Humph,” said my guardian. “I am mistaken, I dare say.” As there was

[050-283] a little pause here, which I thought, for my dear girl’s

[050-284] satisfaction, had better be filled up, I hummed an air as I worked

[050-285] which was a favourite with my guardian.

[050-286] “And do you think Mr. Woodcourt will make another voyage?” I asked

[050-287] him when I had hummed it quietly all through.

[050-288] “I don’t quite know what to think, my dear, but I should say it was

[050-289] likely at present that he will give a long trip to another country.”

[050-290] “I am sure he will take the best wishes of all our hearts with him

[050-291] wherever he goes,” said I; “and though they are not riches, he will

[050-292] never be the poorer for them, guardian, at least.”

[050-293] “Never, little woman,” he replied.

[050-294] I was sitting in my usual place, which was now beside my guardian’s

[050-295] chair. That had not been my usual place before the letter, but it was

[050-296] now. I looked up to Ada, who was sitting opposite, and I saw, as she

[050-297] looked at me, that her eyes were filled with tears and that tears

[050-298] were falling down her face. I felt that I had only to be placid and

[050-299] merry once for all to undeceive my dear and set her loving heart at

[050-300] rest. I really was so, and I had nothing to do but to be myself.

[050-301] So I made my sweet girl lean upon my shoulder—how little thinking

[050-302] what was heavy on her mind!—and I said she was not quite well, and

[050-303] put my arm about her, and took her upstairs. When we were in our own

[050-304] room, and when she might perhaps have told me what I was so

[050-305] unprepared to hear, I gave her no encouragement to confide in me; I

[050-306] never thought she stood in need of it.

[050-307] “Oh, my dear good Esther,” said Ada, “if I could only make up my mind

[050-308] to speak to you and my cousin John when you are together!”

[050-309] “Why, my love!” I remonstrated. “Ada, why should you not speak to

[050-310] us!”

[050-311] Ada only dropped her head and pressed me closer to her heart.

[050-312] “You surely don’t forget, my beauty,” said I, smiling, “what quiet,

[050-313] old-fashioned people we are and how I have settled down to be the

[050-314] discreetest of dames? You don’t forget how happily and peacefully my

[050-315] life is all marked out for me, and by whom? I am certain that you

[050-316] don’t forget by what a noble character, Ada. That can never be.”

[050-317] “No, never, Esther.”

[050-318] “Why then, my dear,” said I, “there can be nothing amiss—and why

[050-319] should you not speak to us?”

[050-320] “Nothing amiss, Esther?” returned Ada. “Oh, when I think of all these

[050-321] years, and of his fatherly care and kindness, and of the old

[050-322] relations among us, and of you, what shall I do, what shall I do!”

[050-323] I looked at my child in some wonder, but I thought it better not to

[050-324] answer otherwise than by cheering her, and so I turned off into many

[050-325] little recollections of our life together and prevented her from

[050-326] saying more. When she lay down to sleep, and not before, I returned

[050-327] to my guardian to say good night, and then I came back to Ada and sat

[050-328] near her for a little while.

[050-329] She was asleep, and I thought as I looked at her that she was a

[050-330] little changed. I had thought so more than once lately. I could not

[050-331] decide, even looking at her while she was unconscious, how she was

[050-332] changed, but something in the familiar beauty of her face looked

[050-333] different to me. My guardian’s old hopes of her and Richard arose

[050-334] sorrowfully in my mind, and I said to myself, “She has been anxious

[050-335] about him,” and I wondered how that love would end.

[050-336] When I had come home from Caddy’s while she was ill, I had often

[050-337] found Ada at work, and she had always put her work away, and I had

[050-338] never known what it was. Some of it now lay in a drawer near her,

[050-339] which was not quite closed. I did not open the drawer, but I still

[050-340] rather wondered what the work could be, for it was evidently nothing

[050-341] for herself.

[050-342] And I noticed as I kissed my dear that she lay with one hand under

[050-343] her pillow so that it was hidden.

[050-344] How much less amiable I must have been than they thought me, how much

[050-345] less amiable than I thought myself, to be so preoccupied with my own

[050-346] cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rested with me

[050-347] to put my dear girl right and set her mind at peace!

[050-348] But I lay down, self-deceived, in that belief. And I awoke in it next

[050-349] day to find that there was still the same shade between me and my

[050-350] darling.
