---
description: "There is a hush upon Chesney Wold in these altered days, as there is"
id: ch-66
label: "Chapter 66: Down in Lincolnshire"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[066-001] There is a hush upon [[chesney-wold|Chesney Wold]] in these altered days, as there is

[066-002] upon a portion of the family history. The story goes that Sir

[066-003] Leicester paid some who could have spoken out to hold their peace;

[066-004] but it is a lame story, feebly whispering and creeping about, and any

[066-005] brighter spark of life it shows soon dies away. It is known for

[066-006] certain that the handsome [[lady-dedlock|Lady Dedlock]] lies in the mausoleum in the

[066-007] park, where the trees arch darkly overhead, and the owl is heard at

[066-008] night making the woods ring; but whence she was brought home to be

[066-009] laid among the echoes of that solitary place, or how she died, is all

[066-010] mystery. Some of her old friends, principally to be found among the

[066-011] peachy-cheeked charmers with the skeleton throats, did once

[066-012] occasionally say, as they toyed in a ghastly manner with large

[066-013] fans—like charmers reduced to flirting with grim death, after losing

[066-014] all their other beaux—did once occasionally say, when the world

[066-015] assembled together, that they wondered the ashes of the Dedlocks,

[066-016] entombed in the mausoleum, never rose against the profanation of her

[066-017] company. But the dead-and-gone Dedlocks take it very calmly and have

[066-018] never been known to object.

[066-019] Up from among the fern in the hollow, and winding by the bridle-road

[066-020] among the trees, comes sometimes to this lonely spot the sound of

[066-021] horses’ hoofs. Then may be seen [[sir-leicester-dedlock|Sir Leicester]]—invalided, bent, and

[066-022] almost blind, but of worthy presence yet—riding with a stalwart man

[066-023] beside him, constant to his bridle-rein. When they come to a certain

[066-024] spot before the mausoleum-door, Sir Leicester’s accustomed horse

[066-025] stops of his own accord, and Sir Leicester, pulling off his hat, is

[066-026] still for a few moments before they ride away.

[066-027] War rages yet with the audacious Boythorn, though at uncertain

[066-028] intervals, and now hotly, and now coolly, flickering like an unsteady

[066-029] fire. The truth is said to be that when Sir Leicester came down to

[066-030] Lincolnshire for good, Mr. Boythorn showed a manifest desire to

[066-031] abandon his right of way and do whatever Sir Leicester would, which

[066-032] Sir Leicester, conceiving to be a condescension to his illness or

[066-033] misfortune, took in such high dudgeon, and was so magnificently

[066-034] aggrieved by, that Mr. Boythorn found himself under the necessity of

[066-035] committing a flagrant trespass to restore his neighbour to himself.

[066-036] Similarly, Mr. Boythorn continues to post tremendous placards on the

[066-037] disputed thoroughfare and (with his bird upon his head) to hold forth

[066-038] vehemently against Sir Leicester in the sanctuary of his own home;

[066-039] similarly, also, he defies him as of old in the little church by

[066-040] testifying a bland unconsciousness of his existence. But it is

[066-041] whispered that when he is most ferocious towards his old foe, he is

[066-042] really most considerate, and that Sir Leicester, in the dignity of

[066-043] being implacable, little supposes how much he is humoured. As little

[066-044] does he think how near together he and his antagonist have suffered

[066-045] in the fortunes of two sisters, and his antagonist, who knows it now,

[066-046] is not the man to tell him. So the quarrel goes on to the

[066-047] satisfaction of both.

[066-048] In one of the lodges of the park—that lodge within sight of the

[066-049] house where, once upon a time, when the waters were out down in

[066-050] Lincolnshire, my Lady used to see the keeper’s child—the stalwart

[066-051] man, the trooper formerly, is housed. Some relics of his old calling

[066-052] hang upon the walls, and these it is the chosen recreation of a

[066-053] little lame man about the stable-yard to keep gleaming bright. A busy

[066-054] little man he always is, in the polishing at harness-house doors, of

[066-055] stirrup-irons, bits, curb-chains, harness bosses, anything in the way

[066-056] of a stable-yard that will take a polish, leading a life of friction.

[066-057] A shaggy little damaged man, withal, not unlike an old dog of some

[066-058] mongrel breed, who has been considerably knocked about. He answers to

[066-059] the name of Phil.

[066-060] A goodly sight it is to see the grand old housekeeper (harder of

[066-061] hearing now) going to church on the arm of her son and to

[066-062] observe—which few do, for the house is scant of company in these

[066-063] times—the relations of both towards Sir Leicester, and his towards

[066-064] them. They have visitors in the high summer weather, when a grey

[066-065] cloak and umbrella, unknown to Chesney Wold at other periods, are

[066-066] seen among the leaves; when two young ladies are occasionally found

[066-067] gambolling in sequestered saw-pits and such nooks of the park; and

[066-068] when the smoke of two pipes wreathes away into the fragrant evening

[066-069] air from the trooper’s door. Then is a fife heard trolling within the

[066-070] lodge on the inspiring topic of the “British Grenadiers”; and as the

[066-071] evening closes in, a gruff inflexible voice is heard to say, while

[066-072] two men pace together up and down, “But I never own to it before the

[066-073] old girl. Discipline must be maintained.”

[066-074] The greater part of the house is shut up, and it is a show-house no

[066-075] longer; yet Sir Leicester holds his shrunken state in the long

[066-076] drawing-room for all that, and reposes in his old place before my

[066-077] Lady’s picture. Closed in by night with broad screens, and illumined

[066-078] only in that part, the light of the drawing-room seems gradually

[066-079] contracting and dwindling until it shall be no more. A little more,

[066-080] in truth, and it will be all extinguished for Sir Leicester; and the

[066-081] damp door in the mausoleum which shuts so tight, and looks so

[066-082] obdurate, will have opened and received him.

[066-083] Volumnia, growing with the flight of time pinker as to the red in her

[066-084] face, and yellower as to the white, reads to Sir Leicester in the

[066-085] long evenings and is driven to various artifices to conceal her

[066-086] yawns, of which the chief and most efficacious is the insertion of

[066-087] the pearl necklace between her rosy lips. Long-winded treatises on

[066-088] the Buffy and Boodle question, showing how Buffy is immaculate and

[066-089] Boodle villainous, and how the country is lost by being all Boodle

[066-090] and no Buffy, or saved by being all Buffy and no Boodle (it must be

[066-091] one of the two, and cannot be anything else), are the staple of her

[066-092] reading. Sir Leicester is not particular what it is and does not

[066-093] appear to follow it very closely, further than that he always comes

[066-094] broad awake the moment Volumnia ventures to leave off, and sonorously

[066-095] repeating her last words, begs with some displeasure to know if she

[066-096] finds herself fatigued. However, Volumnia, in the course of her

[066-097] bird-like hopping about and pecking at papers, has alighted on a

[066-098] memorandum concerning herself in the event of “anything happening” to

[066-099] her kinsman, which is handsome compensation for an extensive course

[066-100] of reading and holds even the dragon Boredom at bay.

[066-101] The cousins generally are rather shy of Chesney Wold in its dullness,

[066-102] but take to it a little in the shooting season, when guns are heard

[066-103] in the plantations, and a few scattered beaters and keepers wait at

[066-104] the old places of appointment for low-spirited twos and threes of

[066-105] cousins. The debilitated cousin, more debilitated by the dreariness

[066-106] of the place, gets into a fearful state of depression, groaning under

[066-107] penitential sofa-pillows in his gunless hours and protesting that

[066-108] such fernal old jail’s—nough t’sew fler up—frever.

[066-109] The only great occasions for Volumnia in this changed aspect of the

[066-110] place in Lincolnshire are those occasions, rare and widely separated,

[066-111] when something is to be done for the county or the country in the way

[066-112] of gracing a public ball. Then, indeed, does the tuckered sylph come

[066-113] out in fairy form and proceed with joy under cousinly escort to the

[066-114] exhausted old assembly-room, fourteen heavy miles off, which, during

[066-115] three hundred and sixty-four days and nights of every ordinary year,

[066-116] is a kind of antipodean lumber-room full of old chairs and tables

[066-117] upside down. Then, indeed, does she captivate all hearts by her

[066-118] condescension, by her girlish vivacity, and by her skipping about as

[066-119] in the days when the hideous old general with the mouth too full of

[066-120] teeth had not cut one of them at two guineas each. Then does she

[066-121] twirl and twine, a pastoral nymph of good family, through the mazes

[066-122] of the dance. Then do the swains appear with tea, with lemonade, with

[066-123] sandwiches, with homage. Then is she kind and cruel, stately and

[066-124] unassuming, various, beautifully wilful. Then is there a singular

[066-125] kind of parallel between her and the little glass chandeliers of

[066-126] another age embellishing that assembly-room, which, with their meagre

[066-127] stems, their spare little drops, their disappointing knobs where no

[066-128] drops are, their bare little stalks from which knobs and drops have

[066-129] both departed, and their little feeble prismatic twinkling, all seem

[066-130] Volumnias.

[066-131] For the rest, Lincolnshire life to Volumnia is a vast blank of

[066-132] overgrown house looking out upon trees, sighing, wringing their

[066-133] hands, bowing their heads, and casting their tears upon the

[066-134] window-panes in monotonous depressions. A labyrinth of grandeur, less

[066-135] the [[inheritance-and-property|property]] of an old family of human beings and their ghostly

[066-136] likenesses than of an old family of echoings and thunderings which

[066-137] start out of their hundred graves at every sound and go resounding

[066-138] through the building. A waste of unused passages and staircases in

[066-139] which to drop a comb upon a bedroom floor at night is to send a

[066-140] stealthy footfall on an errand through the house. A place where few

[066-141] people care to go about alone, where a maid screams if an ash drops

[066-142] from the fire, takes to crying at all times and seasons, becomes the

[066-143] victim of a low disorder of the spirits, and gives warning and

[066-144] departs.

[066-145] Thus Chesney Wold. With so much of itself abandoned to darkness and

[066-146] vacancy; with so little change under the summer shining or the wintry

[066-147] lowering; so sombre and motionless always—no flag flying now by day,

[066-148] no rows of lights sparkling by night; with no family to come and go,

[066-149] no visitors to be the souls of pale cold shapes of rooms, no stir of

[066-150] life about it—passion and pride, even to the stranger’s eye, have

[066-151] died away from the place in Lincolnshire and yielded it to dull

[066-152] repose.
