---
description: "Two days later, Insarov in accordance with his promise arrived at Bersenyev’s with his luggage."
id: ch11
label: "Chapter XI"
tags: ["chapter", "fiction"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter XI

[011-001]Two days later, [[dmitri-insarov|Insarov]] in accordance with his promise arrived at [[andrei-bersenyev|Bersenyev]]’s with his luggage. He had no servant; but without any assistance he put his room to rights, arranged the furniture, dusted and swept the floor. He had special trouble with the writing table, which would not fit into the recess in the wall assigned for it; but Insarov, with the silent persistence peculiar to him succeeded in getting his own way with it. When he had settled in, he asked Bersenyev to let him pay him ten roubles in advance, and arming himself with a thick stick, set off to inspect the country surrounding his new abode. He returned three hours later; and in response to Bersenyev’s invitation to share his repast, he said that he would not refuse to dine with him that day, but that he had already spoken to the woman of the house, and would get her to send him up his meals for the future.

[011-002]“Upon my word!” said Bersenyev, “you will fare very badly; that old body can’t cook a bit. Why don’t you dine with me, we would go halves over the cost.”

[011-003]“My means don’t allow me to dine as you do,” Insarov replied with a tranquil smile.

[011-004]There was something in that smile which forbade further insistence; Bersenyev did not add a word. After dinner he proposed to Insarov that he should take him to the Stahovs; but he replied that he had intended to devote the evening to correspondence with his Bulgarians, and so he would ask him to put off the visit to the Stahovs till next day. Bersenyev was already familiar with Insarov’s unbending will; but it was only now when he was under the same roof with him, that he fully realised at last that Insarov would never alter any decision, just in the same way as he would never fail to carry out a promise he had given; to Bersenyev—a Russian to his fingertips—this more than German exactitude seemed at first odd, and even rather ludicrous; but he soon got used to it, and ended by finding it—if not deserving of respect—at least very convenient.

[011-005]The second day after his arrival, Insarov got up at four o’clock in the morning, made a round of almost all [[kuntsovo|Kuntsovo]], bathed in the river, drank a glass of cold milk, and then set to work. And he had plenty of work to do; he was studying Russian history and law, and political economy, translating the Bulgarian ballads and chronicles, collecting materials on the Eastern Question, and compiling a Russian grammar for the use of Bulgarians, and a Bulgarian grammar for the use of Russians. Bersenyev went up to him and began to discuss Feuerbach. Insarov listened attentively, made few remarks, but to the point; it was clear from his observations that he was trying to arrive at a conclusion as to whether he need study Feuerbach, or whether he could get on without him. Bersenyev turned the conversation on to his pursuits, and asked him if he could not show him anything. Insarov read him his translation of two or three Bulgarian ballads, and was anxious to hear his opinion of them. Bersenyev thought the translation a faithful one, but not sufficiently spirited. Insarov paid close attention to his criticism. From the ballads Bersenyev passed on to the present position of [[bulgaria|Bulgaria]], and then for the first time he noticed what a change came over Insarov at the mere mention of his country: not that his face flushed nor his voice grew louder—no! but at once a sense of force and intense onward striving was expressed in his whole personality, the lines of his mouth grew harder and less flexible, and a dull persistent fire glowed in the depths of his eyes. Insarov did not care to enlarge on his own travels in his country; but of Bulgaria in general he talked readily with anyone. He talked at length of the Turks, of their oppression, of the sorrows and disasters of his countrymen, and of their hopes: concentrated meditation on a single ruling [[love|passion]] could be heard in every word he uttered.

[011-006]“Ah, well, there’s no mistake about it,” Bersenyev was reflecting meanwhile, “that Turkish aga, I venture to think, has been punished for his father’s and mother’s [[death]].”

[011-007]Insarov had not had time to say all he wanted to say, when the door opened and [[pavel-shubin|Shubin]] made his appearance.

[011-008]He came into the room with an almost exaggerated air of ease and good-humour; Bersenyev, who knew him well, could see at once that something had been jarring on him.

[011-009]“I will introduce myself without ceremony,” he began with a bright and open expression on his face. “My name is Shubin; I’m a friend of this young man here” (he indicated Bersenyev). “You are Mr. Insarov, of course, aren’t you?”

[011-010]“I am Insarov.”

[011-011]“Then give me your hand and let us be friends. I don’t know if Bersenyev has talked to you about me, but he has told me a great deal about you. You are staying here? Capital! Don’t be offended at my staring at you so. I’m a sculptor by trade, and I foresee I shall in a little time be begging your permission to model your head.”

[011-012]“My head’s at your service,” said Insarov.

[011-013]“What shall we do today, eh?” began Shubin, sitting down suddenly on a low chair, with his knees apart and his elbows propped on them. “Andrei Petrovitch, has your honour any kind of plan for today? It’s glorious weather; there’s a scent of hay and dried strawberries as if one were drinking strawberry-tea for a cold. We ought to get up some kind of a spree. Let us show the new inhabitant of Kuntsov all its numerous beauties.” (Something has certainly upset him, Bersenyev kept thinking to himself.) “Well, why art thou silent, friend Horatio? Open your prophetic lips. Shall we go off on a spree, or not?”

[011-014]“I don’t know how Insarov feels,” observed Bersenyev. “He is just getting to work, I fancy.”

[011-015]Shubin turned round on his chair.

[011-016]“You want to work?” he inquired, in a somewhat condescending voice.

[011-017]“No,” answered Insarov; “today I could give up to walking.”

[011-018]“Ah!” commented Shubin. “Well, that’s delightful. Run along, my friend, Andrei Petrovitch, put a hat on your learned head, and let us go where our eyes lead us. Our eyes are young—they may lead us far. I know a very repulsive little restaurant, where they will give us a very beastly little dinner; but we shall be very jolly. Come along.”

[011-019]Half an hour later they were all three walking along the bank of the [[moscow|Moskva]]. Insarov had a rather queer cap with flaps, over which Shubin fell into not very spontaneous raptures. Insarov walked without haste, and looked about, breathing, talking, and smiling with the same tranquillity; he was giving this day up to pleasure, and enjoying it to the utmost. “Just as well-behaved boys walk out on Sundays,” Shubin whispered in Bersenyev’s ear. Shubin himself played the fool a great deal, ran in front, threw himself into the attitudes of famous statues, and turned somersaults on the grass; Insarov’s tranquillity did not exactly irritate him, but it spurred him on to playing antics. “What a fidget you are, Frenchman!” Bersenyev said twice to him. “Yes, I am French, half French,” Shubin answered, “and you hold the happy medium between jest and earnest, as a waiter once said to me.” The young men turned away from the river and went along a deep and narrow ravine between two walls of tall golden rye; a bluish shadow was cast on them from the rye on one side; the flashing sunlight seemed to glide over the tops of the ears; the larks were singing, the quails were calling: on all sides was the brilliant green of the grass; a warm breeze stirred and lifted the leaves and shook the heads of the flowers. After prolonged wanderings, with rest and chat between (Shubin had even tried to play leapfrog with a toothless peasant they met, who did nothing but laugh, whatever the gentlemen might do to him), the young men reached the “repulsive little” restaurant: the waiter almost knocked each of them over, and did really provide them with a very bad dinner with a sort of Balkan wine, which did not, however, prevent them from being very jolly, as Shubin had foretold; he himself was the loudest and the least jolly. He drank to the health of the incomprehensible but great *Venelin*, the health of the Bulgarian king Kuma, Huma, or Hroma, who lived somewhere about the time of Adam.

[011-020]“In the ninth century,” Insarov corrected him.

[011-021]“In the ninth century?” cried Shubin. “Oh, how delightful!”

[011-022]Bersenyev noticed that among all his pranks, and jests and gaiety, Shubin was constantly, as it were, examining Insarov; he was sounding him and was in inward excitement, but Insarov remained as before, calm and straightforward.

[011-023]At last they returned home, changed their dress, and resolved to finish the day as they had begun it, by going that evening to the Stahovs. Shubin ran on before them to announce their arrival.

# XII
