---
description: "Elena’s first sensation on awakening was one of happy consternation. “Is it possible?"
id: ch21
label: "Chapter XXI"
tags: ["chapter", "fiction"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter XXI

[021-001][[elena-nikolaevna|Elena]]’s first sensation on awakening was one of happy consternation. “Is it possible? Is it possible?” she asked herself, and her heart grew faint with [[happiness]]. Recollections came rushing on her … she was overwhelmed by them. Then again she was enfolded by the blissful peace of triumph. But in the course of the morning, Elena gradually became possessed by a spirit of unrest, and for the remainder of the day she felt listless and weary. It was true she knew now what she wanted, but that made it no easier for her. That never-to-be forgotten meeting had cast her forever out of the old groove; she was no longer at the same standpoint, she was far away, and yet everything went on about her in its accustomed order, everything pursued its own course as though nothing were changed; the old life moved on its old way, reckoning on Elena’s interest and cooperation as of old. She tried to begin a letter to [[dmitri-insarov|Insarov]], but that too was a failure; the words came on to paper either lifeless or false. Her diary she had put an end to by drawing a thick stroke under the last line. That was the past, and every thought, all her soul, was turned now to the future. Her heart was heavy. To sit with her mother who suspected nothing, to listen to her, answer her and talk to her, seemed to Elena something wicked; she felt the presence of a kind of falseness in her, she suffered though she had nothing to blush for; more than once an almost irresistible desire sprang up in her heart to tell everything without reserve, whatever might come of it afterwards. “Why,” she thought, “did not Dmitri take me away then, from that little chapel, wherever he wanted to go? Didn’t he tell me I was his wife before God? What am I here for?” She suddenly began to feel shy of everyone, even of [[Uvar-Ivanovitch|Uvar Ivanovitch]], who was flourishing his fingers in more perplexity than ever. Now everything about her seemed neither sweet nor friendly, nor even a dream, but, like a nightmare, lay, an immovable dead load, on her heart; seeming to reproach her and be indignant with her, and not to care to know about her. … “You are ours in spite of everything,” she seemed to hear. Even her poor pets, her ill-used birds and animals looked at her—so at least she fancied—with suspicion and hostility. She felt conscience-stricken and ashamed of her feelings. “This is my home after all,” she thought, “my family, my country.” … “No, it’s no longer your country, nor your family,” another voice affirmed within her. Terror was overmastering her, and she was vexed with her own feebleness. The trial was only beginning and she was losing patience already … Was this what she had promised?

[021-002]She did not soon gain control of herself. But a week passed and then another. … Elena became a little calmer, and grew used to her new position. She wrote two little notes to Insarov, and carried them herself to the post: she could not for anything—through shame and through pride—have brought herself to confide in a maid. She was already beginning to expect him in person. … But instead of Insarov, one fine morning [[nikolai-artemyevitch|Nikolai Artemyevitch]] made his appearance.

# XXII
