---
description: "Chapter 2: The Gathering of the Missionaries"
id: ch02
label: "Ch. 2: The Gathering of the Missionaries"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 2: The Gathering of the Missionaries

[002-001] He shuffled the cards and dealt for a new game.

[002-002] I don’t think I ever expected a refusal, but this ready assent cheered

[002-003] me wonderfully. I couldn’t have faced the thing alone.

[002-004] “Well, that’s settled. Now for ways and means. We three have got to put

[002-005] ourselves in the way of finding out Germany’s secret, and we have to go

[002-006] where it is known. Somehow or other we have to reach Constantinople,

[002-007] and to beat the biggest area of country we must go by different roads.

[002-008] [[sandy-arbuthnot|Sandy]], my lad, you’ve got to get into Turkey. You’re the only one of us

[002-009] that knows that engaging people. You can’t get in by Europe very

[002-010] easily, so you must try Asia. What about the coast of [[anatolia|Asia Minor]]?”

[002-011] “It could be done,” he said. “You’d better leave that entirely to me.

[002-012] I’ll find out the best way. I suppose the [[british-intelligence|Foreign Office]] will help me

[002-013] to get to the jumping-off place?”

[002-014] “Remember,” I said, “it’s no good getting too far east. The secret, so

[002-015] far as concerns us, is still west of Constantinople.”

[002-016] “I see that. I’ll blow in on the [[bosporus|Bosporus]] by a short tack.”

[002-017] “For you, Mr [[john-blenkiron|Blenkiron]], I would suggest a straight journey. You’re an

[002-018] American, and can travel through Germany direct. But I wonder how far

[002-019] your activities in New York will allow you to pass as a neutral?”

[002-020] “I have considered that, Sir,” he said. “I have given some thought to

[002-021] the pecooliar psychology of the great German nation. As I read them

[002-022] they’re as cunning as cats, and if you play the feline game they will

[002-023] outwit you every time. Yes, Sir, they are no slouches at sleuth-work.

[002-024] If I were to buy a pair of false whiskers and dye my hair and dress

[002-025] like a Baptist parson and go into Germany on the peace racket, I guess

[002-026] they’d be on my trail like a knife, and I should be shot as a spy

[002-027] inside of a week or doing solitary in the Moabite prison. But they lack

[002-028] the larger vision. They can be bluffed, Sir. With your approval I shall

[002-029] visit the Fatherland as John S. Blenkiron, once a thorn in the side of

[002-030] their brightest boys on the other side. But it will be a different John

[002-031] S. I reckon he will have experienced a change of heart. He will have

[002-032] come to appreciate the great, pure, noble soul of Germany, and he will

[002-033] be sorrowing for his past like a converted gun-man at a camp meeting.

[002-034] He will be a victim of the meanness and perfidy of the British

[002-035] Government. I am going to have a first-class row with your Foreign

[002-036] Office about my passport, and I am going to speak harsh words about

[002-037] them up and down this metropolis. I am going to be shadowed by your

[002-038] sleuths at my port of embarkation, and I guess I shall run up hard

[002-039] against the British Legations in Scandinavia. By that time our Teutonic

[002-040] friends will have begun to wonder what has happened to John S., and to

[002-041] think that maybe they have been mistaken in that child. So, when I get

[002-042] to Germany they will be waiting for me with an open mind. Then I judge

[002-043] my conduct will surprise and encourage them. I will confide to them

[002-044] valuable secret information about British preparations, and I will show

[002-045] up the British lion as the meanest kind of cur. You may trust me to

[002-046] make a good impression. After that I’ll move eastwards, to see the

[002-047] demolition of the British Empire in those parts. By the way, where is

[002-048] the _rendezvous_?”

[002-049] “This is the 17th day of November. If we can’t find out what we want in

[002-050] two months we may chuck the job. On the 17th of January we should

[002-051] forgather in Constantinople. Whoever gets there first waits for the

[002-052] others. If by that date we’re not all present, it will be considered

[002-053] that the missing man has got into trouble and must be given up. If ever

[002-054] we get there we’ll be coming from different points and in different

[002-055] characters, so we want a rendezvous where all kinds of odd folk

[002-056] assemble. Sandy, you know Constantinople. You fix the meeting-place.”

[002-057] “I’ve already thought of that,” he said, and going to the writing-table

[002-058] he drew a little plan on a sheet of paper. “That lane runs down from

[002-059] the Kurdish Bazaar in Galata to the ferry of [[ratchik|Ratchik]]. Half-way down on

[002-060] the left-hand side is a cafe kept by a Greek called Kuprasso. Behind

[002-061] the cafe is a garden, surrounded by high walls which were parts of the

[002-062] old Byzantine Theatre. At the end of the garden is a shanty called the

[002-063] Garden-house of Suliman the Red. It has been in its time a dancing-hall

[002-064] and a gambling hell and God knows what else. It’s not a place for

[002-065] respectable people, but the ends of the earth converge there and no

[002-066] questions are asked. That’s the best spot I can think of for a

[002-067] meeting-place.”

[002-068] The kettle was simmering by the fire, the night was raw, and it seemed

[002-069] the hour for whisky-punch. I made a brew for Sandy and myself and

[002-070] boiled some milk for Blenkiron.

[002-071] “What about language?” I asked. “You’re all right, Sandy?”

[002-072] “I know German fairly well; and I can pass anywhere as a Turk. The

[002-073] first will do for eavesdropping and the second for ordinary business.”

[002-074] “And you?” I asked Blenkiron.

[002-075] “I was left out at Pentecost,” he said. “I regret to confess I have no

[002-076] gift of tongues. But the part I have chosen for myself don’t require

[002-077] the polyglot. Never forget I’m plain John S. Blenkiron, a citizen of

[002-078] the great American Republic.”

[002-079] “You haven’t told us your own line, Dick,” Sandy said.

[002-080] “I am going to the Bosporus through Germany, and, not being a neutral,

[002-081] it won’t be a very cushioned journey.”

[002-082] Sandy looked grave.

[002-083] “That sounds pretty desperate. Is your German good enough?”

[002-084] “Pretty fair; quite good enough to pass as a native. But officially I

[002-085] shall not understand one word. I shall be a Boer from Western Cape

[002-086] Colony: one of [[manie-maritz|Maritz]]’s old lot who after a bit of trouble has got

[002-087] through Angola and reached Europe. I shall talk Dutch and nothing else.

[002-088] And, my hat! I shall be pretty bitter about the British. There’s a

[002-089] powerful lot of good swear-words in the taal. I shall know all about

[002-090] Africa, and be panting to get another whack at the _verdommt rooinek_.

[002-091] With [[fate-and-providence|luck]] they may send me to the Uganda show or to Egypt, and I shall

[002-092] take care to go by Constantinople. If I’m to deal with the Mohammedan

[002-093] natives they’re bound to show me what hand they hold. At least, that’s

[002-094] the way I look at it.”

[002-095] We filled our glasses—two of punch and one of milk—and drank to our

[002-096] next merry meeting. Then Sandy began to laugh, and I joined in. The

[002-097] sense of hopeless folly again descended on me. The best plans we could

[002-098] make were like a few buckets of water to ease the drought of the Sahara

[002-099] or the old lady who would have stopped the Atlantic with a broom. I

[002-100] thought with sympathy of little Saint Teresa.

[002-101] CHAPTER III.

[002-102] [[peter-pienaar|Peter]] Pienaar

[002-103] Our various departures were unassuming, all but the American’s. Sandy

[002-104] spent a busy fortnight in his subterranean fashion, now in the British

[002-105] Museum, now running about the country to see old exploring companions,

[002-106] now at the War Office, now at the Foreign Office, but mostly in my

[002-107] flat, sunk in an arm-chair and meditating. He left finally on December

[002-108] 1st as a King’s Messenger for Cairo. Once there I knew the King’s

[002-109] Messenger would disappear, and some queer Oriental ruffian take his

[002-110] place. It would have been impertinence in me to inquire into his plans.

[002-111] He was the real professional, and I was only the dabbler.

[002-112] Blenkiron was a different matter. [[sir-walter-bullivant|Sir Walter]] told me to look out for

[002-113] squalls, and the twinkle in his eye gave me a notion of what was

[002-114] coming. The first thing the sportsman did was to write a letter to the

[002-115] papers signed with his name. There had been a debate in the House of

[002-116] Commons on foreign policy, and the speech of some idiot there gave him

[002-117] his cue. He declared that he had been heart and soul with the British

[002-118] at the start, but that he was reluctantly compelled to change his

[002-119] views. He said our blockade of Germany had broken all the laws of God

[002-120] and humanity, and he reckoned that Britain was now the worst exponent

[002-121] of Prussianism going. That letter made a fine racket, and the paper

[002-122] that printed it had a row with the Censor. But that was only the

[002-123] beginning of Mr Blenkiron’s campaign. He got mixed up with some

[002-124] mountebanks called the League of Democrats against Aggression,

[002-125] gentlemen who thought that Germany was all right if we could only keep

[002-126] from hurting her feelings. He addressed a meeting under their auspices,

[002-127] which was broken up by the crowd, but not before John S. had got off

[002-128] his chest a lot of amazing stuff. I wasn’t there, but a man who was

[002-129] told me that he never heard such clotted nonsense. He said that Germany

[002-130] was right in wanting the freedom of the seas, and that America would

[002-131] back her up, and that the British Navy was a bigger menace to the peace

[002-132] of the world than [[kaiser-wilhelm-ii|the Kaiser]]’s army. He admitted that he had once

[002-133] thought differently, but he was an honest man and not afraid to face

[002-134] facts. The oration closed suddenly, when he got a brussels-sprout in

[002-135] the eye, at which my friend said he swore in a very unpacifist style.

[002-136] After that he wrote other letters to the Press, saying that there was

[002-137] no more liberty of speech in England, and a lot of scallywags backed

[002-138] him up. Some Americans wanted to tar and feather him, and he got kicked

[002-139] out of the Savoy. There was an agitation to get him deported, and

[002-140] questions were asked in Parliament, and the Under-Secretary for Foreign

[002-141] Affairs said his department had the matter in hand. I was beginning to

[002-142] think that Blenkiron was carrying his tomfoolery too far, so I went to

[002-143] see Sir Walter, but he told me to keep my mind easy.

[002-144] “Our friend’s motto is ‘Thorough’,” he said, “and he knows very well

[002-145] what he is about. We have officially requested him to leave, and he

[002-146] sails from Newcastle on Monday. He will be shadowed wherever he goes,

[002-147] and we hope to provoke more outbreaks. He is a very capable fellow.”

[002-148] The last I saw of him was on the Saturday afternoon when I met him in

[002-149] St James’s Street and offered to shake hands. He told me that my

[002-150] uniform was a pollution, and made a speech to a small crowd about it.

[002-151] They hissed him and he had to get into a taxi. As he departed there was

[002-152] just the suspicion of a wink in his left eye. On Monday I read that he

[002-153] had gone off, and the papers observed that our shores were well quit of

[002-154] him.

[002-155] I sailed on December 3rd from Liverpool in a boat bound for the

[002-156] Argentine that was due to put in at [[lisbon|Lisbon]]. I had of course to get a

[002-157] Foreign Office passport to leave England, but after that my connection

[002-158] with the Government ceased. All the details of my journey were

[002-159] carefully thought out. Lisbon would be a good jumping-off place, for it

[002-160] was the rendezvous of scallywags from most parts of Africa. My kit was

[002-161] an old Gladstone bag, and my clothes were the relics of my South

[002-162] African wardrobe. I let my beard grow for some days before I sailed,

[002-163] and, since it grows fast, I went on board with the kind of hairy chin

[002-164] you will see on the young Boer. My name was now Brandt, Cornelis

[002-165] Brandt—at least so my passport said, and passports never lie.
