---
description: "Chapter 4: Adventures of Two Dutchmen on the Loose (continued, part 2)"
id: ch04-p2
label: "Ch. 4: Adventures of Two Dutchmen on the Loose (cont'd, part 2)"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 4: Adventures of Two Dutchmen on the Loose (cont'd, part 2)

[004-001] As I walked dizzily away the big man was smiling in his horrible way,

[004-002] and that little official was blinking and smiling too. I had struck a

[004-003] dashed queer country, so queer that I had had no time to remember that

[004-004] for the first time in my life I had been bullied without hitting back.

[004-005] When I realized it I nearly choked with anger. But I thanked heaven I

[004-006] had shown no temper, for I remembered my mission. Luck seemed to have

[004-007] brought me into useful company.

[004-008] CHAPTER V.

[004-009] Further Adventures of the Same

[004-010] Next morning there was a touch of frost and a nip in the air which

[004-011] stirred my blood and put me in buoyant spirits. I forgot my precarious

[004-012] position and the long road I had still to travel. I came down to

[004-013] breakfast in great form, to find [[peter-pienaar|Peter]]’s even temper badly ruffled. He

[004-014] had remembered Stumm in the night and disliked the memory; this he

[004-015] muttered to me as we rubbed shoulders at the dining-room door. Peter

[004-016] and I got no opportunity for private talk. The lieutenant was with us

[004-017] all the time, and at night we were locked in our rooms. Peter

[004-018] discovered this through trying to get out to find matches, for he had

[004-019] the bad habit of smoking in bed.

[004-020] Our guide started on the telephone, and announced that we were to be

[004-021] taken to see a prisoners’ camp. In the afternoon I was to go somewhere

[004-022] with Stumm, but the morning was for sight-seeing. “You will see,” he

[004-023] told us, “how merciful is a great people. You will also see some of the

[004-024] hated English in our power. That will delight you. They are the

[004-025] forerunners of all their nation.”

[004-026] We drove in a taxi through the suburbs and then over a stretch of flat

[004-027] market-garden-like country to a low rise of wooded hills. After an

[004-028] hour’s ride we entered the gate of what looked like a big reformatory

[004-029] or hospital. I believe it had been a home for destitute children. There

[004-030] were sentries at the gate and massive concentric circles of barbed wire

[004-031] through which we passed under an arch that was let down like a

[004-032] portcullis at nightfall. The lieutenant showed his permit, and we ran

[004-033] the car into a brick-paved yard and marched through a lot more sentries

[004-034] to the office of the commandant.

[004-035] He was away from home, and we were welcomed by his deputy, a pale young

[004-036] man with a head nearly bald. There were introductions in German which

[004-037] our guide translated into Dutch, and a lot of elegant speeches about

[004-038] how Germany was foremost in humanity as well as martial valour. Then

[004-039] they stood us sandwiches and beer, and we formed a procession for a

[004-040] tour of inspection. There were two doctors, both mild-looking men in

[004-041] spectacles, and a couple of warders—under-officers of the good old

[004-042] burly, bullying sort I knew well. That was the cement which kept the

[004-043] German Army together. Her men were nothing to boast of on the average;

[004-044] no more were the officers, even in crack corps like the Guards and the

[004-045] Brandenburgers; but they seemed to have an inexhaustible supply of

[004-046] hard, competent N.C.O.s.

[004-047] We marched round the wash-houses, the recreation-ground, the kitchens,

[004-048] the hospital—with nobody in it save one chap with the “flu.” It didn’t

[004-049] seem to be badly done. This place was entirely for officers, and I

[004-050] expect it was a show place where American visitors were taken. If half

[004-051] the stories one heard were true there were some pretty ghastly prisons

[004-052] away in South and East Germany.

[004-053] I didn’t half like the business. To be a prisoner has always seemed to

[004-054] me about the worst thing that could happen to a man. The sight of

[004-055] German prisoners used to give me a bad feeling inside, whereas I looked

[004-056] at dead Boches with nothing but satisfaction. Besides, there was the

[004-057] off-chance that I might be recognized. So I kept very much in the

[004-058] shadow whenever we passed anybody in the corridors. The few we met

[004-059] passed us incuriously. They saluted the deputy-commandant, but scarcely

[004-060] wasted a glance on us. No doubt they thought we were inquisitive

[004-061] Germans come to gloat over them. They looked fairly fit, but a little

[004-062] puffy about the eyes, like men who get too little exercise. They seemed

[004-063] thin, too. I expect the food, for all the commandant’s talk, was

[004-064] nothing to boast of. In one room people were writing letters. It was a

[004-065] big place with only a tiny stove to warm it, and the windows were shut

[004-066] so that the atmosphere was a cold frowst. In another room a fellow was

[004-067] lecturing on something to a dozen hearers and drawing figures on a

[004-068] blackboard. Some were in ordinary khaki, others in any old thing they

[004-069] could pick up, and most wore greatcoats. Your blood gets thin when you

[004-070] have nothing to do but hope against hope and think of your pals and the

[004-071] old days.

[004-072] I was moving along, listening with half an ear to the lieutenant’s

[004-073] prattle and the loud explanations of the deputy-commandant, when I

[004-074] pitchforked into what might have been the end of my business. We were

[004-075] going through a sort of convalescent room, where people were sitting

[004-076] who had been in hospital. It was a big place, a little warmer than the

[004-077] rest of the building, but still abominably fuggy. There were about half

[004-078] a dozen men in the room, reading and playing games. They looked at us

[004-079] with lack-lustre eyes for a moment, and then returned to their

[004-080] occupations. Being convalescents I suppose they were not expected to

[004-081] get up and salute.

[004-082] All but one, who was playing Patience at a little table by which we

[004-083] passed. I was feeling very bad about the thing, for I hated to see

[004-084] these good fellows locked away in this infernal German hole when they

[004-085] might have been giving the Boche his deserts at the front. The

[004-086] commandant went first with Peter, who had developed a great interest in

[004-087] prisons. Then came our lieutenant with one of the doctors; then a

[004-088] couple of warders; and then the second doctor and myself. I was

[004-089] absent-minded at the moment and was last in the queue.

[004-090] The Patience-player suddenly looked up and I saw his face. I’m hanged

[004-091] if it wasn’t [[dolly-riddell|Dolly Riddell]], who was our brigade machine-gun officer at

[004-092] [[loos|Loos]]. I had heard that the Germans had got him when they blew up a mine

[004-093] at the Quarries.

[004-094] I had to act pretty quick, for his mouth was agape, and I saw he was

[004-095] going to speak. The doctor was a yard ahead of me.

[004-096] I stumbled and spilt his cards on the floor. Then I kneeled to pick

[004-097] them up and gripped his knee. His head bent to help me and I spoke low

[004-098] in his ear.

[004-099] “I’m Hannay all right. For God’s sake don’t wink an eye. I’m here on a

[004-100] secret job.”

[004-101] The doctor had turned to see what was the matter. I got a few more

[004-102] words in. “Cheer up, old man. We’re winning hands down.”

[004-103] Then I began to talk excited Dutch and finished the collection of the

[004-104] cards. Dolly was playing his part well, smiling as if he was amused by

[004-105] the antics of a monkey. The others were coming back, the

[004-106] deputy-commandant with an angry light in his dull eye. “Speaking to the

[004-107] prisoners is forbidden,” he shouted.

[004-108] I looked blankly at him till the lieutenant translated.

[004-109] “What kind of fellow is he?” said Dolly in English to the doctor. “He

[004-110] spoils my game and then jabbers High-Dutch at me.”

[004-111] Officially I knew English, and that speech of Dolly’s gave me my cue. I

[004-112] pretended to be very angry with the very damned Englishman, and went

[004-113] out of the room close by the deputy-commandant, grumbling like a sick

[004-114] jackal. After that I had to act a bit. The last place we visited was

[004-115] the close-confinement part where prisoners were kept as a punishment

[004-116] for some breach of the rules. They looked cheerless enough, but I

[004-117] pretended to gloat over the sight, and said so to the lieutenant, who

[004-118] passed it on to the others. I have rarely in my life felt such a cad.

[004-119] On the way home the lieutenant discoursed a lot about prisoners and

[004-120] detention-camps, for at one time he had been on [[courage-and-honour|duty]] at Ruhleben.

[004-121] Peter, who had been in quod more than once in his life, was deeply

[004-122] interested and kept on questioning him. Among other things he told us

[004-123] was that they often put bogus prisoners among the rest, who acted as

[004-124] spies. If any plot to escape was hatched these fellows got into it and

[004-125] encouraged it. They never interfered till the attempt was actually made

[004-126] and then they had them on toast. There was nothing the Boche liked so

[004-127] much as an excuse for sending a poor devil to “solitary”.

[004-128] That afternoon Peter and I separated. He was left behind with the

[004-129] lieutenant and I was sent off to the station with my bag in the company

[004-130] of a Landsturm sergeant. Peter was very cross, and I didn’t care for

[004-131] the look of things; but I brightened up when I heard I was going

[004-132] somewhere with Stumm. If he wanted to see me again he must think me of

[004-133] some use, and if he was going to use me he was bound to let me into his

[004-134] game. I liked Stumm about as much as a dog likes a scorpion, but I

[004-135] hankered for his society.

[004-136] At the station platform, where the ornament of the Landsturm saved me

[004-137] all the trouble about tickets, I could not see my companion. I stood

[004-138] waiting, while a great crowd, mostly of soldiers, swayed past me and

[004-139] filled all the front carriages. An officer spoke to me gruffly and told

[004-140] me to stand aside behind a wooden rail. I obeyed, and suddenly found

[004-141] Stumm’s eyes looking down at me.

[004-142] “You know German?” he asked sharply.

[004-143] “A dozen words,” I said carelessly. “I’ve been to Windhuk and learned

[004-144] enough to ask for my dinner. Peter—my friend—speaks it a bit.”

[004-145] “So,” said Stumm. “Well, get into the carriage. Not that one! There,

[004-146] thickhead!”

[004-147] I did as I was bid, he followed, and the door was locked behind us. The

[004-148] precaution was needless, for the sight of Stumm’s profile at the

[004-149] platform end would have kept out the most brazen. I wondered if I had

[004-150] woken up his suspicions. I must be on my guard to show no signs of

[004-151] intelligence if he suddenly tried me in German, and that wouldn’t be

[004-152] easy, for I knew it as well as I knew Dutch.

[004-153] We moved into the country, but the windows were blurred with frost, and

[004-154] I saw nothing of the landscape. Stumm was busy with papers and let me

[004-155] alone. I read on a notice that one was forbidden to smoke, so to show

[004-156] my ignorance of German I pulled out my pipe. Stumm raised his head, saw

[004-157] what I was doing, and gruffly bade me put it away, as if he were an old

[004-158] lady that disliked the smell of tobacco.

[004-159] In half an hour I got very bored, for I had nothing to read and my pipe

[004-160] was _verboten_. People passed now and then in the corridors, but no one

[004-161] offered to enter. No doubt they saw the big figure in uniform and

[004-162] thought he was the deuce of a staff swell who wanted solitude. I

[004-163] thought of stretching my legs in the corridor, and was just getting up

[004-164] to do it when somebody slid the door back and a big figure blocked the

[004-165] light.

[004-166] He was wearing a heavy ulster and a green felt hat. He saluted Stumm,

[004-167] who looked up angrily, and smiled pleasantly on us both.

[004-168] “Say, gentlemen,” he said, “have you room in here for a little one? I

[004-169] guess I’m about smoked out of my car by your brave soldiers. I’ve

[004-170] gotten a delicate stomach ...”
