---
description: "Chapter 11: The Companions of the Rosy Hours"
id: ch11
label: "Ch. 11: The Companions of the Rosy Hours"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 11: The Companions of the Rosy Hours

[011-001] When we left his door the night had begun to drop. We hadn’t gone

[011-002] twenty yards before [[peter-pienaar|Peter]] drew very near to me and kept turning his

[011-003] head like a hunted stag.

[011-004] “We are being followed close, Cornelis,” he said calmly.

[011-005] Another ten yards and we were at a cross-roads, where a little _place_

[011-006] faced a biggish mosque. I could see in the waning light a crowd of

[011-007] people who seemed to be moving towards us. I heard a high-pitched voice

[011-008] cry out a jabber of excited words, and it seemed to me that I had heard

[011-009] the voice before.

[011-010] CHAPTER XI.

[011-011] The Companions of the Rosy Hours

[011-012] We battled to a corner, where a jut of building stood out into the

[011-013] street. It was our only chance to protect our backs, to stand up with

[011-014] the rib of stone between us. It was only the work of seconds. One

[011-015] instant we were groping our solitary way in the darkness, the next we

[011-016] were pinned against a wall with a throaty mob surging round us.

[011-017] It took me a moment or two to realize that we were attacked. Every man

[011-018] has one special funk in the back of his head, and mine was to be the

[011-019] quarry of an angry crowd. I hated the thought of it—the mess, the blind

[011-020] struggle, the sense of unleashed passions different from those of any

[011-021] single blackguard. It was a dark world to me, and I don’t like

[011-022] darkness. But in my nightmares I had never imagined anything just like

[011-023] this. The narrow, fetid street, with the icy winds fanning the filth,

[011-024] the unknown tongue, the hoarse savage murmur, and my utter ignorance as

[011-025] to what it might all be about, made me cold in the pit of my stomach.

[011-026] “We’ve got it in the neck this time, old man,” I said to Peter, who had

[011-027] out the pistol the commandant at [[rustchuk|Rustchuk]] had given him. These pistols

[011-028] were our only weapons. The crowd saw them and hung back, but if they

[011-029] chose to rush us it wasn’t much of a barrier two pistols would make.

[011-030] [[rasta-bey|Rasta]]’s voice had stopped. He had done his work, and had retired to the

[011-031] background. There were shouts from the crowd—“_Alleman_” and a word

[011-032] “_Khafiyeh_” constantly repeated. I didn’t know what it meant at the

[011-033] time, but now I know that they were after us because we were Boches and

[011-034] spies. There was no love lost between the Constantinople scum and their

[011-035] new masters. It seemed an ironical end for Peter and me to be done in

[011-036] because we were Boches. And done in we should be. I had heard of the

[011-037] East as a good place for people to disappear in; there were no

[011-038] inquisitive newspapers or incorruptible police.

[011-039] I wished to Heaven I had a word of Turkish. But I made my voice heard

[011-040] for a second in a pause of the din, and shouted that we were German

[011-041] sailors who had brought down big guns for Turkey, and were going home

[011-042] next day. I asked them what the devil they thought we had done? I don’t

[011-043] know if any fellow there understood German; anyhow, it only brought a

[011-044] pandemonium of cries in which that ominous word _Khafiyeh_ was

[011-045] predominant.

[011-046] Then Peter fired over their heads. He had to, for a chap was pawing at

[011-047] his throat. The answer was a clatter of bullets on the wall above us.

[011-048] It looked as if they meant to take us alive, and that I was very clear

[011-049] should not happen. Better a bloody end in a street scrap than the

[011-050] tender mercies of that bandbox bravo.

[011-051] I don’t quite know what happened next. A press drove down at me and I

[011-052] fired. Someone squealed, and I looked the next moment to be strangled.

[011-053] And then, suddenly, the scrimmage ceased, and there was a wavering

[011-054] splash of light in that pit of darkness.

[011-055] I never went through many worse minutes than these. When I had been

[011-056] hunted in the past weeks there had been mystery enough, but no

[011-057] immediate peril to face. When I had been up against a real, urgent,

[011-058] physical risk, like [[loos|Loos]], the danger at any rate had been clear. One

[011-059] knew what one was in for. But here was a threat I couldn’t put a name

[011-060] to, and it wasn’t in the future, but pressing hard at our throats.

[011-061] And yet I couldn’t feel it was quite real. The patter of the pistol

[011-062] bullets against the wall, like so many crackers, the faces felt rather

[011-063] than seen in the dark, the clamour which to me was pure gibberish, had

[011-064] all the madness of a nightmare. Only Peter, cursing steadily in Dutch

[011-065] by my side, was real. And then the light came, and made the scene more

[011-066] eerie!

[011-067] It came from one or two torches carried by wild fellows with long

[011-068] staves who drove their way into the heart of the mob. The flickering

[011-069] glare ran up the steep walls and made monstrous shadows. The wind swung

[011-070] the flame into long streamers, dying away in a fan of sparks.

[011-071] And now a new word was heard in the crowd. It was _Chinganeh_, shouted

[011-072] not in anger but in fear.

[011-073] At first I could not see the newcomers. They were hidden in the deep

[011-074] darkness under their canopy of light, for they were holding their

[011-075] torches high at the full stretch of their arms. They were shouting,

[011-076] too, wild shrill cries ending sometimes in a gush of rapid speech.

[011-077] Their words did not seem to be directed against us, but against the

[011-078] crowd. A sudden hope came to me that for some unknown reason they were

[011-079] on our side.

[011-080] The press was no longer heavy against us. It was thinning rapidly and I

[011-081] could hear the scuffle as men made off down the side streets. My first

[011-082] notion was that these were the Turkish police. But I changed my mind

[011-083] when the leader came out into a patch of light. He carried no torch,

[011-084] but a long stave with which he belaboured the heads of those who were

[011-085] too tightly packed to flee.

[011-086] It was the most eldritch apparition you can conceive. A tall man

[011-087] dressed in skins, with bare legs and sandal-shod feet. A wisp of

[011-088] scarlet cloth clung to his shoulders, and, drawn over his head down

[011-089] close to his eyes, was a skull-cap of some kind of pelt with the tail

[011-090] waving behind it. He capered like a wild animal, keeping up a strange

[011-091] high monotone that fairly gave me the creeps.

[011-092] I was suddenly aware that the crowd had gone. Before us was only this

[011-093] figure and his half-dozen companions, some carrying torches and all

[011-094] wearing clothes of skin. But only the one who seemed to be their leader

[011-095] wore the skull-cap; the rest had bare heads and long tangled hair.

[011-096] The fellow was shouting gibberish at me. His eyes were glassy, like a

[011-097] man who smokes hemp, and his legs were never still for a second. You

[011-098] would think such a figure no better than a mountebank, and yet there

[011-099] was nothing comic in it. Fearful and sinister and uncanny it was; and I

[011-100] wanted to do anything but laugh.

[011-101] As he shouted he kept pointing with his stave up the street which

[011-102] climbed the hillside.

[011-103] “He means us to move,” said Peter. “For God’s sake let us get away from

[011-104] this witch-doctor.”

[011-105] I couldn’t make sense of it, but one thing was clear. These maniacs had

[011-106] delivered us for the moment from Rasta and his friends.

[011-107] Then I did a dashed silly thing. I pulled out a sovereign and offered

[011-108] it to the leader. I had some kind of notion of showing gratitude, and

[011-109] as I had no words I had to show it by deed.

[011-110] He brought his stick down on my wrist and sent the coin spinning in the

[011-111] gutter. His eyes blazed, and he made his weapon sing round my head. He

[011-112] cursed me—oh, I could tell cursing well enough, though I didn’t follow

[011-113] a word; and he cried to his followers and they cursed me too. I had

[011-114] offered him a mortal insult and stirred up a worse hornet’s nest than

[011-115] Rasta’s push.

[011-116] Peter and I, with a common impulse, took to our heels. We were not

[011-117] looking for any trouble with demoniacs. Up the steep, narrow lane we

[011-118] ran with that bedlamite crowd at our heels. The torches seemed to have

[011-119] gone out, for the place was black as pitch, and we tumbled over heaps

[011-120] of offal and splashed through running drains. The men were close behind

[011-121] us, and more than once I felt a stick on my shoulder. But fear lent us

[011-122] wings, and suddenly before us was a blaze of light and we saw the

[011-123] debouchment of our street in a main thoroughfare. The others saw it,

[011-124] too, for they slackened off. Just before we reached the light we

[011-125] stopped and looked round. There was no sound or sight behind us in the

[011-126] dark lane which dipped to the harbour.

[011-127] “This is a queer country, Cornelis,” said Peter, feeling his limbs for

[011-128] bruises. “Too many things happen in too short a time. I am breathless.”

[011-129] The big street we had struck seemed to run along the crest of the hill.

[011-130] There were lamps in it, and crawling cabs, and quite civilized-looking

[011-131] shops. We soon found the hotel to which Kuprasso had directed us, a big

[011-132] place in a courtyard with a very tumble-down-looking portico, and green

[011-133] sun-shutters which rattled drearily in the winter’s wind. It proved, as

[011-134] I had feared, to be packed to the door, mostly with German officers.

[011-135] With some trouble I got an interview with the proprietor, the usual

[011-136] Greek, and told him that we had been sent there by Mr Kuprasso. That

[011-137] didn’t affect him in the least, and we would have been shot into the

[011-138] street if I hadn’t remembered about Stumm’s pass.

[011-139] So I explained that we had come from Germany with munitions and only

[011-140] wanted rooms for one night. I showed him the pass and blustered a good

[011-141] deal, till he became civil and said he would do the best he could for

[011-142] us.

[011-143] That best was pretty poor. Peter and I were doubled up in a small room

[011-144] which contained two camp-beds and little else, and had broken windows

[011-145] through which the wind whistled. We had a wretched dinner of stringy

[011-146] mutton, boiled with vegetables, and a white cheese strong enough to

[011-147] raise the dead. But I got a bottle of whisky, for which I paid a

[011-148] sovereign, and we managed to light the stove in our room, fasten the

[011-149] shutters, and warm our hearts with a brew of toddy. After that we went

[011-150] to bed and slept like logs for twelve hours. On the road from Rustchuk

[011-151] we had had uneasy slumbers.

[011-152] I woke next morning and, looking out from the broken window, saw that

[011-153] it was snowing. With a lot of trouble I got hold of a servant and made

[011-154] him bring us some of the treacly Turkish coffee. We were both in pretty

[011-155] low spirits. “Europe is a poor cold place,” said Peter, “not worth

[011-156] fighting for. There is only one white man’s land, and that is South

[011-157] Africa.” At the time I heartily agreed with him.

[011-158] I remember that, sitting on the edge of my bed, I took stock of our

[011-159] position. It was not very cheering. We seemed to have been amassing

[011-160] enemies at a furious pace. First of all, there was Rasta, whom I had

[011-161] insulted and who wouldn’t forget it in a hurry. He had his crowd of

[011-162] Turkish riff-raff and was bound to get us sooner or later. Then there

[011-163] was the maniac in the skin hat. He didn’t like Rasta, and I made a

[011-164] guess that he and his weird friends were of some party hostile to the

[011-165] Young Turks. But, on the other hand, he didn’t like us, and there would

[011-166] be bad trouble the next time we met him. Finally, there was Stumm and

[011-167] the German Government. It could only be a matter of hours at the best

[011-168] before he got the Rustchuk authorities on our trail. It would be easy

[011-169] to trace us from [[chataldja|Chataldja]], and once they had us we were absolutely

[011-170] done. There was a big black _dossier_ against us, which by no

[011-171] conceivable piece of [[fate-and-providence|luck]] could be upset.
