---
description: "Chapter 13: I Move in Good Society"
id: ch13
label: "Ch. 13: I Move in Good Society"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 13: I Move in Good Society

[013-001] “I can find that out,” said [[sandy-arbuthnot|Sandy]]. “That’s the advantage of having a

[013-002] push like mine. Meantime, I’ve got to clear, for my day’s work isn’t

[013-003] finished. Dick, you and [[peter-pienaar|Peter]] must go to bed at once.”

[013-004] “Why?” I asked in amazement. Sandy spoke like a medical adviser.

[013-005] “Because I want your clothes—the

[013-006] things you’ve got on now. I’ll take them off with me and you’ll never

[013-007] see them again.”

[013-008] “You’ve a queer taste in souvenirs,” I said.

[013-009] “Say rather the Turkish police. The current in the [[bosporus|Bosporus]] is pretty

[013-010] strong, and these sad relics of two misguided Dutchmen will be washed

[013-011] up tomorrow about Seraglio Point. In this game you must drop the

[013-012] curtain neat and pat at the end of each Scene, if you don’t want

[013-013] trouble later with the missing heir and the family lawyer.”

[013-014] CHAPTER XIII.

[013-015] I Move in Good Society

[013-016] I walked out of that house next morning with [[john-blenkiron|Blenkiron]]’s arm in mine, a

[013-017] different being from the friendless creature who had looked vainly the

[013-018] day before for sanctuary. To begin with, I was splendidly dressed. I

[013-019] had a navy-blue suit with square padded shoulders, a neat black

[013-020] bow-tie, shoes with a hump at the toe, and a brown bowler. Over that I

[013-021] wore a greatcoat lined with wolf fur. I had a smart malacca cane, and

[013-022] one of Blenkiron’s cigars in my mouth. Peter had been made to trim his

[013-023] beard, and, dressed in unassuming pepper-and-salt, looked with his

[013-024] docile eyes and quiet voice a very respectable servant. Old Blenkiron

[013-025] had done the job in style, for, if you’ll believe it, he had brought

[013-026] the clothes all the way from [[london|London]]. I realized now why he and Sandy

[013-027] had been fossicking in my wardrobe. Peter’s suit had been of Sandy’s

[013-028] procuring, and it was not the fit of mine. I had no difficulty about

[013-029] the accent. Any man brought up in the colonies can get his tongue round

[013-030] American, and I flattered myself I made a very fair shape at the lingo

[013-031] of the Middle West.

[013-032] The wind had gone to the south and the snow was melting fast. There was

[013-033] a blue sky above Asia, and away to the north masses of white cloud

[013-034] drifting over the [[black-sea|Black Sea]]. What had seemed the day before the

[013-035] dingiest of cities now took on a strange beauty, the beauty of

[013-036] unexpected horizons and tongues of grey water winding below

[013-037] cypress-studded shores. A man’s temper has a lot to do with his

[013-038] appreciation of scenery. I felt a free man once more, and could use my

[013-039] eyes.

[013-040] That street was a jumble of every nationality on earth. There were

[013-041] Turkish regulars in their queer conical khaki helmets, and wild-looking

[013-042] levies who had no kin with Europe. There were squads of Germans in flat

[013-043] forage-caps, staring vacantly at novel sights, and quick to salute any

[013-044] officer on the side-walk. Turks in closed carriages passed, and Turks

[013-045] on good Arab horses, and Turks who looked as if they had come out of

[013-046] the Ark. But it was the rabble that caught the eye—very wild, pinched,

[013-047] miserable rabble. I never in my life saw such swarms of beggars, and

[013-048] you walked down that street to the accompaniment of entreaties for alms

[013-049] in all the tongues of the Tower of Babel. Blenkiron and I behaved as if

[013-050] we were interested tourists. We would stop and laugh at one fellow and

[013-051] give a penny to a second, passing comments in high-pitched Western

[013-052] voices.

[013-053] We went into a cafe and had a cup of coffee. A beggar came in and asked

[013-054] alms. Hitherto Blenkiron’s purse had been closed, but now he took out

[013-055] some small nickels and planked five down on the table. The man cried

[013-056] down blessings and picked up three. Blenkiron very swiftly swept the

[013-057] other two into his pocket.

[013-058] That seemed to me queer, and I remarked that I had never before seen a

[013-059] beggar who gave change. Blenkiron said nothing, and presently we moved

[013-060] on and came to the harbour-side.

[013-061] There were a number of small tugs moored alongside, and one or two

[013-062] bigger craft—fruit boats, I judged, which used to ply in the Aegean.

[013-063] They looked pretty well moth-eaten from disuse. We stopped at one of

[013-064] them and watched a fellow in a blue nightcap splicing ropes. He raised

[013-065] his eyes once and looked at us, and then kept on with his business.

[013-066] Blenkiron asked him where he came from, but he shook his head, not

[013-067] understanding the tongue. A Turkish policeman came up and stared at us

[013-068] suspiciously, till Blenkiron opened his coat, as if by accident, and

[013-069] displayed a tiny square of ribbon, at which he saluted. Failing to make

[013-070] conversation with the sailor, Blenkiron flung him three of his black

[013-071] cigars.

[013-072] “I guess you can smoke, friend, if you can’t talk,” he said.

[013-073] The man grinned and caught the three neatly in the air. Then to my

[013-074] amazement he tossed one of them back.

[013-075] The donor regarded it quizzically as it lay on the pavement. “That

[013-076] boy’s a connoisseur of tobacco,” he said. As we moved away I saw the

[013-077] Turkish policeman pick it up and put it inside his cap.

[013-078] We returned by the long street on the crest of the hill. There was a

[013-079] man selling oranges on a tray, and Blenkiron stopped to look at them. I

[013-080] noticed that the man shuffled fifteen into a cluster. Blenkiron felt

[013-081] the oranges, as if to see that they were sound, and pushed two aside.

[013-082] The man instantly restored them to the group, never raising his eyes.

[013-083] “This ain’t the time of year to buy fruit,” said Blenkiron as we passed

[013-084] on. “Those oranges are rotten as medlars.”

[013-085] We were almost on our own doorstep before I guessed the meaning of the

[013-086] business.

[013-087] “Is your morning’s work finished?” I said.

[013-088] “Our morning’s walk?” he asked innocently.

[013-089] “I said ‘work’.”

[013-090] He smiled blandly. “I reckoned you’d tumble to it. Why, yes, except

[013-091] that I’ve some figuring still to do. Give me half an hour and I’ll be

[013-092] at your service, Major.”

[013-093] That afternoon, after Peter had cooked a wonderfully good luncheon, I

[013-094] had a heart-to-heart talk with Blenkiron.

[013-095] “My business is to get noos,” he said; “and before I start on a stunt I

[013-096] make considerable preparations. All the time in London when I was

[013-097] yelping at the British Government, I was busy with [[sir-walter-bullivant|Sir Walter]] arranging

[013-098] things ahead. We used to meet in queer places and at all hours of the

[013-099] night. I fixed up a lot of connections in this city before I arrived,

[013-100] and especially a noos service with your [[british-intelligence|Foreign Office]] by way of

[013-101] [[rumania|Rumania]] and [[russia|Russia]]. In a day or two I guess our friends will know all

[013-102] about our discoveries.”

[013-103] At that I opened my eyes very wide.

[013-104] “Why, yes. You Britishers haven’t any notion how wide-awake your

[013-105] Intelligence Service is. I reckon it’s easy the best of all the

[013-106] belligerents. You never talked about it in peace time, and you shunned

[013-107] the theatrical ways of the Teuton. But you had the wires laid good and

[013-108] sure. I calculate there isn’t much that happens in any corner of the

[013-109] earth that you don’t know within twenty-four hours. I don’t say your

[013-110] highbrows use the noos well. I don’t take much stock in your political

[013-111] push. They’re a lot of silver-tongues, no doubt, but it ain’t oratory

[013-112] that is wanted in this racket. The William Jennings Bryan stunt

[013-113] languishes in war-time. Politics is like a chicken-coop, and those

[013-114] inside get to behave as if their little run were all the world. But if

[013-115] the politicians make mistakes it isn’t from lack of good instruction to

[013-116] guide their steps. If I had a big proposition to handle and could have

[013-117] my pick of helpers I’d plump for the Intelligence Department of the

[013-118] British Admiralty. Yes, Sir, I take off my hat to your Government

[013-119] sleuths.”

[013-120] “Did they provide you with ready-made spies here?” I asked in

[013-121] astonishment.

[013-122] “Why, no,” he said. “But they gave me the key, and I could make my own

[013-123] arrangements. In Germany I buried myself deep in the local atmosphere

[013-124] and never peeped out. That was my game, for I was looking for something

[013-125] in Germany itself, and didn’t want any foreign cross-bearings. As you

[013-126] know, I failed where you succeeded. But so soon as I crossed the [[danube-river|Danube]]

[013-127] I set about opening up my lines of communication, and I hadn’t been two

[013-128] days in this metropolis before I had got my telephone exchange buzzing.

[013-129] Sometime I’ll explain the thing to you, for it’s a pretty little

[013-130] business. I’ve got the cutest cypher ... No, it ain’t my invention.

[013-131] It’s your Government’s. Any one, babe, imbecile, or dotard, can carry

[013-132] my messages—you saw some of them today—but it takes some mind to set

[013-133] the piece, and it takes a lot of figuring at my end to work out the

[013-134] results. Some day you shall hear it all, for I guess it would please

[013-135] you.”

[013-136] “How do you use it?” I asked.

[013-137] “Well, I get early noos of what is going on in this cabbage-patch.

[013-138] Likewise I get authentic noos of the rest of Europe, and I can send a

[013-139] message to Mr X. in Petrograd and Mr Y. in London, or, if I wish, to Mr

[013-140] Z. in Noo York. What’s the matter with that for a post-office? I’m the

[013-141] best informed man in Constantinople, for old [[liman|General Liman]] only hears

[013-142] one side, and mostly lies at that, and [[ennver-pasha|Enver]] prefers not to listen at

[013-143] all. Also, I could give them points on what is happening at their very

[013-144] door, for our friend Sandy is a big boss in the best-run crowd of

[013-145] mountebanks that ever fiddled secrets out of men’s hearts. Without

[013-146] their help I wouldn’t have cut much ice in this city.”

[013-147] “I want you to tell me one thing, Blenkiron,” I said. “I’ve been

[013-148] playing a part for the past month, and it wears my nerves to tatters.

[013-149] Is this job very tiring, for if it is, I doubt I may buckle up.”

[013-150] He looked thoughtful. “I can’t call our business an absolute rest-cure

[013-151] any time. You’ve got to keep your eyes skinned, and there’s always the

[013-152] risk of the little packet of dynamite going off unexpected. But as

[013-153] these things go, I rate this stunt as easy. We’ve only got to be

[013-154] natural. We wear our natural clothes, and talk English, and sport a

[013-155] Teddy Roosevelt smile, and there isn’t any call for theatrical talent.

[013-156] Where I’ve found the job tight was when I had got to be natural, and my

[013-157] naturalness was the same brand as that of everybody round about, and

[013-158] all the time I had to do unnatural things. It isn’t easy to be going

[013-159] down town to business and taking cocktails with Mr Carl Rosenheim, and

[013-160] next hour being engaged trying to blow Mr Rosenheim’s friends sky-high.

[013-161] And it isn’t easy to keep up a part which is clean outside your

[013-162] ordinary life. I’ve never tried that. My line has always been to keep

[013-163] my normal personality. But you have, Major, and I guess you found it

[013-164] wearing.”

[013-165] “Wearing’s a mild word,” I said. “But I want to know another thing. It

[013-166] seems to me that the line you’ve picked is as good as could be. But

[013-167] it’s a cast-iron line. It commits us pretty deep and it won’t be a

[013-168] simple job to drop it.”

[013-169] “Why, that’s just the point I was coming to,” he said. “I was going to

[013-170] put you wise about that very thing. When I started out I figured on

[013-171] some situation like this. I argued that unless I had a very clear part

[013-172] with a big bluff in it I wouldn’t get the confidences which I needed.

[013-173] We’ve got to be at the heart of the show, taking a real hand and not

[013-174] just looking on. So I settled I would be a big engineer—there was a

[013-175] time when there weren’t many bigger in the United States than John S.

[013-176] Blenkiron. I talked large about what might be done in [[mesopotamia|Mesopotamia]] in

[013-177] the way of washing the British down the river. Well, that talk caught

[013-178] on. They knew of my reputation as an hydraulic expert, and they were

[013-179] tickled to death to rope me in. I told them I wanted a helper, and I

[013-180] told them about my friend Richard Hanau, as good a German as ever

[013-181] supped sauerkraut, who was coming through Russia and Rumania as a

[013-182] benevolent neutral; but when he got to Constantinople would drop his

[013-183] neutrality and double his benevolence. They got reports on you by wire

[013-184] from the States—I arranged that before I left London. So you’re going

[013-185] to be welcomed and taken to their bosoms just like John S. was. We’ve

[013-186] both got jobs we can hold down, and now you’re in these pretty clothes

[013-187] you’re the dead ringer of the brightest kind of American engineer ...

[013-188] But we can’t go back on our tracks. If we wanted to leave for Constanza

[013-189] next week they’d be very polite, but they’d never let us. We’ve got to

[013-190] go on with this adventure and nose our way down into Mesopotamia,

[013-191] hoping that our [[fate-and-providence|luck]] will hold ... God knows how we will get out of it;

[013-192] but it’s no good going out to meet trouble. As I observed before, I

[013-193] believe in an all-wise and beneficent Providence, but you’ve got to

[013-194] give him a chance.”
