---
description: "Chapter 16: The Battered Caravanserai"
id: ch16
label: "Ch. 16: The Battered Caravanserai"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 16: The Battered Caravanserai

[016-001] “The woman has been here tonight,” I said. “She asked me what I stood

[016-002] for, and I invented some infernal nonsense which she approved of. But I

[016-003] can see one thing. She and her prophet may run for different stakes,

[016-004] but it’s the same course.”

[016-005] [[sandy-arbuthnot|Sandy]] started. “She has been here!” he cried. “Tell me, Dick, what do

[016-006] you think of her?”

[016-007] “I thought she was about two parts mad, but the third part was uncommon

[016-008] like inspiration.”

[016-009] “That’s about right,” he said. “I was wrong in comparing her to

[016-010] Messalina. She’s something a dashed sight more complicated. She runs

[016-011] the prophet just because she shares his belief. Only what in him is

[016-012] sane and fine, in her is mad and horrible. You see, Germany also wants

[016-013] to simplify life.”

[016-014] “I know,” I said. “I told her that an hour ago, when I talked more rot

[016-015] to the second than any normal man ever achieved. It will come between

[016-016] me and my sleep for the rest of my days.”

[016-017] “Germany’s simplicity is that of the neurotic, not the primitive. It is

[016-018] megalomania and egotism and the pride of the man in the Bible that

[016-019] waxed fat and kicked. But the results are the same. She wants to

[016-020] destroy and simplify; but it isn’t the simplicity of the ascetic, which

[016-021] is of the spirit, but the simplicity of the madman that grinds down all

[016-022] the contrivances of civilization to a featureless monotony. The prophet

[016-023] wants to save the souls of his people; Germany wants to rule the

[016-024] inanimate corpse of the world. But you can get the same language to

[016-025] cover both. And so you have the partnership of St Francis and

[016-026] Messalina. Dick, did you ever hear of a thing called the Superman?”

[016-027] “There was a time when the papers were full of nothing else,” I

[016-028] answered. “I gather it was invented by a sportsman called Nietzsche.”

[016-029] “Maybe,” said Sandy. “Old Nietzsche has been blamed for a great deal of

[016-030] rubbish he would have died rather than acknowledge. But it’s a craze of

[016-031] the new, fatted Germany. It’s a fancy type which could never really

[016-032] exist, any more than the Economic Man of the politicians. Mankind has a

[016-033] sense of humour which stops short of the final absurdity. There never

[016-034] has been, and there never could be a real Superman ... But there might

[016-035] be a Superwoman.”

[016-036] “You’ll get into trouble, my lad, if you talk like that,” I said.

[016-037] “It’s true all the same. Women have got a perilous logic which we never

[016-038] have, and some of the best of them don’t see the joke of life like the

[016-039] ordinary man. They can be far greater than men, for they can go

[016-040] straight to the heart of things. There never was a man so near the

[016-041] divine as Joan of Arc. But I think, too, they can be more entirely

[016-042] damnable than anything that ever was breeched, for they don’t stop

[016-043] still now and then and laugh at themselves ... There is no Superman.

[016-044] The poor old donkeys that fancy themselves in the part are either

[016-045] crackbrained professors who couldn’t rule a Sunday-school class, or

[016-046] bristling soldiers with pint-pot heads who imagine that the shooting of

[016-047] a Duc d’Enghien made a Napoleon. But there is a Superwoman, and her

[016-048] name’s [[hilda-von-einem|Hilda]] von Einem.”

[016-049] “I thought our job was nearly over,” I groaned, “and now it looks as if

[016-050] it hadn’t well started. [[sir-walter-bullivant|Bullivant]] said that all we had to do was to

[016-051] find out the truth.”

[016-052] “Bullivant didn’t know. No man knows except you and me. I tell you, the

[016-053] woman has immense power. The Germans have trusted her with their trump

[016-054] card, and she’s going to play it for all she is worth. There’s no crime

[016-055] that will stand in her way. She has set the ball rolling, and if need

[016-056] be she’ll cut all her prophets’ throats and run the show herself ... I

[016-057] don’t know about your job, for honestly I can’t quite see what you and

[016-058] [[john-blenkiron|Blenkiron]] are going to do. But I’m very clear about my own [[courage-and-honour|duty]]. She’s

[016-059] let me into the business, and I’m going to stick to it in the hope that

[016-060] I’ll find a chance of wrecking it ... We’re moving eastward

[016-061] tomorrow—with a new prophet if the old one is dead.”

[016-062] “Where are you going?” I asked.

[016-063] “I don’t know. But I gather it’s a long journey, judging by the

[016-064] preparations. And it must be to a cold country, judging by the clothes

[016-065] provided.”

[016-066] “Well, wherever it is, we’re going with you. You haven’t heard the end

[016-067] of our yarn. Blenkiron and I have been moving in the best circles as

[016-068] skilled American engineers who are going to play Old [[harry-bullivant|Harry]] with the

[016-069] British on the Tigris. I’m a pal of [[ennver-pasha|Enver]]’s now, and he has offered me

[016-070] his protection. The lamented [[rasta-bey|Rasta]] brought our passports for the

[016-071] journey to [[mesopotamia|Mesopotamia]] tomorrow, but an hour ago your lady tore them up

[016-072] and put them in the fire. We are going with her, and she vouchsafed the

[016-073] information that it was towards the great hills.”

[016-074] Sandy whistled long and low. “I wonder what the deuce she wants with

[016-075] you? This thing is getting dashed complicated, Dick ... Where, more by

[016-076] token, is Blenkiron? He’s the fellow to know about high politics.”

[016-077] The missing Blenkiron, as Sandy spoke, entered the room with his slow,

[016-078] quiet step. I could see by his carriage that for once he had no

[016-079] dyspepsia, and by his eyes that he was excited.

[016-080] “Say, boys,” he said, “I’ve got something pretty considerable in the

[016-081] way of noos. There’s been big fighting on the Eastern border, and the

[016-082] Buzzards have taken a bad knock.”

[016-083] His hands were full of papers, from which he selected a map and spread

[016-084] it on the table.

[016-085] “They keep mum about this thing in the capital, but I’ve been piecing

[016-086] the story together these last days and I think I’ve got it straight. A

[016-087] fortnight ago old man Nicholas descended from his mountains and

[016-088] scuppered his enemies there—at Kuprikeui, where the main road eastwards

[016-089] crosses the Araxes. That was only the beginning of the stunt, for he

[016-090] pressed on on a broad front, and the gentleman called Kiamil, who

[016-091] commands in those parts, was not up to the job of holding him. The

[016-092] Buzzards were shepherded in from north and east and south, and now the

[016-093] Muscovite is sitting down outside the forts of Erzerum. I can tell you

[016-094] they’re pretty miserable about the situation in the highest quarters

[016-095] ... Enver is sweating blood to get fresh divisions to Erzerum from

[016-096] Gally-poly, but it’s a long road and it looks as if they would be too

[016-097] late for the fair ... You and I, Major, start for Mesopotamy tomorrow,

[016-098] and that’s about the meanest bit of bad [[fate-and-providence|luck]] that ever happened to John

[016-099] S. We’re missing the chance of seeing the goriest fight of this

[016-100] campaign.”

[016-101] I picked up the map and pocketed it. Maps were my business, and I had

[016-102] been looking for one.

[016-103] “We’re not going to Mesopotamia,” I said. “Our orders have been

[016-104] cancelled.”

[016-105] “But I’ve just seen Enver, and he said he had sent round our

[016-106] passports.”

[016-107] “They’re in the fire,” I said. “The right ones will come along tomorrow

[016-108] morning.”

[016-109] Sandy broke in, his eyes bright with excitement.

[016-110] “The great hills! ... We’re going to Erzerum ... Don’t you see that the

[016-111] Germans are playing their big card? They’re sending Greenmantle to the

[016-112] point of danger in the hope that his coming will rally the Turkish

[016-113] defence. Things are beginning to move, Dick, old man. No more kicking

[016-114] the heels for us. We’re going to be in it up to the neck, and Heaven

[016-115] help the best man ... I must be off now, for I’ve a lot to do. _Au

[016-116] revoir_. We meet some time in the hills.”

[016-117] Blenkiron still looked puzzled, till I told him the story of that

[016-118] night’s doings. As he listened, all the satisfaction went out of his

[016-119] face, and that funny, childish air of bewilderment crept in.

[016-120] “It’s not for me to complain, for it’s in the straight line of our

[016-121] dooty, but I reckon there’s going to be big trouble ahead of this

[016-122] caravan. It’s Kismet, and we’ve got to bow. But I won’t pretend that

[016-123] I’m not considerable scared at the prospect.”

[016-124] “Oh, so am I,” I said. “The woman frightens me into fits. We’re up

[016-125] against it this time all right. All the same I’m glad we’re to be let

[016-126] into the real star metropolitan performance. I didn’t relish the idea

[016-127] of touring the provinces.”

[016-128] “I guess that’s correct. But I could wish that the good God would see

[016-129] fit to take that lovely lady to Himself. She’s too much for a quiet man

[016-130] at my time of life. When she invites us to go in on the ground-floor I

[016-131] feel like taking the elevator to the roof-garden.”

[016-132] CHAPTER XVI.

[016-133] The Battered Caravanserai

[016-134] Two days later, in the evening, we came to [[angora|Angora]], the first stage in

[016-135] our journey.

[016-136] The passports had arrived next morning, as Frau von Einem had promised,

[016-137] and with them a plan of our journey. More, one of the Companions, who

[016-138] spoke a little English, was detailed to accompany us—a wise precaution,

[016-139] for no one of us had a word of Turkish. These were the sum of our

[016-140] instructions. I heard nothing more of Sandy or Greenmantle or the lady.

[016-141] We were meant to travel in our own party.

[016-142] We had the railway to Angora, a very comfortable German _Schlafwagen_,

[016-143] tacked to the end of a troop-train. There wasn’t much to be seen of the

[016-144] country, for after we left the [[bosporus|Bosporus]] we ran into scuds of snow, and

[016-145] except that we seemed to be climbing on to a big plateau I had no

[016-146] notion of the landscape. It was a marvel that we made such good time,

[016-147] for that line was congested beyond anything I have ever seen. The place

[016-148] was crawling with the [[gallipoli|Gallipoli]] troops, and every siding was packed

[016-149] with supply trucks. When we stopped—which we did on an average about

[016-150] once an hour—you could see vast camps on both sides of the line, and

[016-151] often we struck regiments on the march along the railway track. They

[016-152] looked a fine, hardy lot of ruffians, but many were deplorably ragged,

[016-153] and I didn’t think much of their boots. I wondered how they would do

[016-154] the five hundred miles of road to Erzerum.

[016-155] Blenkiron played Patience, and [[peter-pienaar|Peter]] and I took a hand at picquet, but

[016-156] mostly we smoked and yarned. Getting away from that infernal city had

[016-157] cheered us up wonderfully. Now we were out on the open road, moving to

[016-158] the sound of the guns. At the worst, we should not perish like rats in

[016-159] a sewer. We would be all together, too, and that was a comfort. I think

[016-160] we felt the relief which a man who has been on a lonely outpost feels

[016-161] when he is brought back to his battalion. Besides, the thing had gone

[016-162] clean beyond our power to direct. It was no good planning and scheming,

[016-163] for none of us had a notion what the next step might be. We were

[016-164] fatalists now, believing in Kismet, and that is a comfortable faith.

[016-165] All but Blenkiron. The coming of Hilda von Einem into the business had

[016-166] put a very ugly complexion on it for him. It was curious to see how she

[016-167] affected the different members of our gang. Peter did not care a rush:

[016-168] man, woman, and hippogriff were the same to him; he met it all as

[016-169] calmly as if he were making plans to round up an old lion in a patch of

[016-170] bush, taking the facts as they came and working at them as if they were

[016-171] a sum in arithmetic. Sandy and I were impressed—it’s no good denying

[016-172] it: horribly impressed—but we were too interested to be scared, and we

[016-173] weren’t a bit fascinated. We hated her too much for that. But she

[016-174] fairly struck Blenkiron dumb. He said himself it was just like a

[016-175] rattlesnake and a bird.
