---
description: "Chapter 20: Peter Pienaar Goes to the Wars (continued, part 2)"
id: ch20-p2
label: "Ch. 20: Peter Pienaar Goes to the Wars (cont'd, part 2)"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 20: Peter Pienaar Goes to the Wars (cont'd, part 2)

[020-001] Then rose a noise of wheels and horses from the opposite direction.

[020-002] Michael and the delayed wagons were approaching. They dashed up at a

[020-003] great pace, driven wildly, and for one horrid second [[peter-pienaar|Peter]] thought they

[020-004] were going to spill into the ditch at the very spot where he was

[020-005] concealed. The wheels passed so close to the edge that they almost

[020-006] grazed his fingers. Somebody shouted an order and they pulled up a yard

[020-007] or two nearer the bridge. The others came up and there was a

[020-008] consultation.

[020-009] Michael swore he had passed no one on the road.

[020-010] “That fool Hannus has seen a ghost,” said the officer testily. “It’s

[020-011] too cold for this child’s play.”

[020-012] Hannus, almost in tears, repeated his tale. “The man spoke to me in

[020-013] good German,” he cried.

[020-014] “Ghost or no ghost he is safe enough up the road,” said the officer.

[020-015] “Kind God, that was a big one!” He stopped and stared at a shell-burst,

[020-016] for the bombardment from the east was growing fiercer.

[020-017] They stood discussing the fire for a minute and presently moved off.

[020-018] Peter gave them two minutes’ law and then clambered back to the highway

[020-019] and set off along it at a run. The noise of the shelling and the wind,

[020-020] together with the thick darkness, made it safe to hurry.

[020-021] He left the road at the first chance and took to the broken country.

[020-022] The ground was now rising towards a spur of the Palantuken, on the far

[020-023] slope of which were the Turkish trenches. The night had begun by being

[020-024] pretty nearly as black as pitch; even the smoke from the shell

[020-025] explosions, which is often visible in darkness, could not be seen. But

[020-026] as the wind blew the snow-clouds athwart the sky patches of stars came

[020-027] out. Peter had a compass, but he didn’t need to use it, for he had a

[020-028] kind of “feel” for landscape, a special sense which is born in savages

[020-029] and can only be acquired after long experience by the white man. I

[020-030] believe he could smell where the north lay. He had settled roughly

[020-031] which part of the line he would try, merely because of its nearness to

[020-032] the enemy. But he might see reason to vary this, and as he moved he

[020-033] began to think that the safest place was where the shelling was

[020-034] hottest. He didn’t like the notion, but it sounded sense.

[020-035] Suddenly he began to puzzle over queer things in the ground, and, as he

[020-036] had never seen big guns before, it took him a moment to fix them.

[020-037] Presently one went off at his elbow with a roar like the Last Day.

[020-038] These were Austrian howitzers—nothing over eight-inch, I fancy, but to

[020-039] Peter they looked like leviathans. Here, too, he saw for the first time

[020-040] a big and quite recent shell-hole, for the Russian guns were searching

[020-041] out the position. He was so interested in it all that he poked his nose

[020-042] where he shouldn’t have been, and dropped plump into the pit behind a

[020-043] gun-emplacement.

[020-044] Gunners all the world over are the same—shy people, who hide themselves

[020-045] in holes and hibernate and mortally dislike being detected.

[020-046] A gruff voice cried “_Wer da_?” and a heavy hand seized his neck.

[020-047] Peter was ready with his story. He belonged to Michael’s wagon-team and

[020-048] had been left behind. He wanted to be told the way to the sappers’

[020-049] camp. He was very apologetic, not to say obsequious.

[020-050] “It is one of those Prussian swine from the Marta bridge,” said a

[020-051] gunner. “Land him a kick to teach him sense. Bear to your right,

[020-052] mannikin, and you will find a road. And have a care when you get there,

[020-053] for the Russkoes are registering on it.”

[020-054] Peter thanked them and bore off to the right. After that he kept a wary

[020-055] eye on the howitzers, and was thankful when he got out of their area on

[020-056] to the slopes up the hill. Here was the type of country that was

[020-057] familiar to him, and he defied any Turk or Boche to spot him among the

[020-058] scrub and boulders. He was getting on very well, when once more, close

[020-059] to his ear, came a sound like the crack of doom.

[020-060] It was the field-guns now, and the sound of a field-gun close at hand

[020-061] is bad for the nerves if you aren’t expecting it. Peter thought he had

[020-062] been hit, and lay flat for a little to consider. Then he found the

[020-063] right explanation, and crawled forward very warily.

[020-064] Presently he saw his first Russian shell. It dropped half a dozen yards

[020-065] to his right, making a great hole in the snow and sending up a mass of

[020-066] mixed earth, snow, and broken stones. Peter spat out the dirt and felt

[020-067] very solemn. You must remember that never in his life had he seen big

[020-068] shelling, and was now being landed in the thick of a first-class show

[020-069] without any preparation. He said he felt cold in his stomach, and very

[020-070] wishful to run away, if there had been anywhere to run to. But he kept

[020-071] on to the crest of the ridge, over which a big glow was broadening like

[020-072] sunrise. He tripped once over a wire, which he took for some kind of

[020-073] snare, and after that went very warily. By and by he got his face

[020-074] between two boulders and looked over into the true battle-field.

[020-075] He told me it was exactly what the predikant used to say that Hell

[020-076] would be like. [[About]] fifty yards down the slope lay the Turkish

[020-077] trenches—they were dark against the snow, and now and then a black

[020-078] figure like a devil showed for an instant and disappeared. The Turks

[020-079] clearly expected an infantry attack, for they were sending up calcium

[020-080] rockets and Very flares. The Russians were battering their line and

[020-081] spraying all the hinterland, not with shrapnel, but with good, solid

[020-082] high-explosives. The place would be as bright as day for a moment, all

[020-083] smothered in a scurry of smoke and snow and debris, and then a black

[020-084] pall would fall on it, when only the thunder of the guns told of the

[020-085] battle.

[020-086] Peter felt very sick. He had not believed there could be so much noise

[020-087] in the world, and the drums of his ears were splitting. Now, for a man

[020-088] to whom [[courage-and-honour|courage]] is habitual, the taste of fear—naked, utter fear—is a

[020-089] horrible thing. It seems to wash away all his manhood. Peter lay on the

[020-090] crest, watching the shells burst, and confident that any moment he

[020-091] might be a shattered remnant. He lay and reasoned with himself, calling

[020-092] himself every name he could think of, but conscious that nothing would

[020-093] get rid of that lump of ice below his heart.

[020-094] Then he could stand it no longer. He got up and ran for his life.

[020-095] But he ran forward.

[020-096] It was the craziest performance. He went hell-for-leather over a piece

[020-097] of ground which was being watered with H.E., but by the mercy of heaven

[020-098] nothing hit him. He took some fearsome tosses in shell-holes, but

[020-099] partly erect and partly on all fours he did the fifty yards and tumbled

[020-100] into a Turkish trench right on top of a dead man.

[020-101] The contact with that body brought him to his senses. That men could

[020-102] die at all seemed a comforting, homely thing after that unnatural

[020-103] pandemonium. The next moment a crump took the parapet of the trench

[020-104] some yards to his left, and he was half buried in an avalanche.

[020-105] He crawled out of that, pretty badly cut about the head. He was quite

[020-106] cool now and thinking hard about his next step. There were men all

[020-107] around him, sullen dark faces as he saw them when the flares went up.

[020-108] They were manning the parapets and waiting tensely for something else

[020-109] than the shelling. They paid no attention to him, for I fancy in that

[020-110] trench units were pretty well mixed up, and under a bad bombardment no

[020-111] one bothers about his neighbour. He found himself free to move as he

[020-112] pleased. The ground of the trench was littered with empty

[020-113] cartridge-cases, and there were many dead bodies.

[020-114] The last shell, as I have said, had played havoc with the parapet. In

[020-115] the next spell of darkness Peter crawled through the gap and twisted

[020-116] among some snowy hillocks. He was no longer afraid of shells, any more

[020-117] than he was afraid of a veld thunderstorm. But he was wondering very

[020-118] hard how he should ever get to the Russians. The Turks were behind him

[020-119] now, but there was the biggest danger in front.

[020-120] Then the artillery ceased. It was so sudden that he thought he had gone

[020-121] deaf, and could hardly realize the blessed relief of it. The wind, too,

[020-122] seemed to have fallen, or perhaps he was sheltered by the lee of the

[020-123] hill. There were a lot of dead here also, and that he couldn’t

[020-124] understand, for they were new dead. Had the Turks attacked and been

[020-125] driven back? When he had gone about thirty yards he stopped to take his

[020-126] bearings. On the right were the ruins of a large building set on fire

[020-127] by the guns. There was a blur of woods and the debris of walls round

[020-128] it. Away to the left another hill ran out farther to the east, and the

[020-129] place he was in seemed to be a kind of cup between the spurs. Just

[020-130] before him was a little ruined building, with the sky seen through its

[020-131] rafters, for the smouldering ruin on the right gave a certain light. He

[020-132] wondered if the Russian firing-line lay there.

[020-133] Just then he heard voices—smothered voices—not a yard away and

[020-134] apparently below the ground. He instantly jumped to what this must

[020-135] mean. It was a Turkish trench—a communication trench. Peter didn’t know

[020-136] much about modern warfare, but he had read in the papers, or heard from

[020-137] me, enough to make him draw the right moral. The fresh dead pointed to

[020-138] the same conclusion. What he had got through were the Turkish support

[020-139] trenches, not their firing-line. That was still before him.

[020-140] He didn’t despair, for the rebound from panic had made him extra

[020-141] courageous. He crawled forward, an inch at a time, taking no sort of

[020-142] risk, and presently found himself looking at the parados of a trench.

[020-143] Then he lay quiet to think out the next step.

[020-144] The shelling had stopped, and there was that queer kind of peace which

[020-145] falls sometimes on two armies not a quarter of a mile distant. Peter

[020-146] said he could hear nothing but the far-off sighing of the wind. There

[020-147] seemed to be no movement of any kind in the trench before him, which

[020-148] ran through the ruined building. The light of the burning was dying,

[020-149] and he could just make out the mound of earth a yard in front. He began

[020-150] to feel hungry, and got out his packet of food and had a swig at the

[020-151] brandy flask. That comforted him, and he felt a master of his [[fate-and-providence|fate]]

[020-152] again. But the next step was not so easy. He must find out what lay

[020-153] behind that mound of earth.

[020-154] Suddenly a curious sound fell on his ears. It was so faint that at

[020-155] first he doubted the evidence of his senses. Then as the wind fell it

[020-156] came louder. It was exactly like some hollow piece of metal being

[020-157] struck by a stick, musical and oddly resonant.

[020-158] He concluded it was the wind blowing a branch of a tree against an old

[020-159] boiler in the ruin before him. The trouble was that there was scarcely

[020-160] enough wind now for that in this sheltered cup.

[020-161] But as he listened he caught the note again. It was a bell, a fallen

[020-162] bell, and the place before him must have been a chapel. He remembered

[020-163] that an Armenian monastery had been marked on the big map, and he

[020-164] guessed it was the burned building on his right.
