---
description: "Chapter 22: The Guns of the North"
id: ch22
label: "Ch. 22: The Guns of the North"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Ch. 22: The Guns of the North

[022-001] Back over that moor we went with my spirits badly damped. We had none

[022-002] too long a start, and [[hilda-von-einem|Hilda]] von Einem would rouse heaven and earth to

[022-003] catch us up. Hussin was forcing the pace, for his anxiety was as great

[022-004] as mine.

[022-005] Before we reached the road the mist blew back and revealed a wedge of

[022-006] country right across to the hills beyond the river. It was a clear

[022-007] view, every object standing out wet and sharp in the light of morning.

[022-008] It showed the bridge with horsemen drawn up across it, and it showed,

[022-009] too, cavalry pickets moving along the road.

[022-010] They saw us at the same instant. A word was passed down the road, a

[022-011] shrill whistle blew, and the pickets put their horses at the bank and

[022-012] started across the moor.

[022-013] “Did I not say this mist was from Eblis?” growled Hussin, as we swung

[022-014] round and galloped back on our tracks. “These cursed Zaptiehs have seen

[022-015] us, and our road is cut.”

[022-016] I was for trying the stream at all costs, but Hussin pointed out that

[022-017] it would do us no good. The cavalry beyond the bridge was moving up the

[022-018] other bank. “There is a path through the hills that I know, but it must

[022-019] be travelled on foot. If we can increase our lead and the mist cloaks

[022-020] us, there is yet a chance.”

[022-021] It was a weary business plodding up to the skirts of the hills. We had

[022-022] the pursuit behind us now, and that put an edge on every difficulty.

[022-023] There were long banks of broken screes, I remember, where the snow

[022-024] slipped in wreaths from under our feet. Great boulders had to be

[022-025] circumvented, and patches of bog, where the streams from the snows

[022-026] first made contact with the plains, mired us to our girths. Happily the

[022-027] mist was down again, but this, though it hindered the chase, lessened

[022-028] the chances of Hussin finding the path.

[022-029] He found it nevertheless. There was the gully and the rough mule-track

[022-030] leading upwards. But there also had been a landslip, quite recent from

[022-031] the marks. A large scar of raw earth had broken across the hillside,

[022-032] which with the snow above it looked like a slice cut out of an iced

[022-033] chocolate-cake.

[022-034] We stared blankly for a second, till we recognized its hopelessness.

[022-035] “I’m trying for the crags,” I said. “Where there once was a way another

[022-036] can be found.”

[022-037] “And be picked off at their leisure by these marksmen,” said Hussin

[022-038] grimly. “Look!”

[022-039] The mist had opened again, and a glance behind showed me the pursuit

[022-040] closing up on us. They were now less than three hundred yards off. We

[022-041] turned our horses and made off east-ward along the skirts of the

[022-042] cliffs.

[022-043] Then [[sandy-arbuthnot|Sandy]] spoke for the first time. “I don’t know how you fellows

[022-044] feel, but I’m not going to be taken. There’s nothing much to do except

[022-045] to find a place and put up a fight. We can sell our lives dearly.”

[022-046] “That’s about all,” said [[john-blenkiron|Blenkiron]] cheerfully. He had suffered such

[022-047] tortures on that gallop that he welcomed any kind of stationary fight.

[022-048] “Serve out the arms,” said Sandy.

[022-049] The Companions all carried rifles slung across their shoulders. Hussin,

[022-050] from a deep saddle-bag, brought out rifles and bandoliers for the rest

[022-051] of us. As I laid mine across my saddle-bow I saw it was a German Mauser

[022-052] of the latest pattern.

[022-053] “It’s hell-for-leather till we find a place for a stand,” said Sandy.

[022-054] “The game’s against us this time.”

[022-055] Once more we entered the mist, and presently found better going on a

[022-056] long stretch of even slope. Then came a rise, and on the crest of it I

[022-057] saw the sun. Presently we dipped into bright daylight and looked down

[022-058] on a broad glen, with a road winding up it to a pass in the range. I

[022-059] had expected this. It was one way to the Palantuken pass, some miles

[022-060] south of the house where we had been lodged.

[022-061] And then, as I looked southward, I saw what I had been watching for for

[022-062] days. A little hill split the valley, and on its top was a _kranz_ of

[022-063] rocks. It was the _castrol_ of my persistent dream.

[022-064] On that I promptly took charge. “There’s our fort,” I cried. “If we

[022-065] once get there we can hold it for a week. Sit down and ride for it.”

[022-066] We bucketed down that hillside like men possessed, even Blenkiron

[022-067] sticking on manfully among the twists and turns and slithers. Presently

[022-068] we were on the road and were racing past marching infantry and gun

[022-069] teams and empty wagons. I noted that most seemed to be moving downward

[022-070] and few going up. Hussin screamed some words in Turkish that secured us

[022-071] a passage, but indeed our crazy speed left them staring. Out of a

[022-072] corner of my eye I saw that Sandy had flung off most of his wrappings

[022-073] and seemed to be all a dazzle of rich colour. But I had thought for

[022-074] nothing except the little hill, now almost fronting us across the

[022-075] shallow glen.

[022-076] No horses could breast that steep. We urged them into the hollow, and

[022-077] then hastily dismounted, humped the packs, and began to struggle up the

[022-078] side of the _castrol_. It was strewn with great boulders, which gave a

[022-079] kind of cover that very soon was needed. For, snatching a glance back,

[022-080] I saw that our pursuers were on the road above us and were getting

[022-081] ready to shoot.

[022-082] At normal times we would have been easy marks, but, fortunately, wisps

[022-083] and streamers of mist now clung about that hollow. The rest could fend

[022-084] for themselves, so I stuck to Blenkiron and dragged him, wholly

[022-085] breathless, by the least exposed route. Bullets spattered now and then

[022-086] against the rocks, and one sang unpleasantly near my head. In this way

[022-087] we covered three-fourths of the distance, and had only the bare dozen

[022-088] yards where the gradient eased off up to the edge of the _kranz_.

[022-089] Blenkiron got hit in the leg, our only casualty. There was nothing for

[022-090] it but to carry him, so I swung him on my shoulders, and with a

[022-091] bursting heart did that last lap. It was hottish work, and the bullets

[022-092] were pretty thick about us, but we all got safely to the _kranz_, and a

[022-093] short scramble took us over the edge. I laid Blenkiron inside the

[022-094] _castrol_ and started to prepare our defence.

[022-095] We had little time to do it. Out of the thin fog figures were coming,

[022-096] crouching in cover. The place we were in was a natural redoubt, except

[022-097] that there were no loopholes or sandbags. We had to show our heads over

[022-098] the rim to shoot, but the danger was lessened by the superb field of

[022-099] fire given by those last dozen yards of glacis. I posted the men and

[022-100] waited, and Blenkiron, with a white face, insisted on taking his share,

[022-101] announcing that he used to be handy with a gun.

[022-102] I gave the order that no man was to shoot till the enemy had come out

[022-103] of the rocks on to the glacis. The thing ran right round the top, and

[022-104] we had to watch all sides to prevent them getting us in flank or rear.

[022-105] Hussin’s rifle cracked out presently from the back, so my precautions

[022-106] had not been needless.

[022-107] We were all three fair shots, though none of us up to [[peter-pienaar|Peter]]’s

[022-108] miraculous standard, and the Companions, too, made good practice. The

[022-109] Mauser was the weapon I knew best, and I didn’t miss much. The

[022-110] attackers never had a chance, for their only hope was to rush us by

[022-111] numbers, and, the whole party being not above two dozen, they were far

[022-112] too few. I think we killed three, for their bodies were left lying, and

[022-113] wounded at least six, while the rest fell back towards the road. In a

[022-114] quarter of an hour it was all over.

[022-115] “They are dogs of Kurds,” I heard Hussin say fiercely. “Only a Kurdish

[022-116] _giaour_ would fire on the livery of the Kaába.”

[022-117] Then I had a good look at Sandy. He had discarded shawls and wrappings,

[022-118] and stood up in the strangest costume man ever wore in battle. Somehow

[022-119] he had procured field-boots and an old pair of riding-breeches. Above

[022-120] these, reaching well below his middle, he had a wonderful silken jibbah

[022-121] or ephod of a bright emerald. I call it silk, but it was like no silk I

[022-122] have ever known, so exquisite in the mesh, with such a sheen and depth

[022-123] in it. Some strange pattern was woven on the breast, which in the dim

[022-124] light I could not trace. I’ll warrant no rarer or costlier garment was

[022-125] ever exposed to lead on a bleak winter hill.

[022-126] Sandy seemed unconscious of his garb. His eye, listless no more,

[022-127] scanned the hollow. “That’s only the overture,” he cried. “The opera

[022-128] will soon begin. We must put a breastwork up in these gaps or they’ll

[022-129] pick us off from a thousand yards.”

[022-130] I had meantime roughly dressed Blenkiron’s wound with a linen rag which

[022-131] Hussin provided. It was from a ricochet bullet which had chipped into

[022-132] his left shin. Then I took a hand with the others in getting up

[022-133] earthworks to complete the circuit of the defence. It was no easy job,

[022-134] for we wrought only with our knives and had to dig deep down below the

[022-135] snowy gravel. As we worked I took stock of our refuge.

[022-136] The _castrol_ was a rough circle about ten yards in diameter, its

[022-137] interior filled with boulders and loose stones, and its parapet about

[022-138] four feet high. The mist had cleared for a considerable space, and I

[022-139] could see the immediate surroundings. West, beyond the hollow, was the

[022-140] road we had come, where now the remnants of the pursuit were clustered.

[022-141] North, the hill fell steeply to the valley bottom, but to the south,

[022-142] after a dip there was a ridge which shut the view. East lay another

[022-143] fork of the stream, the chief fork I guessed, and it was evidently

[022-144] followed by the main road to the pass, for I saw it crowded with

[022-145] transport. The two roads seemed to converge somewhere farther south of

[022-146] my sight.

[022-147] I guessed we could not be very far from the front, for the noise of

[022-148] guns sounded very near, both the sharp crack of the field-pieces, and

[022-149] the deeper boom of the howitzers. More, I could hear the chatter of the

[022-150] machine-guns, a magpie note among the baying of hounds. I even saw the

[022-151] bursting of Russian shells, evidently trying to reach the main road.

[022-152] One big fellow—an eight-inch—landed not ten yards from a convoy to the

[022-153] east of us, and another in the hollow through which we had come. These

[022-154] were clearly ranging shots, and I wondered if the Russians had

[022-155] observation-posts on the heights to mark them. If so, they might soon

[022-156] try a curtain, and we should be very near its edge. It would be an odd

[022-157] irony if we were the target of friendly shells.

[022-158] “By the Lord [[harry-bullivant|Harry]],” I heard Sandy say, “if we had a brace of

[022-159] machine-guns we could hold this place against a division.”

[022-160] “What price shells?” I asked. “If they get a gun up they can blow us to

[022-161] atoms in ten minutes.”

[022-162] “Please God the Russians keep them too busy for that,” was his answer.

[022-163] With anxious eyes I watched our enemies on the road. They seemed to

[022-164] have grown in numbers. They were signalling, too, for a white flag

[022-165] fluttered. Then the mist rolled down on us again, and our prospect was

[022-166] limited to ten yards of vapour.

[022-167] “Steady,” I cried; “they may try to rush us at any moment. Every man

[022-168] keep his eye on the edge of the fog, and shoot at the first sign.”

[022-169] For nearly half an hour by my watch we waited in that queer white

[022-170] world, our eyes smarting with the strain of peering. The sound of the

[022-171] guns seemed to be hushed, and everything grown deathly quiet.

[022-172] Blenkiron’s squeal, as he knocked his wounded leg against a rock, made

[022-173] every man start.
