---
description: "Chapter 2 of A History of China"
id: ch02
label: "Section 2"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 2

[002-001] The picture of ancient and medieval China has also been entirely changed

[002-002] since it has been realized that the sources on which reliance has always

[002-003] been placed were not objective, but deliberately and emphatically

[002-004] represented a particular philosophy. The reports on the emperors and

[002-005] ministers of the earliest period are not historical at all, but served

[002-006] as examples of ideas of social policy or as glorifications of particular

[002-007] noble families. Myths such as we find to this day among China's

[002-008] neighbours were made into history; gods were made men and linked

[002-009] together by long family trees. We have been able to touch on all these

[002-010] things only briefly, and have had to dispense with any account of the

[002-011] complicated processes that have taken place here.

[002-012] The official dynastic histories apply to the course of Chinese history

[002-013] the criterion of Confucian ethics; for them history is a textbook of

[002-014] ethics, designed to show by means of examples how the man of high

[002-015] character should behave or not behave. We have to go deeper, and try to

[002-016] extract the historic truth from these records. Many specialized studies

[002-017] by Chinese, Japanese, and Western scholars on problems of Chinese

[002-018] history are now available and of assistance in this task. However, some

[002-019] Chinese writers still imagine that they are serving their country by yet

[002-020] again dishing up the old fables for the foreigner as history; and some

[002-021] Europeans, knowing no better or aiming at setting alongside the

[002-022] unedifying history of Europe the shining example of the conventional

[002-023] story of China, continue in the old groove. To this day, of course, we

[002-024] are far from having really worked through every period of Chinese

[002-025] history; there are long periods on which scarcely any work has yet been

[002-026] done. Thus the picture we are able to give today has no finality about

[002-027] it and will need many modifications. But the time has come for a new

[002-028] synthesis, so that criticism may proceed along the broadest possible

[002-029] front and push our knowledge further forward.

[002-030] The present work is intended for the general reader and not for the

[002-031] specialist, who will devote his attention to particular studies and to

[002-032] the original texts. In view of the wide scope of the work, I have had to

[002-033] confine myself to placing certain lines of thought in the foreground and

[002-034] paying less attention to others. I have devoted myself mainly to showing

[002-035] the main lines of China's social and cultural development down to the

[002-036] present day. But I have also been concerned not to leave out of account

[002-037] China's relations with her neighbours. Now that we have a better

[002-038] knowledge of China's neighbours, the Turks, Mongols, Tibetans, Tunguses,

[002-039] Tai, not confined to the narratives of Chinese, who always speak only of

[002-040] "barbarians", we are better able to realize how closely China has been

[002-041] associated with her neighbours from the first day of her history to the

[002-042] present time; how greatly she is indebted to them, and how much she has

[002-043] given them. We no longer see China as a great civilization surrounded by

[002-044] barbarians, but we study the Chinese coming to terms with their

[002-045] neighbours, who had civilizations of quite different types but

[002-046] nevertheless developed ones.

[002-047] It is usual to split up Chinese history under the various dynasties that

[002-048] have ruled China or parts thereof. The beginning or end of a dynasty

[002-049] does not always indicate the beginning or the end of a definite period

[002-050] of China's social or cultural development. We have tried to break

[002-051] China's history down into the three large periods--"Antiquity", "The

[002-052] Middle Ages", and "Modern Times". This does not mean that we compare

[002-053] these periods with periods of the same name in Western history although,

[002-054] naturally, we find some similarities with the development of society and

[002-055] culture in the West. Every attempt towards periodization is to some

[002-056] degree arbitrary: the beginning and end of the Middle Ages, for

[002-057] instance, cannot be fixed to a year, because development is a continuous

[002-058] process. To some degree any periodization is a matter of convenience,

[002-059] and it should be accepted as such.

[002-060] The account of Chinese history here given is based on a study of the

[002-061] original documents and excavations, and on a study of recent research

[002-062] done by Chinese, Japanese and Western scholars, including my own

[002-063] research. In many cases, these recent studies produced new data or

[002-064] arranged new data in a new way without an attempt to draw general

[002-065] conclusions. By putting such studies together, by fitting them into the

[002-066] pattern that already existed, new insights into social and cultural

[002-067] processes have been gained. The specialist in the field will, I hope,

[002-068] easily recognize the sources, primary or secondary, on which such new

[002-069] insights represented in this book are based. Brief notes are appended

[002-070] for each chapter; they indicate the most important works in English and

[002-071] provide the general reader with an opportunity of finding further

[002-072] information on the problems touched on. For the specialist brief hints

[002-073] to international research are given, mainly in cases in which different

[002-074] interpretations have been proposed.

[002-075] Chinese words are transcribed according to the Wade-Giles system with

[002-076] the exception of names for which already a popular way of transcription

[002-077] exists (such as Peking). Place names are written without hyphen, if they

[002-078] remain readable.

[002-079] THE EARLIEST TIMES

[002-080] Chapter One

[002-081] PREHISTORY

[002-082] 1 _Sources for the earliest history_

[002-083] Until recently we were dependent for the beginnings of Chinese history

[002-084] on the written Chinese tradition. According to these sources China's

[002-085] history began either about 4000 B.C. or about 2700 B.C. with a

[002-086] succession of wise emperors who "invented" the elements of a

[002-087] civilization, such as clothing, the preparation of food, marriage, and a

[002-088] state system; they instructed their people in these things, and so

[002-089] brought China, as early as in the third millennium B.C., to an

[002-090] astonishingly high cultural level. However, all we know of the origin of

[002-091] civilizations makes this of itself entirely improbable; no other

[002-092] civilization in the world originated in any such way. As time went on,

[002-093] Chinese historians found more and more to say about primeval times. All

[002-094] these narratives were collected in the great imperial history that

[002-095] appeared at the beginning of the Manchu epoch. That book was translated

[002-096] into French, and all the works written in Western languages until recent

[002-097] years on Chinese history and civilization have been based in the last

[002-098] resort on that translation.

[002-099] Modern research has not only demonstrated that all these accounts are

[002-100] inventions of a much later period, but has also shown _why_ such

[002-101] narratives were composed. The older historical sources make no mention

[002-102] of any rulers before 2200 B.C., no mention even of their names. The

[002-103] names of earlier rulers first appear in documents of about 400 B.C.; the

[002-104] deeds attributed to them and the dates assigned to them often do not

[002-105] appear until much later. Secondly, it was shown that the traditional

[002-106] chronology is wrong and another must be adopted, reducing all the dates

[002-107] for the more ancient history, before 900 B.C. Finally, all narratives

[002-108] and reports from China's earliest period have been dealt a mortal blow

[002-109] by modern archaeology, with the excavations of recent years. There was

[002-110] no trace of any high civilization in the third millennium B.C., and,

[002-111] indeed, we can only speak of a real "Chinese civilization" from 1300

[002-112] B.C. onward. The peoples of the China of that time had come from the

[002-113] most varied sources; from 1300 B.C. they underwent a common process of

[002-114] development that welded them into a new unity. In this sense and

[002-115] emphasizing the cultural aspects, we are justified in using from then on

[002-116] a new name, "Chinese", for the peoples of China. Those sections,

[002-117] however, of their ancestral populations who played no part in the

[002-118] subsequent cultural and racial fusion, we may fairly call "non-Chinese".

[002-119] This distinction answers the question that continually crops up, whether

[002-120] the Chinese are "autochthonons". They are autochthonons in the sense

[002-121] that they formed a unit in the Far East, in the geographical region of

[002-122] the present China, and were not immigrants from the Middle East.

[002-123] 2 _The Peking Man_

[002-124] Man makes his appearance in the Far East at a time when remains in other

[002-125] parts of the world are very rare and are disputed. He appears as the

[002-126] so-called "Peking Man", whose bones were found in caves of

[002-127] Chou-k'ou-tien south of Peking. The Peking Man is vastly different from

[002-128] the men of today, and forms a special branch of the human race, closely

[002-129] allied to the Pithecanthropus of Java. The formation of later races of

[002-130] mankind from these types has not yet been traced, if it occurred at all.

[002-131] Some anthropologists consider, however, that the Peking Man possessed

[002-132] already certain characteristics peculiar to the yellow race.

[002-133] The Peking Man lived in caves; no doubt he was a hunter, already in

[002-134] possession of very simple stone implements and also of the art of making

[002-135] fire. As none of the skeletons so far found are complete, it is assumed

[002-136] that he buried certain bones of the dead in different places from the

[002-137] rest. This burial custom, which is found among primitive peoples in

[002-138] other parts of the world, suggests the conclusion that the Peking Man

[002-139] already had religious notions. We have no knowledge yet of the length of

[002-140] time the Peking Man may have inhabited the Far East. His first traces

[002-141] are attributed to a million years ago, and he may have flourished in

[002-142] 500,000 B.C.

[002-143] 3 _The Palaeolithic Age_

[002-144] After the period of the Peking Man there comes a great gap in our

[002-145] knowledge. All that we know indicates that at the time of the Peking Man

[002-146] there must have been a warmer and especially a damper climate in North

[002-147] China and Inner Mongolia than today. Great areas of the Ordos region,

[002-148] now dry steppe, were traversed in that epoch by small rivers and lakes

[002-149] beside which men could live. There were elephants, rhinoceroses, extinct

[002-150] species of stag and bull, even tapirs and other wild animals. About

[002-151] 50,000 B.C. there lived by these lakes a hunting people whose stone

[002-152] implements (and a few of bone) have been found in many places. The

[002-153] implements are comparable in type with the palaeolithic implements of

[002-154] Europe (Mousterian type, and more rarely Aurignacian or even

[002-155] Magdalenian). They are not, however, exactly like the European

[002-156] implements, but have a character of their own. We do not yet know what

[002-157] the men of these communities looked like, because as yet no indisputable

[002-158] human remains have been found. All the stone implements have been found

[002-159] on the surface, where they have been brought to light by the wind as it

[002-160] swept away the loess. These stone-age communities seem to have lasted a

[002-161] considerable time and to have been spread not only over North China but

[002-162] over Mongolia and Manchuria. It must not be assumed that the stone age

[002-163] came to an end at the same time everywhere. Historical accounts have

[002-164] recorded, for instance, that stone implements were still in use in

[002-165] Manchuria and eastern Mongolia at a time when metal was known and used

[002-166] in western Mongolia and northern China. Our knowledge about the

[002-167] palaeolithic period of Central and South China is still extremely

[002-168] limited; we have to wait for more excavations before anything can be

[002-169] said. Certainly, many implements in this area were made of wood or more

[002-170] probably bamboo, such as we still find among the non-Chinese tribes of

[002-171] the south-west and of South-East Asia. Such implements, naturally, could

[002-172] not last until today.

[002-173] About 25,000 B.C. there appears in North China a new human type, found

[002-174] in upper layers in the same caves that sheltered Peking Man. This type

[002-175] is beyond doubt not Mongoloid, and may have been allied to the Ainu, a

[002-176] non-Mongol race still living in northern Japan. These, too, were a

[002-177] palaeolithic people, though some of their implements show technical

[002-178] advance. Later they disappear, probably because they were absorbed into

[002-179] various populations of central and northern Asia. Remains of them have

[002-180] been found in badly explored graves in northern Korea.

## c3.xhtml
