---
description: "Chapter 3 of A History of China"
id: ch03
label: "Section 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 3

[003-001] 4 _The Neolithic age_

[003-002] In the period that now followed, northern China must have gradually

[003-003] become arid, and the formation of loess seems to have steadily advanced.

[003-004] There is once more a great gap in our knowledge until, about 4000 B.C.,

[003-005] we can trace in North China a purely Mongoloid people with a neolithic

[003-006] culture. In place of hunters we find cattle breeders, who are even to

[003-007] some extent agriculturists as well. This may seem an astonishing

[003-008] statement for so early an age. It is a fact, however, that pure pastoral

[003-009] nomadism is exceptional, that normal pastoral nomads have always added a

[003-010] little farming to their cattle-breeding, in order to secure the needed

[003-011] additional food and above all fodder, for the winter.

[003-012] At this time, about 4000 B.C., the other parts of China come into view.

[003-013] The neolithic implements of the various regions of the Far East are far

[003-014] from being uniform; there are various separate cultures. In the

[003-015] north-west of China there is a system of cattle-breeding combined with

[003-016] agriculture, a distinguishing feature being the possession of finely

[003-017] polished axes of rectangular section, with a cutting edge. Farther east,

[003-018] in the north and reaching far to the south, is found a culture with axes

[003-019] of round or oval section. In the south and in the coastal region from

[003-020] Nanking to Tonking, Yünnan to Fukien, and reaching as far as the coasts

[003-021] of Korea and Japan, is a culture with so-called shoulder-axes. Szechwan

[003-022] and Yünnan represented a further independent culture.

[003-023] All these cultures were at first independent. Later the shoulder-axe

[003-024] culture penetrated as far as eastern India. Its people are known to

[003-025] philological research as Austroasiatics, who formed the original stock

[003-026] of the Australian aborigines; they survived in India as the Munda

[003-027] tribes, in Indo-China as the Mon-Khmer, and also remained in pockets on

[003-028] the islands of Indonesia and especially Melanesia. All these peoples had

[003-029] migrated from southern China. The peoples with the oval-axe culture are

[003-030] the so-called Papuan peoples in Melanesia; they, too, migrated from

[003-031] southern China, probably before the others. Both groups influenced the

[003-032] ancient Japanese culture. The rectangular-axe culture of north-west

[003-033] China spread widely, and moved southward, where the Austronesian peoples

[003-034] (from whom the Malays are descended) were its principal constituents,

[003-035] spreading that culture also to Japan.

[003-036] Thus we see here, in this period around 4000 B.C., an extensive mutual

[003-037] penetration of the various cultures all over the Far East, including

[003-038] Japan, which in the palaeolithic age was apparently without or almost

[003-039] without settlers.

[003-040] 5 _The eight principal prehistoric cultures_

[003-041] In the period roughly around 2500 B.C. the general historical view

[003-042] becomes much clearer. Thanks to a special method of working, making use

[003-043] of the ethnological sources available from later times together with the

[003-044] archaeological sources, much new knowledge has been gained in recent

[003-045] years. At this time there is still no trace of a Chinese realm; we find

[003-046] instead on Chinese soil a considerable number of separate local

[003-047] cultures, each developing on its own lines. The chief of these cultures,

[003-048] acquaintance with which is essential to a knowledge of the whole later

[003-049] development of the Far East, are as follows:

[003-050] (a) _The north-east culture_, centred in the present provinces of Hopei

[003-051] (in which Peking lies), Shantung, and southern Manchuria. The people of

[003-052] this culture were ancestors of the Tunguses, probably mixed with an

[003-053] element that is contained in the present-day Paleo-Siberian tribes.

[003-054] These men were mainly hunters, but probably soon developed a little

[003-055] primitive agriculture and made coarse, thick pottery with certain basic

[003-056] forms which were long preserved in subsequent Chinese pottery (for

[003-057] instance, a type of the so-called tripods). Later, pig-breeding became

[003-058] typical of this culture.

[003-059] (b) _The northern culture_ existed to the west of that culture, in the

[003-060] region of the present Chinese province of Shansi and in the province of

[003-061] Jehol in Inner Mongolia. These people had been hunters, but then became

[003-062] pastoral nomads, depending mainly on cattle. The people of this culture

[003-063] were the tribes later known as Mongols, the so-called proto-Mongols.

[003-064] Anthropologically they belonged, like the Tunguses, to the Mongol race.

[003-065] (c) The people of the culture farther west, the _north-west culture_,

[003-066] were not Mongols. They, too, were originally hunters, and later became a

[003-067] pastoral people, with a not inconsiderable agriculture (especially

[003-068] growing wheat and millet). The typical animal of this group soon became

[003-069] the horse. The horse seems to be the last of the great animals to be

[003-070] domesticated, and the date of its first occurrence in domesticated form

[003-071] in the Far East is not yet determined, but we can assume that by 2500

[003-072] B.C. this group was already in the possession of horses. The horse has

[003-073] always been a "luxury", a valuable animal which needed special care. For

[003-074] their economic needs, these tribes depended on other animals, probably

[003-075] sheep, goats, and cattle. The centre of this culture, so far as can be

[003-076] ascertained from Chinese sources, were the present provinces of Shensi

[003-077] and Kansu, but mainly only the plains. The people of this culture were

[003-078] most probably ancestors of the later Turkish peoples. It is not

[003-079] suggested, of course, that the original home of the Turks lay in the

[003-080] region of the Chinese provinces of Shensi and Kansu; one gains the

[003-081] impression, however, that this was a border region of the Turkish

[003-082] expansion; the Chinese documents concerning that period do not suffice

[003-083] to establish the centre of the Turkish territory.

[003-084] (d) In the _west_, in the present provinces of Szechwan and in all the

[003-085] mountain regions of the provinces of Kansu and Shensi, lived the

[003-086] ancestors of the Tibetan peoples as another separate culture. They were

[003-087] shepherds, generally wandering with their flocks of sheep and goats on

[003-088] the mountain heights.

[003-089] (e) In the _south_ we meet with four further cultures. One is very

[003-090] primitive, the Liao culture, the peoples of which are the Austroasiatics

[003-091] already mentioned. These are peoples who never developed beyond the

[003-092] stage of primitive hunters, some of whom were not even acquainted with

[003-093] the bow and arrow. Farther east is the Yao culture, an early

[003-094] Austronesian culture, the people of which also lived in the mountains,

[003-095] some as collectors and hunters, some going over to a simple type of

[003-096] agriculture (denshiring). They mingled later with the last great culture

[003-097] of the south, the Tai culture, distinguished by agriculture. The people

[003-098] lived in the valleys and mainly cultivated rice.

[003-099] The origin of rice is not yet known; according to some scholars, rice

[003-100] was first cultivated in the area of present Burma and was perhaps at

[003-101] first a perennial plant. Apart from the typical rice which needs much

[003-102] water, there were also some strains of dry rice which, however, did not

[003-103] gain much importance. The centre of this Tai culture may have been in

[003-104] the present provinces of Kuangtung and Kuanghsi. Today, their

[003-105] descendants form the principal components of the Tai in Thailand, the

[003-106] Shan in Burma and the Lao in Laos. Their immigration into the areas of

[003-107] the Shan States of Burma and into Thailand took place only in quite

[003-108] recent historical periods, probably not much earlier than A.D. 1000.

[003-109] Finally there arose from the mixture of the Yao with the Tai culture, at

[003-110] a rather later time, the Yüeh culture, another early Austronesian

[003-111] culture, which then spread over wide regions of Indonesia, and of which

[003-112] the axe of rectangular section, mentioned above, became typical.

[003-113] Thus, to sum up, we may say that, quite roughly, in the middle of the

[003-114] third millennium we meet in the _north_ and west of present-day China

[003-115] with a number of herdsmen cultures. In the _south_ there were a number

[003-116] of agrarian cultures, of which the Tai was the most powerful, becoming

[003-117] of most importance to the later China. We must assume that these

[003-118] cultures were as yet undifferentiated in their social composition, that

[003-119] is to say that as yet there was no distinct social stratification, but

[003-120] at most beginnings of class-formation, especially among the nomad

[003-121] herdsmen.

[003-122] [Illustration: Map 1. Regions of the principal local cultures in

[003-123] prehistoric times. _Local cultures of minor importance have not been

[003-124] shown_.]

[003-125] 6 _The Yang-shao culture_

[003-126] The various cultures here described gradually penetrated one another,

[003-127] especially at points where they met. Such a process does not yield a

[003-128] simple total of the cultural elements involved; any new combination

[003-129] produces entirely different conditions with corresponding new results

[003-130] which, in turn, represent the characteristics of the culture that

[003-131] supervenes. We can no longer follow this process of penetration in

[003-132] detail; it need not by any means have been always warlike. Conquest of

[003-133] one group by another was only one way of mutual cultural penetration. In

[003-134] other cases, a group which occupied the higher altitudes and practiced

[003-135] hunting or slash-and-burn agriculture came into closer contacts with

[003-136] another group in the valleys which practiced some form of higher

[003-137] agriculture; frequently, such contacts resulted in particular forms of

[003-138] division of labour in a unified and often stratified new form of

[003-139] society. Recent and present developments in South-East Asia present a

[003-140] number of examples for such changes. Increase of population is certainly

[003-141] one of the most important elements which lead to these developments. The

[003-142] result, as a rule, was a stratified society being made up of at least

[003-143] one privileged and one ruled stratum. Thus there came into existence

[003-144] around 2000 B.C. some new cultures, which are well known

[003-145] archaeologically. The most important of these are the Yang-shao culture

[003-146] in the west and the Lung-shan culture in the east. Our knowledge of both

[003-147] these cultures is of quite recent date and there are many enigmas still

[003-148] to be cleared up.

[003-149] The _Yang-shao culture_ takes its name from a prehistoric settlement in

[003-150] the west of the present province of Honan, where Swedish investigators

[003-151] discovered it. Typical of this culture is its wonderfully fine pottery,

[003-152] apparently used as gifts to the dead. It is painted in three colours,

[003-153] white, red, and black. The patterns are all stylized, designs copied

[003-154] from nature being rare. We are now able to divide this painted pottery

[003-155] into several sub-types of specific distribution, and we know that this

[003-156] style existed from _c_. 2200 B.C. on. In general, it tends to disappear

[003-157] as does painted pottery in other parts of the world with the beginning

[003-158] of urban civilization and the invention of writing. The typical

[003-159] Yang-shao culture seems to have come to an end around 1600 or 1500 B.C.

[003-160] It continued in some more remote areas, especially of Kansu, perhaps to

[003-161] about 700 B.C. Remnants of this painted pottery have been found over a

[003-162] wide area from Southern Manchuria, Hopei, Shansi, Honan, Shensi to

[003-163] Kansu; some pieces have also been discovered in Sinkiang. Thus far, it

[003-164] seems that it occurred mainly in the mountainous parts of North and

[003-165] North-West China. The people of this culture lived in villages near to

[003-166] the rivers and creeks. They had various forms of houses, including

[003-167] underground dwellings and animal enclosures. They practiced some

[003-168] agriculture; some authors believe that rice was already known to them.

[003-169] They also had domesticated animals. Their implements were of stone with

[003-170] rare specimens of bone. The axes were of the rectangular type. Metal was

[003-171] as yet unknown, but seems to have been introduced towards the end of the

[003-172] period. They buried their dead on the higher elevations, and here the

[003-173] painted pottery was found. For their daily life, they used predominantly

[003-174] a coarse grey pottery.

[003-175] After the discovery of this culture, its pottery was compared with the

[003-176] painted pottery of the West, and a number of resemblances were found,

[003-177] especially with the pottery of the Lower Danube basin and that of Anau,

[003-178] in Turkestan. Some authors claim that such resemblances are fortuitous

[003-179] and believe that the older layers of this culture are to be found in the

[003-180] eastern part of its distribution and only the later layers in the west.

[003-181] It is, they say, these later stages which show the strongest

[003-182] resemblances with the West. Other authors believe that the painted

[003-183] pottery came from the West where it occurs definitely earlier than in

[003-184] the Far East; some investigators went so far as to regard the

[003-185] Indo-Europeans as the parents of that civilization. As we find people

[003-186] who spoke an Indo-European language in the Far East in a later period,

[003-187] they tend to connect the spread of painted pottery with the spread of

[003-188] Indo-European-speaking groups. As most findings of painted pottery in

[003-189] the Far East do not stem from scientific excavations it is difficult to

[003-190] make any decision at this moment. We will have to wait for more and

[003-191] modern excavations.

## c4.xhtml
