---
description: "Chapter 4 of A History of China"
id: ch04
label: "Section 4"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 4

[004-001] From our knowledge of primeval settlement in West and North-West China

[004-002] we know, however, that Tibetan groups, probably mixed with Turkish

[004-003] elements, must have been the main inhabitants of the whole region in

[004-004] which this painted pottery existed. Whatever the origin of the painted

[004-005] pottery may be, it seems that people of these two groups were the main

[004-006] users of it. Most of the shapes of their pottery are not found in later

[004-007] Chinese pottery.

[004-008] 7 _The Lung-shan culture_

[004-009] While the Yang-shao culture flourished in the mountain regions of

[004-010] northern and western China around 2000 B.C., there came into existence

[004-011] in the plains of eastern China another culture, which is called the

[004-012] Lung-shan culture, from the scene of the principal discoveries.

[004-013] Lung-shan is in the province of Shantung, near Chinan-fu. This culture,

[004-014] discovered only about twenty-five years ago, is distinguished by a black

[004-015] pottery of exceptionally fine quality and by a similar absence of metal.

[004-016] The pottery has a polished appearance on the exterior; it is never

[004-017] painted, and mostly without decoration; at most it may have incised

[004-018] geometrical patterns. The forms of the vessels are the same as have

[004-019] remained typical of Chinese pottery, and of Far Eastern pottery in

[004-020] general. To that extent the Lung-shan culture may be described as one of

[004-021] the direct predecessors of the later Chinese civilization.

[004-022] As in the West, we find in Lung-shan much grey pottery out of which

[004-023] vessels for everyday use were produced. This simple corded or matted

[004-024] ware seems to be in connection with Tunguse people who lived in the

[004-025] north-east. The people of the Lung-shan culture lived on mounds produced

[004-026] by repeated building on the ruins of earlier settlements, as did the

[004-027] inhabitants of the "Tells" in the Near East. They were therefore a

[004-028] long-settled population of agriculturists. Their houses were of mud, and

[004-029] their villages were surrounded with mud walls. There are signs that

[004-030] their society was stratified. So far as is known at present, this

[004-031] culture was spread over the present provinces of Shantung, Kiangsu,

[004-032] Chekiang, and Anhui, and some specimens of its pottery went as far as

[004-033] Honan and Shansi, into the region of the painted pottery. This culture

[004-034] lasted in the east until about 1600 B.C., with clear evidence of rather

[004-035] longer duration only in the south. As black pottery of a similar

[004-036] character occurs also in the Near East, some authors believe that it has

[004-037] been introduced into the Far East by another migration (Pontic

[004-038] migration) following that migration which supposedly brought the painted

[004-039] pottery. This theory has not been generally accepted because of the fact

[004-040] that typical black pottery is limited to the plains of East China; if it

[004-041] had been brought in from the West, we should expect to find it in

[004-042] considerable amounts also in West China. Ordinary black pottery can be

[004-043] simply the result of a special temperature in the pottery kiln; such

[004-044] pottery can be found almost everywhere. The typical thin, fine black

[004-045] pottery of Lung-shan, however, is in the Far East an eastern element,

[004-046] and migrants would have had to pass through the area of the painted

[004-047] pottery people without leaving many traces and without pushing their

[004-048] predecessors to the East. On the basis of our present knowledge we

[004-049] assume that the peoples of the Lung-shan culture were probably of Tai

[004-050] and Yao stocks together with some Tunguses.

[004-051] Recently, a culture of mound-dwellers in Eastern China has been

[004-052] discovered, and a southern Chinese culture of people with impressed or

[004-053] stamped pottery. This latter seems to be connected with the Yüeh tribes.

[004-054] As yet, no further details are known.

[004-055] 8 _The first petty States in Shansi_

[004-056] At the time in which, according to archaeological research, the painted

[004-057] pottery flourished in West China, Chinese historical tradition has it

[004-058] that the semi-historical rulers, Yao and Shun, and the first official

[004-059] dynasty, the Hsia dynasty ruled over parts of China with a centre in

[004-060] southern Shansi. While we dismiss as political myths the Confucianist

[004-061] stories representing Yao and Shun as models of virtuous rulers, it may

[004-062] be that a small state existed in south-western Shansi under a chieftain

[004-063] Yao, and farther to the east another small state under a chieftain Shun,

[004-064] and that these states warred against each other until Yao's state was

[004-065] destroyed. These first small states may have existed around 2000 B.C.

[004-066] On the cultural scene we first find an important element of progress:

[004-067] bronze, in traces in the middle layers of the Yang-shao culture, about

[004-068] 1800 B.C.; that element had become very widespread by 1400 B.C. The

[004-069] forms of the oldest weapons and their ornamentation show similarities

[004-070] with weapons from Siberia; and both mythology and other indications

[004-071] suggest that the bronze came into China from the north and was not

[004-072] produced in China proper. Thus, from the present state of our knowledge,

[004-073] it seems most correct to say that the bronze was brought to the Far East

[004-074] through the agency of peoples living north of China, such as the Turkish

[004-075] tribes who in historical times were China's northern neighbours (or

[004-076] perhaps only individual families or clans, the so-called smith families

[004-077] with whom we meet later in Turkish tradition), reaching the Chinese

[004-078] either through these people themselves or through the further agency of

[004-079] Mongols. At first the forms of the weapons were left unaltered. The

[004-080] bronze vessels, however, which made their appearance about 1450 B.C. are

[004-081] entirely different from anything produced in other parts of Asia; their

[004-082] ornamentation shows, on the one hand, elements of the so-called "animal

[004-083] style" which is typical of the steppe people of the Ordos area and of

[004-084] Central Asia. But most of the other elements, especially the "filling"

[004-085] between stylized designs, is recognizably southern (probably of the Tai

[004-086] culture), no doubt first applied to wooden vessels and vessels made from

[004-087] gourds, and then transferred to bronze. This implies that the art of

[004-088] casting bronze very soon spread from North China, where it was first

[004-089] practiced by Turkish peoples, to the east and south, which quickly

[004-090] developed bronze industries of their own. There are few deposits of

[004-091] copper and tin in North China, while in South China both metals are

[004-092] plentiful and easily extracted, so that a trade in bronze from south to

[004-093] north soon set in.

[004-094] The origin of the Hsia state may have been a consequence of the progress

[004-095] due to bronze. The Chinese tradition speaks of the Hsia _dynasty_, but

[004-096] can say scarcely anything about it. The excavations, too, yield no

[004-097] clear conclusions, so that we can only say that it flourished at the

[004-098] time and in the area in which the painted pottery occurred, with a

[004-099] centre in south-west Shansi. We date this dynasty now somewhere between

[004-100] 2000 and 1600 B.C. and believe that it was an agrarian culture with

[004-101] bronze weapons and pottery vessels but without the knowledge of the art

[004-102] of writing.

[004-103] Chapter Two

[004-104] THE SHANG DYNASTY (_c_. 1600-1028 B.C.)

[004-105] 1 _Period, origin, material culture_

[004-106] About 1600 B.C. we come at last into the realm of history. Of the Shang

[004-107] dynasty, which now followed, we have knowledge both from later texts and

[004-108] from excavations and the documents they have brought to light. The Shang

[004-109] civilization, an evident off-shoot of the Lung-shan culture (Tai, Yao,

[004-110] and Tunguses), but also with elements of the Hsia culture (with Tibetan

[004-111] and Mongol and/or Turkish elements), was beyond doubt a high

[004-112] civilization. Of the origin of the Shang _State_ we have no details, nor

[004-113] do we know how the Hsia culture passed into the Shang culture.

[004-114] The central territory of the Shang realm lay in north-western Honan,

[004-115] alongside the Shansi mountains and extending into the plains. It was a

[004-116] peasant civilization with towns. One of these towns has been excavated.

[004-117] It adjoined the site of the present town of Anyang, in the province of

[004-118] Honan. The town, the Shang capital from _c_. 1300 to 1028 B.C., was

[004-119] probably surrounded by a mud wall, as were the settlements of the

[004-120] Lung-shan people. In the centre was what evidently was the ruler's

[004-121] palace. Round this were houses probably inhabited by artisans; for the

[004-122] artisans formed a sort of intermediate class, as dependents of the

[004-123] ruling class. From inscriptions we know that the Shang had, in addition

[004-124] to their capital, at least two other large cities and many smaller

[004-125] town-like settlements and villages. The rectangular houses were built in

[004-126] a style still found in Chinese houses, except that their front did not

[004-127] always face south as is now the general rule. The Shang buried their

[004-128] kings in large, subterranean, cross-shaped tombs outside the city, and

[004-129] many implements, animals and human sacrifices were buried together with

[004-130] them. The custom of large burial mounds, which later became typical of

[004-131] the Chou dynasty, did not yet exist.

[004-132] The Shang had sculptures in stone, an art which later more or less

[004-133] completely disappeared and which was resuscitated only in post-Christian

[004-134] times under the influence of Indian Buddhism. Yet, Shang culture cannot

[004-135] well be called a "megalithic" culture. Bronze implements and especially

[004-136] bronze vessels were cast in the town. We even know the trade marks of

[004-137] some famous bronze founders. The bronze weapons are still similar to

[004-138] those from Siberia, and are often ornamented in the so-called "animal

[004-139] style", which was used among all the nomad peoples between the Ordos

[004-140] region and Siberia until the beginning of the Christian era. On the

[004-141] other hand, the famous bronze vessels are more of southern type, and

[004-142] reveal an advanced technique that has scarcely been excelled since.

[004-143] There can be no doubt that the bronze vessels were used for religious

[004-144] service and not for everyday life. For everyday use there were

[004-145] earthenware vessels. Even in the middle of the first millennium B.C.,

[004-146] bronze was exceedingly dear, as we know from the records of prices.

[004-147] China has always suffered from scarcity of metal. For that reason metal

[004-148] was accumulated as capital, entailing a further rise in prices; when

[004-149] prices had reached a sufficient height, the stocks were thrown on the

[004-150] market and prices fell again. Later, when there was a metal coinage,

[004-151] this cycle of inflation and deflation became still clearer. The metal

[004-152] coinage was of its full nominal value, so that it was possible to coin

[004-153] money by melting down bronze implements. As the money in circulation was

[004-154] increased in this way, the value of the currency fell. Then it paid to

[004-155] turn coin into metal implements. This once more reduced the money in

[004-156] circulation and increased the value of the remaining coinage. Thus

[004-157] through the whole course of Chinese history the scarcity of metal and

[004-158] insufficiency of production of metal continually produced extensive

[004-159] fluctuations of the stocks and the value of metal, amounting virtually

[004-160] to an economic law in China. Consequently metal implements were never

[004-161] universally in use, and vessels were always of earthenware, with the

[004-162] further result of the early invention of porcelain. Porcelain vessels

[004-163] have many of the qualities of metal ones, but are cheaper.

[004-164] The earthenware vessels used in this period are in many cases already

[004-165] very near to porcelain: there was a pottery of a brilliant white,

[004-166] lacking only the glaze which would have made it into porcelain. Patterns

[004-167] were stamped on the surface, often resembling the patterns on bronze

[004-168] articles. This ware was used only for formal, ceremonial purposes. For

[004-169] daily use there was also a perfectly simple grey pottery.

[004-170] Silk was already in use at this time. The invention of sericulture must

[004-171] therefore have dated from very ancient times in China. It undoubtedly

[004-172] originated in the south of China, and at first not only the threads

[004-173] spun by the silkworm but those made by other caterpillars were also

[004-174] used. The remains of silk fabrics that have been found show already an

[004-175] advanced weaving technique. In addition to silk, various plant fibres,

[004-176] such as hemp, were in use. Woollen fabrics do not seem to have been yet

[004-177] used.

[004-178] The Shang were agriculturists, but their implements were still rather

[004-179] primitive. There was no real plough yet; hoes and hoe-like implements

[004-180] were used, and the grain, mainly different kinds of millet and some

[004-181] wheat, was harvested with sickles. The materials, from which these

[004-182] implements were made, were mainly wood and stone; bronze was still too

[004-183] expensive to be utilized by the ordinary farmer. As a great number of

[004-184] vessels for wine in many different forms have been excavated, we can

[004-185] assume that wine, made from special kinds of millet, was a popular

[004-186] drink.

## c5.xhtml
