---
description: "Chapter 5 of A History of China"
id: ch05
label: "Section 5"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 5

[005-001] The Shang state had its centre in northern Honan, north of the Yellow

[005-002] river. At various times, different towns were made into the capital

[005-003] city; Yin-ch'ü, their last capital and the only one which has been

[005-004] excavated, was their sixth capital. We do not know why the capitals were

[005-005] removed to new locations; it is possible that floods were one of the

[005-006] main reasons. The area under more or less organized Shang control

[005-007] comprised towards the end of the dynasty the present provinces of Honan,

[005-008] western Shantung, southern Hopei, central and south Shansi, east Shensi,

[005-009] parts of Kiangsu and Anhui. We can only roughly estimate the size of the

[005-010] population of the Shang state. Late texts say that at the time of the

[005-011] annihilation of the dynasty, some 3.1 million free men and 1.1 million

[005-012] serfs were captured by the conquerors; this would indicate a population

[005-013] of at least some 4-5 millions. This seems a possible number, if we

[005-014] consider that an inscription of the tenth century B.C. which reports

[005-015] about an ordinary war against a small and unimportant western neighbour,

[005-016] speaks of 13,081 free men and 4,812 serfs taken as prisoners.

[005-017] Inscriptions mention many neighbours of the Shang with whom they were in

[005-018] more or less continuous state of war. Many of these neighbours can now

[005-019] be identified. We know that Shansi at that time was inhabited by Ch'iang

[005-020] tribes, belonging to the Tibetan culture, as well as by Ti tribes,

[005-021] belonging to the northern culture, and by Hsien-yün and other tribes,

[005-022] belonging to the north-western culture; the centre of the Ch'iang tribes

[005-023] was more in the south-west of Shansi and in Shensi. Some of these tribes

[005-024] definitely once formed a part of the earlier Hsia state. The

[005-025] identification of the eastern neighbours of the Shang presents more

[005-026] difficulties. We might regard them as representatives of the Tai and Yao

[005-027] cultures.

[005-028] 2 _Writing and Religion_

[005-029] Not only the material but also the intellectual level attained in the

[005-030] Shang period was very high. We meet for the first time with

[005-031] writing--much later than in the Middle East and in India. Chinese

[005-032] scholars have succeeded in deciphering some of the documents discovered,

[005-033] so that we are able to learn a great deal from them. The writing is a

[005-034] rudimentary form of the present-day Chinese script, and like it a

[005-035] pictorial writing, but also makes use, as today, of many phonetic signs.

[005-036] There were, however, a good many characters that no longer exist, and

[005-037] many now used are absent. There were already more than 3,000 characters

[005-038] in use of which some 1,000 can now be read. (Today newspapers use some

[005-039] 3,000 characters; scholars have command of up to 8,000; the whole of

[005-040] Chinese literature, ancient and modern, comprises some 50,000

[005-041] characters.) With these 3,000 characters the Chinese of the Shang period

[005-042] were able to express themselves well.

[005-043] The still existing fragments of writing of this period are found almost

[005-044] exclusively on tortoiseshells or on other bony surfaces, and they

[005-045] represent oracles. As early as in the Lung-shan culture there was

[005-046] divination by means of "oracle bones", at first without written

[005-047] characters. In the earliest period any bones of animals (especially

[005-048] shoulder-bones) were used; later only tortoiseshell. For the purpose of

[005-049] the oracle a depression was burnt in the shell so that cracks were

[005-050] formed on the other side, and the future was foretold from their

[005-051] direction. Subsequently particular questions were scratched on the

[005-052] shells, and the answers to them; these are the documents that have come

[005-053] down to us. In Anyang tens of thousands of these oracle bones with

[005-054] inscriptions have been found. The custom of asking the oracle and of

[005-055] writing the answers on the bones spread over the borders of the Shang

[005-056] state and continued in some areas after the end of the dynasty.

[005-057] The bronze vessels of later times often bear long inscriptions, but

[005-058] those of the Shang period have only very brief texts. On the other hand,

[005-059] they are ornamented with pictures, as yet largely unintelligible, of

[005-060] countless deities, especially in the shape of animals or birds--pictures

[005-061] that demand interpretation. The principal form on these bronzes is that

[005-062] of the so-called T'ao-t'ieh, a hybrid with the head of a water-buffalo

[005-063] and tiger's teeth.

[005-064] The Shang period had a religion with many nature deities, especially

[005-065] deities of fertility. There was no systematized pantheon, different

[005-066] deities being revered in each locality, often under the most varied

[005-067] names. These various deities were, however, similar in character, and

[005-068] later it occurred often that many of them were combined by the priests

[005-069] into a single god. The composite deities thus formed were officially

[005-070] worshipped. Their primeval forms lived on, however, especially in the

[005-071] villages, many centuries longer than the Shang dynasty. The sacrifices

[005-072] associated with them became popular festivals, and so these gods or

[005-073] their successors were saved from oblivion; some of them have lived on in

[005-074] popular religion to the present day. The supreme god of the official

[005-075] worship was called Shang Ti; he was a god of vegetation who guided all

[005-076] growth and birth and was later conceived as a forefather of the races of

[005-077] mankind. The earth was represented as a mother goddess, who bore the

[005-078] plants and animals procreated by Shang Ti. In some parts of the Shang

[005-079] realm the two were conceived as a married couple who later were parted

[005-080] by one of their children. The husband went to heaven, and the rain is

[005-081] the male seed that creates life on earth. In other regions it was

[005-082] supposed that in the beginning of the world there was a world-egg, out

[005-083] of which a primeval god came, whose body was represented by the earth:

[005-084] his hair formed the plants, and his limbs the mountains and valleys.

[005-085] Every considerable mountain was also itself a god and, similarly, the

[005-086] river god, the thunder god, cloud, lightning, and wind gods, and many

[005-087] others were worshipped.

[005-088] In order to promote the fertility of the earth, it was believed that

[005-089] sacrifices must be offered to the gods. Consequently, in the Shang realm

[005-090] and the regions surrounding it there were many sorts of human

[005-091] sacrifices; often the victims were prisoners of war. One gains the

[005-092] impression that many wars were conducted not as wars of conquest but

[005-093] only for the purpose of capturing prisoners, although the area under

[005-094] Shang control gradually increased towards the west and the south-east, a

[005-095] fact demonstrating the interest in conquest. In some regions men lurked

[005-096] in the spring for people from other villages; they slew them, sacrificed

[005-097] them to the earth, and distributed portions of the flesh of the

[005-098] sacrifice to the various owners of fields, who buried them. At a later

[005-099] time all human sacrifices were prohibited, but we have reports down to

[005-100] the eleventh century A.D., and even later, that such sacrifices were

[005-101] offered secretly in certain regions of central China. In other regions a

[005-102] great boat festival was held in the spring, to which many crews came

[005-103] crowded in long narrow boats. At least one of the boats had to capsize;

[005-104] the people who were thus drowned were a sacrifice to the deities of

[005-105] fertility. This festival has maintained its fundamental character to

[005-106] this day, in spite of various changes. The same is true of other

[005-107] festivals, customs, and conceptions, vestiges of which are contained at

[005-108] least in folklore.

[005-109] In addition to the nature deities which were implored to give fertility,

[005-110] to send rain, or to prevent floods and storms, the Shang also

[005-111] worshipped deceased rulers and even dead ministers as a kind of

[005-112] intermediaries between man and the highest deity, Shang Ti. This

[005-113] practice may be regarded as the forerunner of "ancestral worship" which

[005-114] became so typical of later China.

[005-115] 3 _Transition to feudalism_

[005-116] At the head of the Shang state was a king, posthumously called a "Ti",

[005-117] the same word as in the name of the supreme god. We have found on bones

[005-118] the names of all the rulers of this dynasty and even some of their

[005-119] pre-dynastic ancestors. These names can be brought into agreement with

[005-120] lists of rulers found in the ancient Chinese literature. The ruler seems

[005-121] to have been a high priest, too; and around him were many other priests.

[005-122] We know some of them now so well from the inscriptions that their

[005-123] biographies could be written. The king seems to have had some kind of

[005-124] bureaucracy. There were "ch'en", officials who served the ruler

[005-125] personally, as well as scribes and military officials. The basic army

[005-126] organization was in units of one hundred men which were combined as

[005-127] "right", "left" and "central" units into an army of 300 men. But it

[005-128] seems that the central power did not extend very far. In the more

[005-129] distant parts of the realm were more or less independent lords, who

[005-130] recognized the ruler only as their supreme lord and religious leader. We

[005-131] may describe this as an early, loose form of the feudal system, although

[005-132] the main element of real feudalism was still absent. The main

[005-133] obligations of these lords were to send tributes of grain, to

[005-134] participate with their soldiers in the wars, to send tortoise shells to

[005-135] the capital to be used there for oracles, and to send occasionally

[005-136] cattle and horses. There were some thirty such dependent states.

[005-137] Although we do not know much about the general population, we know that

[005-138] the rulers had a patrilinear system of inheritance. After the death of

[005-139] the ruler his brothers followed him on the throne, the older brothers

[005-140] first. After the death of all brothers, the sons of older or younger

[005-141] brothers became rulers. No preference was shown to the son of the oldest

[005-142] brother, and no preference between sons of main or of secondary wives is

[005-143] recognizable. Thus, the Shang patrilinear system was much less extreme

[005-144] than the later system. Moreover, the deceased wives of the rulers played

[005-145] a great role in the cult, another element which later disappeared. From

[005-146] these facts and from the general structure of Shang religion it has been

[005-147] concluded that there was a strong matrilinear strain in Shang culture.

[005-148] Although this cannot be proved, it seems quite plausible because we know

[005-149] of matrilinear societies in the South of China at later times.

[005-150] About the middle of the Shang period there occurred interesting

[005-151] changes, probably under the influence of nomad peoples from the

[005-152] north-west.

[005-153] In religion there appears some evidence of star-worship. The deities

[005-154] seem to have been conceived as a kind of celestial court of Shang Ti,

[005-155] as his "officials". In the field of material culture, horse-breeding

[005-156] becomes more and more evident. Some authors believe that the art of

[005-157] riding was already known in late Shang times, although it was certainly

[005-158] not yet so highly developed that cavalry units could be used in war.

[005-159] With horse-breeding the two-wheeled light war chariot makes its

[005-160] appearance. The wheel was already known in earlier times in the form of

[005-161] the potter's wheel. Recent excavations have brought to light burials in

[005-162] which up to eighteen chariots with two or four horses were found

[005-163] together with the owners of the chariots. The cart is not a Chinese

[005-164] invention but came from the north, possibly from Turkish peoples. It has

[005-165] been contended that it was connected with the war chariot of the Near

[005-166] East: shortly before the Shang period there had been vast upheavals in

[005-167] western Asia, mainly in connection with the expansion of peoples who

[005-168] spoke Indo-European languages (Hittites, etc.) and who became successful

[005-169] through the use of quick, light, two-wheeled war-chariots. It is

[005-170] possible, but cannot be proved, that the war-chariot spread

[005-171] through Central Asia in connection with the spread of such

[005-172] Indo-European-speaking groups or by the intermediary of Turkish tribes.

[005-173] We have some reasons to believe that the first Indo-European-speaking

[005-174] groups arrived in the Far East in the middle of the second millennium

[005-175] B.C. Some authors even connect the Hsia with these groups. In any case,

[005-176] the maximal distribution of these people seems to have been to the

[005-177] western borders of the Shang state. As in Western Asia, a Shang-time

[005-178] chariot was manned by three men: the warrior who was a nobleman, his

[005-179] driver, and his servant who handed him arrows or other weapons when

[005-180] needed. There developed a quite close relationship between the nobleman

[005-181] and his chariot-driver. The chariot was a valuable object, manufactured

[005-182] by specialists; horses were always expensive and rare in China, and in

[005-183] many periods of Chinese history horses were directly imported from

[005-184] nomadic tribes in the North or West. Thus, the possessors of vehicles

[005-185] formed a privileged class in the Shang realm; they became a sort of

[005-186] nobility, and the social organization began to move in the direction of

[005-187] feudalism. One of the main sports of the noblemen in this period, in

[005-188] addition to warfare, was hunting. The Shang had their special hunting

[005-189] grounds south of the mountains which surround Shansi province, along the

[005-190] slopes of the T'ai-hang mountain range, and south to the shores of the

[005-191] Yellow river. Here, there were still forests and swamps in Shang time,

[005-192] and boars, deer, buffaloes and other animals, as well as occasional

[005-193] rhinoceros and elephants, were hunted. None of these wild animals was

[005-194] used as a sacrifice; all sacrificial animals, such as cattle, pigs,

[005-195] etc., were domesticated animals.

## c6.xhtml
