---
description: "Chapter 6 of A History of China"
id: ch06
label: "Section 6"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 6

[006-001] Below the nobility we find large numbers of dependent people; modern

[006-002] Chinese scholars call them frequently "slaves" and speak of a "slave

[006-003] society". There is no doubt that at least some farmers were "free

[006-004] farmers"; others were what we might call "serfs": families in hereditary

[006-005] group dependence upon some noble families and working on land which the

[006-006] noble families regarded as theirs. Families of artisans and craftsmen

[006-007] also were hereditary servants of noble families--a type of social

[006-008] organization which has its parallels in ancient Japan and in later India

[006-009] and other parts of the world. There were also real slaves: persons who

[006-010] were the personal property of noblemen. The independent states around

[006-011] the Shang state also had serfs. When the Shang captured neighbouring

[006-012] states, they resettled the captured foreign aristocracy by attaching

[006-013] them as a group to their own noblemen. The captured serfs remained under

[006-014] their masters and shared their fate. The same system was later practiced

[006-015] by the Chou after their conquest of the Shang state.

[006-016] The conquests of late Shang added more territory to the realm than could

[006-017] be coped with by the primitive communications of the time. When the last

[006-018] ruler of Shang made his big war which lasted 260 days against the tribes

[006-019] in the south-east, rebellions broke out which lead to the end of the

[006-020] dynasty, about 1028 B.C. according to the new chronology (1122 B.C. old

[006-021] chronology).

[006-022] ANTIQUITY

[006-023] Chapter Three

[006-024] THE CHOU DYNASTY (_c_. 1028-257 B.C.)

[006-025] 1 _Cultural origin of the Chou and end of the Shang dynasty_

[006-026] The Shang culture still lacked certain things that were to become

[006-027] typical of "Chinese" civilization. The family system was not yet the

[006-028] strong patriarchal system of the later Chinese. The religion, too, in

[006-029] spite of certain other influences, was still a religion of agrarian

[006-030] fertility. And although Shang society was strongly stratified and showed

[006-031] some tendencies to develop a feudal system, feudalism was still very

[006-032] primitive. Although the Shang script was the precursor of later Chinese

[006-033] script, it seemed to have contained many words which later disappeared,

[006-034] and we are not sure whether Shang language was the same as the language

[006-035] of Chou time. With the Chou period, however, we enter a period in which

[006-036] everything which was later regarded as typically "Chinese" began to

[006-037] emerge.

[006-038] During the time of the Shang dynasty the Chou formed a small realm in

[006-039] the west, at first in central Shensi, an area which even in much later

[006-040] times was the home of many "non-Chinese" tribes. Before the beginning of

[006-041] the eleventh century B.C. they must have pushed into eastern Shensi, due

[006-042] to pressures of other tribes which may have belonged to the Turkish

[006-043] ethnic group. However, it is also possible that their movement was

[006-044] connected with pressures from Indo-European groups. An analysis of their

[006-045] tribal composition at the time of the conquest seems to indicate that

[006-046] the ruling house of the Chou was related to the Turkish group, and that

[006-047] the population consisted mainly of Turks and Tibetans. Their culture was

[006-048] closely related to that of Yang-shao, the previously described

[006-049] painted-pottery culture, with, of course, the progress brought by time.

[006-050] They had bronze weapons and, especially, the war-chariot. Their eastward

[006-051] migration, however, brought them within the zone of the Shang culture,

[006-052] by which they were strongly influenced, so that the Chou culture lost

[006-053] more and more of its original character and increasingly resembled the

[006-054] Shang culture. The Chou were also brought into the political sphere of

[006-055] the Shang, as shown by the fact that marriages took place between the

[006-056] ruling houses of Shang and Chou, until the Chou state became nominally

[006-057] dependent on the Shang state in the form of a dependency with special

[006-058] prerogatives. Meanwhile the power of the Chou state steadily grew, while

[006-059] that of the Shang state diminished more and more through the disloyalty

[006-060] of its feudatories and through wars in the East. Finally, about 1028

[006-061] B.C., the Chou ruler, named Wu Wang ("the martial king"), crossed his

[006-062] eastern frontier and pushed into central Honan. His army was formed by

[006-063] an alliance between various tribes, in the same way as happened again

[006-064] and again in the building up of the armies of the rulers of the steppes.

[006-065] Wu Wang forced a passage across the Yellow River and annihilated the

[006-066] Shang army. He pursued its vestiges as far as the capital, captured the

[006-067] last emperor of the Shang, and killed him. Thus was the Chou dynasty

[006-068] founded, and with it we begin the actual history of China. The Chou

[006-069] brought to the Shang culture strong elements of Turkish and also Tibetan

[006-070] culture, which were needed for the release of such forces as could

[006-071] create a new empire and maintain it through thousands of years as a

[006-072] cultural and, generally, also a political unit.

[006-073] 2 _Feudalism in the new empire_

[006-074] A natural result of the situation thus produced was the turning of the

[006-075] country into a feudal state. The conquerors were an alien minority, so

[006-076] that they had to march out and spread over the whole country. Moreover,

[006-077] the allied tribal chieftains expected to be rewarded. The territory to

[006-078] be governed was enormous, but the communications in northern China at

[006-079] that time were similar to those still existing not long ago in southern

[006-080] China--narrow footpaths from one settlement to another. It is very

[006-081] difficult to build roads in the loess of northern China; and the

[006-082] war-chariots that required roads had only just been introduced. Under

[006-083] such conditions, the simplest way of administering the empire was to

[006-084] establish garrisons of the invading tribes in the various parts of the

[006-085] country under the command of their chieftains. Thus separate regions of

[006-086] the country were distributed as fiefs. If a former subject of the Shang

[006-087] surrendered betimes with the territory under his rule, or if there was

[006-088] one who could not be overcome by force, the Chou recognized him as a

[006-089] feudal lord.

[006-090] We find in the early Chou time the typical signs of true feudalism:

[006-091] fiefs were given in a ceremony in which symbolically a piece of earth

[006-092] was handed over to the new fiefholder, and his instalment, his rights

[006-093] and obligations were inscribed in a "charter". Most of the fiefholders

[006-094] were members of the Chou ruling family or members of the clan to which

[006-095] this family belonged; other fiefs were given to heads of the allied

[006-096] tribes. The fiefholder (feudal lord) regarded the land of his fief, as

[006-097] far as he and his clan actually used it, as "clan" land; parts of this

[006-098] land he gave to members of his own branch-clan for their use without

[006-099] transferring rights of property, thus creating new sub-fiefs and

[006-100] sub-lords. In much later times the concept of landed property of a

[006-101] _family_ developed, and the whole concept of "clan" disappeared. By 500

[006-102] B.C., most feudal lords had retained only a dim memory that they

[006-103] originally belonged to the Chi clan of the Chou or to one of the few

[006-104] other original clans, and their so-called sub-lords felt themselves as

[006-105] members of independent noble families. Slowly, then, the family names of

[006-106] later China began to develop, but it took many centuries until, at the

[006-107] time of the Han Dynasty, all citizens (slaves excluded) had accepted

[006-108] family names. Then, reversely, families grew again into new clans.

[006-109] Thus we have this picture of the early Chou state: the imperial central

[006-110] power established in Shensi, near the present Sian; over a thousand

[006-111] feudal states, great and small, often consisting only of a small

[006-112] garrison, or sometimes a more considerable one, with the former

[006-113] chieftain as feudal lord over it. Around these garrisons the old

[006-114] population lived on, in the north the Shang population, farther east and

[006-115] south various other peoples and cultures. The conquerors' garrisons were

[006-116] like islands in a sea. Most of them formed new towns, walled, with a

[006-117] rectangular plan and central crossroads, similar to the European towns

[006-118] subsequently formed out of Roman encampments. This town plan has been

[006-119] preserved to the present day.

[006-120] This upper class in the garrisons formed the nobility; it was sharply

[006-121] divided from the indigenous population around the towns The conquerors

[006-122] called the population "the black-haired people", and themselves "the

[006-123] hundred families". The rest of the town populations consisted often of

[006-124] urban Shang people: Shang noble families together with their bondsmen

[006-125] and serfs had been given to Chou fiefholders. Such forced resettlements

[006-126] of whole populations have remained typical even for much later periods.

[006-127] By this method new cities were provided with urban, refined people and,

[006-128] most important, with skilled craftsmen and businessmen who assisted in

[006-129] building the cities and in keeping them alive. Some scholars believe

[006-130] that many resettled Shang urbanites either were or became businessmen;

[006-131] incidentally, the same word "Shang" means "merchant", up to the present

[006-132] time. The people of the Shang capital lived on and even attempted a

[006-133] revolt in collaboration with some Chou people. The Chou rulers

[006-134] suppressed this revolt, and then transferred a large part of this

[006-135] population to Loyang. They were settled there in a separate community,

[006-136] and vestiges of the Shang population were still to be found there in the

[006-137] fifth century A.D.: they were entirely impoverished potters, still

[006-138] making vessels in the old style.

[006-139] 3 _Fusion of Chou and Shang_

[006-140] The conquerors brought with them, for their own purposes to begin with,

[006-141] their rigid patriarchate in the family system and their cult of Heaven

[006-142] (t'ien), in which the worship of sun and stars took the principal place;

[006-143] a religion most closely related to that of the Turkish peoples and

[006-144] derived from them. Some of the Shang popular deities, however, were

[006-145] admitted into the official Heaven-worship. Popular deities became

[006-146] "feudal lords" under the Heaven-god. The Shang conceptions of the soul

[006-147] were also admitted into the Chou religion: the human body housed two

[006-148] souls, the personality-soul and the life-soul. Death meant the

[006-149] separation of the souls from the body, the life-soul also slowly dying.

[006-150] The personality-soul, however, could move about freely and lived as long

[006-151] as there were people who remembered it and kept it from hunger by means

[006-152] of sacrifices. The Chou systematized this idea and made it into the

[006-153] ancestor-worship that has endured down to the present time.

[006-154] The Chou officially abolished human sacrifices, especially since, as

[006-155] former pastoralists, they knew of better means of employing prisoners of

[006-156] war than did the more agrarian Shang. The Chou used Shang and other

[006-157] slaves as domestic servants for their numerous nobility, and Shang serfs

[006-158] as farm labourers on their estates. They seem to have regarded the land

[006-159] under their control as "state land" and all farmers as "serfs". A slave,

[006-160] here, must be defined as an individual, a piece of property, who was

[006-161] excluded from membership in human society but, in later legal texts, was

[006-162] included under domestic animals and immobile property, while serfs as a

[006-163] class depended upon another class and had certain rights, at least the

[006-164] right to work on the land. They could change their masters if the land

[006-165] changed its master, but they could not legally be sold individually.

[006-166] Thus, the following, still rather hypothetical, picture of the land

[006-167] system of the early Chou time emerges: around the walled towns of the

[006-168] feudal lords and sub-lords, always in the plains, was "state land" which

[006-169] produced millet and more and more wheat. Cultivation was still largely

[006-170] "shifting", so that the serfs in groups cultivated more or less

[006-171] standardized plots for a year or more and then shifted to other plots.

[006-172] During the growing season they lived in huts on the fields; during the

[006-173] winter in the towns in adobe houses. In this manner the yearly life

[006-174] cycle was divided into two different periods. The produce of the serfs

[006-175] supplied the lords, their dependants and the farmers themselves.

[006-176] Whenever the lord found it necessary, the serfs had to perform also

[006-177] other services for the lord. Farther away from the towns were the

[006-178] villages of the "natives", nominally also subjects of the lord. In most

[006-179] parts of eastern China, these, too, were agriculturists. They

[006-180] acknowledged their dependence by sending "gifts" to the lord in the

[006-181] town. Later these gifts became institutionalized and turned into a form

[006-182] of tax. The lord's serfs, on the other hand, tended to settle near the

[006-183] fields in villages of their own because, with growing urban population,

[006-184] the distances from the town to many of the fields became too great. It

[006-185] was also at this time of new settlements that a more intensive

[006-186] cultivation with a fallow system began. At latest from the sixth century

[006-187] B.C. on, the distinctions between both land systems became unclear; and

[006-188] the pure serf-cultivation, called by the old texts the "well-field

[006-189] system" because eight cultivating families used one common well,

[006-190] disappeared in practice.

## c7.xhtml
