---
description: "Chapter 7 of A History of China"
id: ch07
label: "Section 7"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 7

[007-001] The actual structure of early Chou administration is difficult to

[007-002] ascertain. The "Duke of Chou", brother of the first ruler, Wu Wang,

[007-003] later regent during the minority of Wu Wang's son, and certainly one of

[007-004] the most influential persons of this time, was the alleged creator of

[007-005] the book _Chou-li_ which contains a detailed table of the bureaucracy of

[007-006] the country. However, we know now from inscriptions that the bureaucracy

[007-007] at the beginning of the Chou period was not much more developed than in

[007-008] late Shang time. The _Chou-li_ gave an ideal picture of a bureaucratic

[007-009] state, probably abstracted from actual conditions in feudal states

[007-010] several centuries later.

[007-011] The Chou capital, at Sian, was a twin city. In one part lived the

[007-012] master-race of the Chou with the imperial court, in the other the

[007-013] subjugated population. At the same time, as previously mentioned, the

[007-014] Chou built a second capital, Loyang, in the present province of Honan.

[007-015] Loyang was just in the middle of the new state, and for the purposes of

[007-016] Heaven-worship it was regarded as the centre of the universe, where it

[007-017] was essential that the emperor should reside. Loyang was another twin

[007-018] city: in one part were the rulers' administrative buildings, in the

[007-019] other the transferred population of the Shang capital, probably artisans

[007-020] for the most part. The valuable artisans seem all to have been taken

[007-021] over from the Shang, for the bronze vessels of the early Chou age are

[007-022] virtually identical with those of the Shang age. The shapes of the

[007-023] houses also remained unaltered, and probably also the clothing, though

[007-024] the Chou brought with them the novelties of felt and woollen fabrics,

[007-025] old possessions of their earlier period. The only fundamental material

[007-026] change was in the form of the graves: in the Shang age house-like tombs

[007-027] were built underground; now great tumuli were constructed in the fashion

[007-028] preferred by all steppe peoples.

[007-029] One professional class was severely hit by the changed

[007-030] circumstances--the Shang priesthood. The Chou had no priests. As with

[007-031] all the races of the steppes, the head of the family himself performed

[007-032] the religious rites. Beyond this there were only shamans for certain

[007-033] purposes of magic. And very soon Heaven-worship was combined with the

[007-034] family system, the ruler being declared to be the Son of Heaven; the

[007-035] mutual relations within the family were thus extended to the religious

[007-036] relations with the deity. If, however, the god of Heaven is the father

[007-037] of the ruler, the ruler as his son himself offers sacrifice, and so the

[007-038] priest becomes superfluous. Thus the priests became "unemployed". Some

[007-039] of them changed their profession. They were the only people who could

[007-040] read and write, and as an administrative system was necessary they

[007-041] obtained employment as scribes. Others withdrew to their villages and

[007-042] became village priests. They organized the religious festivals in the

[007-043] village, carried out the ceremonies connected with family events, and

[007-044] even conducted the exorcism of evil spirits with shamanistic dances;

[007-045] they took charge, in short, of everything connected with customary

[007-046] observances and morality. The Chou lords were great respecters of

[007-047] propriety. The Shang culture had, indeed, been a high one with an

[007-048] ancient and highly developed moral system, and the Chou as rough

[007-049] conquerors must have been impressed by the ancient forms and tried to

[007-050] imitate them. In addition, they had in their religion of Heaven a

[007-051] conception of the existence of mutual relations between Heaven and

[007-052] Earth: all that went on in the skies had an influence on earth, and vice

[007-053] versa. Thus, if any ceremony was "wrongly" performed, it had an evil

[007-054] effect on Heaven--there would be no rain, or the cold weather would

[007-055] arrive too soon, or some such misfortune would come. It was therefore of

[007-056] great importance that everything should be done "correctly". Hence the

[007-057] Chou rulers were glad to call in the old priests as performers of

[007-058] ceremonies and teachers of morality similar to the ancient Indian rulers

[007-059] who needed the Brahmans for the correct performance of all rites. There

[007-060] thus came into existence in the early Chou empire a new social group,

[007-061] later called "scholars", men who were not regarded as belonging to the

[007-062] lower class represented by the subjugated population but were not

[007-063] included in the nobility; men who were not productively employed but

[007-064] belonged to a sort of independent profession. They became of very great

[007-065] importance in later centuries.

[007-066] In the first centuries of the Chou dynasty the ruling house steadily

[007-067] lost power. Some of the emperors proved weak, or were killed at war;

[007-068] above all, the empire was too big and its administration too

[007-069] slow-moving. The feudal lords and nobles were occupied with their own

[007-070] problems in securing the submission of the surrounding villages to their

[007-071] garrisons and in governing them; they soon paid little attention to the

[007-072] distant central authority. In addition to this, the situation at the

[007-073] centre of the empire was more difficult than that of its feudal states

[007-074] farther east. The settlements around the garrisons in the east were

[007-075] inhabited by agrarian tribes, but the subjugated population around the

[007-076] centre at Sian was made up of nomadic tribes of Turks and Mongols

[007-077] together with semi-nomadic Tibetans. Sian lies in the valley of the

[007-078] river Wei; the riverside country certainly belonged, though perhaps only

[007-079] insecurely, to the Shang empire and was specially well adapted to

[007-080] agriculture; but its periphery--mountains in the south, steppes in the

[007-081] north--was inhabited (until a late period, to some extent to the present

[007-082] day) by nomads, who had also been subjugated by the Chou. The Chou

[007-083] themselves were by no means strong, as they had been only a small tribe

[007-084] and their strength had depended on auxiliary tribes, which had now

[007-085] spread over the country as the new nobility and lived far from the Chou.

[007-086] The Chou emperors had thus to hold in check the subjugated but warlike

[007-087] tribes of Turks and Mongols who lived quite close to their capital. In

[007-088] the first centuries of the dynasty they were more or less successful,

[007-089] for the feudal lords still sent auxiliary forces. In time, however,

[007-090] these became fewer and fewer, because the feudal lords pursued their own

[007-091] policy; and the Chou were compelled to fight their own battles against

[007-092] tribes that continually rose against them, raiding and pillaging their

[007-093] towns. Campaigns abroad also fell mainly on the shoulders of the Chou,

[007-094] as their capital lay near the frontier.

[007-095] It must not be simply assumed, as is often done by the Chinese and some

[007-096] of the European historians, that the Turkish and Mongolian tribes were

[007-097] so savage or so pugnacious that they continually waged war just for the

[007-098] love of it. The problem is much deeper, and to fail to recognize this is

[007-099] to fail to understand Chinese history down to the Middle Ages. The

[007-100] conquering Chou established their garrisons everywhere, and these

[007-101] garrisons were surrounded by the quarters of artisans and by the

[007-102] villages of peasants, a process that ate into the pasturage of the

[007-103] Turkish and Mongolian nomads. These nomads, as already mentioned,

[007-104] pursued agriculture themselves on a small scale, but it occurred to them

[007-105] that they could get farm produce much more easily by barter or by

[007-106] raiding. Accordingly they gradually gave up cultivation and became pure

[007-107] nomads, procuring the needed farm produce from their neighbours. This

[007-108] abandonment of agriculture brought them into a precarious situation: if

[007-109] for any reason the Chinese stopped supplying or demanded excessive

[007-110] barter payment, the nomads had to go hungry. They were then virtually

[007-111] driven to get what they needed by raiding. Thus there developed a mutual

[007-112] reaction that lasted for centuries. Some of the nomadic tribes living

[007-113] between garrisons withdrew, to escape from the growing pressure, mainly

[007-114] into the province of Shansi, where the influence of the Chou was weak

[007-115] and they were not numerous; some of the nomad chiefs lost their lives in

[007-116] battle, and some learned from the Chou lords and turned themselves into

[007-117] petty rulers. A number of "marginal" states began to develop; some of

[007-118] them even built their own cities. This process of transformation of

[007-119] agro-nomadic tribes into "warrior-nomadic" tribes continued over many

[007-120] centuries and came to an end in the third or second century B.C.

[007-121] The result of the three centuries that had passed was a symbiosis

[007-122] between the urban aristocrats and the country-people. The rulers of the

[007-123] towns took over from the general population almost the whole vocabulary

[007-124] of the language which from now on we may call "Chinese". They naturally

[007-125] took over elements of the material civilization. The subjugated

[007-126] population had, meanwhile, to adjust itself to its lords. In the

[007-127] organism that thus developed, with its unified economic system, the

[007-128] conquerors became an aristocratic ruling class, and the subjugated

[007-129] population became a lower class, with varied elements but mainly a

[007-130] peasantry. From now on we may call this society "Chinese"; it has

[007-131] endured to the middle of the twentieth century. Most later essential

[007-132] societal changes are the result of internal development and not of

[007-133] aggression from without.

[007-134] 4 _Limitation of the imperial power_

[007-135] In 771 B.C. an alliance of northern feudal states had attacked the ruler

[007-136] in his western capital; in a battle close to the city they had overcome

[007-137] and killed him. This campaign appears to have set in motion considerable

[007-138] groups from various tribes, so that almost the whole province of Shensi

[007-139] was lost. With the aid of some feudal lords who had remained loyal, a

[007-140] Chou prince was rescued and conducted eastward to the second capital,

[007-141] Loyang, which until then had never been the ruler's actual place of

[007-142] residence. In this rescue a lesser feudal prince, ruler of the feudal

[007-143] state of Ch'in, specially distinguished himself. Soon afterwards this

[007-144] prince, whose domain had lain close to that of the ruler, reconquered a

[007-145] great part of the lost territory, and thereafter regarded it as his own

[007-146] fief. The Ch'in family resided in the same capital in which the Chou

[007-147] had lived in the past, and five hundred years later we shall meet with

[007-148] them again as the dynasty that succeeded the Chou.

[007-149] The new ruler, resident now in Loyang, was foredoomed to impotence. He

[007-150] was now in the centre of the country, and less exposed to large-scale

[007-151] enemy attacks; but his actual rule extended little beyond the town

[007-152] itself and its immediate environment. Moreover, attacks did not entirely

[007-153] cease; several times parts of the indigenous population living between

[007-154] the Chou towns rose against the towns, even in the centre of the

[007-155] country.

[007-156] Now that the emperor had no territory that could be the basis of a

[007-157] strong rule and, moreover, because he owed his position to the feudal

[007-158] lords and was thus under an obligation to them, he ruled no longer as

[007-159] the chief of the feudal lords but as a sort of sanctified overlord; and

[007-160] this was the position of all his successors. A situation was formed at

[007-161] first that may be compared with that of Japan down to the middle of the

[007-162] nineteenth century. The ruler was a symbol rather than an exerciser of

[007-163] power. There had to be a supreme ruler because, in the worship of Heaven

[007-164] which was recognized by all the feudal lords, the supreme sacrifices

[007-165] could only be offered by the Son of Heaven in person. There could not be

[007-166] a number of sons of heaven because there were not a number of heavens.

[007-167] The imperial sacrifices secured that all should be in order in the

[007-168] country, and that the necessary equilibrium between Heaven and Earth

[007-169] should be maintained. For in the religion of Heaven there was a close

[007-170] parallelism between Heaven and Earth, and every omission of a sacrifice,

[007-171] or failure to offer it in due form, brought down a reaction from Heaven.

[007-172] For these religious reasons a central ruler was a necessity for the

[007-173] feudal lords. They needed him also for practical reasons. In the course

[007-174] of centuries the personal relationship between the various feudal lords

[007-175] had ceased. Their original kinship and united struggles had long been

[007-176] forgotten. When the various feudal lords proceeded to subjugate the

[007-177] territories at a distance from their towns, in order to turn their city

[007-178] states into genuine territorial states, they came into conflict with

[007-179] each other. In the course of these struggles for power many of the small

[007-180] fiefs were simply destroyed. It may fairly be said that not until the

[007-181] eighth and seventh centuries B.C. did the old garrison towns became real

[007-182] states. In these circumstances the struggles between the feudal states

[007-183] called urgently for an arbiter, to settle simple cases, and in more

[007-184] difficult cases either to try to induce other feudal lords to intervene

[007-185] or to give sanction to the new situation. These were the only governing

[007-186] functions of the ruler from the time of the transfer to the second

[007-187] capital.

## c8.xhtml
