---
description: "Chapter 8 of A History of China"
id: ch08
label: "Section 8"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 8

[008-001] 5 _Changes in the relative strength of the feudal states_

[008-002] In these disturbed times China also made changes in her outer frontiers.

[008-003] When we speak of frontiers in this connection, we must take little

[008-004] account of the European conception of a frontier. No frontier in that

[008-005] sense existed in China until her conflict with the European powers. In

[008-006] the dogma of the Chinese religion of Heaven, all the countries of the

[008-007] world were subject to the Chinese emperor, the Son of Heaven. Thus there

[008-008] could be no such thing as other independent states. In practice the

[008-009] dependence of various regions on the ruler naturally varied: near the

[008-010] centre, that is to say near the ruler's place of residence, it was most

[008-011] pronounced; then it gradually diminished in the direction of the

[008-012] periphery. The feudal lords of the inner territories were already rather

[008-013] less subordinated than at the centre, and those at a greater distance

[008-014] scarcely at all; at a still greater distance were territories whose

[008-015] chieftains regarded themselves as independent, subject only in certain

[008-016] respects to Chinese overlordship. In such a system it is difficult to

[008-017] speak of frontiers. In practice there was, of course, a sort of

[008-018] frontier, where the influence of the outer feudal lords ceased to exist.

[008-019] The development of the original feudal towns into feudal states with

[008-020] actual dominion over their territories proceeded, of course, not only in

[008-021] the interior of China but also on its borders, where the feudal

[008-022] territories had the advantage of more unrestricted opportunities of

[008-023] expansion; thus they became more and more powerful. In the south (that

[008-024] is to say, in the south of the Chou empire, in the present central

[008-025] China) the garrisons that founded feudal states were relatively small

[008-026] and widely separated; consequently their cultural system was largely

[008-027] absorbed into that of the aboriginal population, so that they developed

[008-028] into feudal states with a character of their own. Three of these

[008-029] attained special importance--(1) Ch'u, in the neighbourhood of the

[008-030] present Chungking and Hankow; (2) Wu, near the present Nanking; and (3)

[008-031] Yüeh, near the present Hangchow. In 704 B.C. the feudal prince of Wu

[008-032] proclaimed himself "Wang". "Wang", however was the title of the ruler of

[008-033] the Chou dynasty. This meant that Wu broke away from the old Chou

[008-034] religion of Heaven, according to which there could be only one ruler

[008-035] (_wang_) in the world.

[008-036] At the beginning of the seventh century it became customary for the

[008-037] ruler to unite with the feudal lord who was most powerful at the time.

[008-038] This feudal lord became a dictator, and had the military power in his

[008-039] hands, like the shoguns in nineteenth-century Japan. If there was a

[008-040] disturbance of the peace, he settled the matter by military means. The

[008-041] first of these dictators was the feudal lord of the state of Ch'i, in

[008-042] the present province of Shantung. This feudal state had grown

[008-043] considerably through the conquest of the outer end of the peninsula of

[008-044] Shantung, which until then had been independent. Moreover, and this was

[008-045] of the utmost importance, the state of Ch'i was a trade centre. Much of

[008-046] the bronze, and later all the iron, for use in northern China came from

[008-047] the south by road and in ships that went up the rivers to Ch'i, where it

[008-048] was distributed among the various regions of the north, north-east, and

[008-049] north-west. In addition to this, through its command of portions of the

[008-050] coast, Ch'i had the means of producing salt, with which it met the needs

[008-051] of great areas of eastern China. It was also in Ch'i that money was

[008-052] first used. Thus Ch'i soon became a place of great luxury, far

[008-053] surpassing the court of the Chou, and Ch'i also became the centre of the

[008-054] most developed civilization.

[008-055] [Illustration: Map 2: The principal feudal States in the feudal epoch.

[008-056] (_roughly 722-481 B.C._)]

[008-057] After the feudal lord of Ch'i, supported by the wealth and power of his

[008-058] feudal state, became dictator, he had to struggle not only against other

[008-059] feudal lords, but also many times against risings among the most various

[008-060] parts of the population, and especially against the nomad tribes in the

[008-061] southern part of the present province of Shansi. In the seventh century

[008-062] not only Ch'i but the other feudal states had expanded. The regions in

[008-063] which the nomad tribes were able to move had grown steadily smaller, and

[008-064] the feudal lords now set to work to bring the nomads of their country

[008-065] under their direct rule. The greatest conflict of this period was the

[008-066] attack in 660 B.C. against the feudal state of Wei, in northern Honan.

[008-067] The nomad tribes seem this time to have been proto-Mongols; they made a

[008-068] direct attack on the garrison town and actually conquered it. The

[008-069] remnant of the urban population, no more than 730 in number, had to flee

[008-070] southward. It is clear from this incident that nomads were still living

[008-071] in the middle of China, within the territory of the feudal states, and

[008-072] that they were still decidedly strong, though no longer in a position to

[008-073] get rid entirely of the feudal lords of the Chou.

[008-074] The period of the dictators came to an end after about a century,

[008-075] because it was found that none of the feudal states was any longer

[008-076] strong enough to exercise control over all the others. These others

[008-077] formed alliances against which the dictator was powerless. Thus this

[008-078] period passed into the next, which the Chinese call the period of the

[008-079] Contending States.

[008-080] 6 _Confucius_

[008-081] After this survey of the political history we must consider the

[008-082] intellectual history of this period, for between 550 and 280 B.C. the

[008-083] enduring fundamental influences in the Chinese social order and in the

[008-084] whole intellectual life of China had their original. We saw how the

[008-085] priests of the earlier dynasty of the Shang developed into the group of

[008-086] so-called "scholars". When the Chou ruler, after the move to the second

[008-087] capital, had lost virtually all but his religious authority, these

[008-088] "scholars" gained increased influence. They were the specialists in

[008-089] traditional morals, in sacrifices, and in the organization of festivals.

[008-090] The continually increasing ritualism at the court of the Chou called for

[008-091] more and more of these men. The various feudal lords also attracted

[008-092] these scholars to their side, employed them as tutors for their

[008-093] children, and entrusted them with the conduct of sacrifices and

[008-094] festivals.

[008-095] China's best-known philosopher, Confucius (Chinese: K'ung Tz[)u], was

[008-096] one of these scholars. He was born in 551 B.C. in the feudal state Lu in

[008-097] the present province of Shantung. In Lu and its neighbouring state Sung,

[008-098] institutions of the Shang had remained strong; both states regarded

[008-099] themselves as legitimate heirs of Shang culture, and many traces of

[008-100] Shang culture can be seen in Confucius's political and ethical ideas. He

[008-101] acquired the knowledge which a scholar had to possess, and then taught

[008-102] in the families of nobles, also helping in the administration of their

[008-103] properties. He made several attempts to obtain advancement, either in

[008-104] vain or with only a short term of employment ending in dismissal. Thus

[008-105] his career was a continuing pilgrimage from one noble to another, from

[008-106] one feudal lord to another, accompanied by a few young men, sons of

[008-107] scholars, who were partly his pupils and partly his servants. Many of

[008-108] these disciples seem to have been "illegitimate" sons of noblemen, i.e.

[008-109] sons of concubines, and Confucius's own family seems to have been of the

[008-110] same origin. In the strongly patriarchal and patrilinear system of the

[008-111] Chou and the developing primogeniture, children of secondary wives had a

[008-112] lower social status. Ultimately Confucius gave up his wanderings,

[008-113] settled in his home town of Lu, and there taught his disciples until his

[008-114] death in 479 B.C.

[008-115] Such was briefly the life of Confucius. His enemies claim that he was a

[008-116] political intriguer, inciting the feudal lords against each other in the

[008-117] course of his wanderings from one state to another, with the intention

[008-118] of somewhere coming into power himself. There may, indeed, be some truth

[008-119] in that.

[008-120] Confucius's importance lies in the fact that he systematized a body of

[008-121] ideas, not of his own creation, and communicated it to a circle of

[008-122] disciples. His teachings were later set down in writing and formed,

[008-123] right down to the twentieth century, the moral code of the upper classes

[008-124] of China. Confucius was fully conscious of his membership of a social

[008-125] class whose existence was tied to that of the feudal lords. With their

[008-126] disappearance, his type of scholar would become superfluous. The common

[008-127] people, the lower class, was in his view in an entirely subordinate

[008-128] position. Thus his moral teaching is a code for the ruling class.

[008-129] Accordingly it retains almost unaltered the elements of the old cult of

[008-130] Heaven, following the old tradition inherited from the northern peoples.

[008-131] For him Heaven is not an arbitrarily governing divine tyrant, but the

[008-132] embodiment of a system of legality. Heaven does not act independently,

[008-133] but follows a universal law, the so-called "Tao". Just as sun, moon, and

[008-134] stars move in the heavens in accordance with law, so man should conduct

[008-135] himself on earth in accord with the universal law, not against it. The

[008-136] ruler should not actively intervene in day-to-day policy, but should

[008-137] only act by setting an example, like Heaven; he should observe the

[008-138] established ceremonies, and offer all sacrifices in accordance with the

[008-139] rites, and then all else will go well in the world. The individual, too,

[008-140] should be guided exactly in his life by the prescriptions of the rites,

[008-141] so that harmony with the law of the universe may be established.

[008-142] A second idea of the Confucian system came also from the old conceptions

[008-143] of the Chou conquerors, and thus originally from the northern peoples.

[008-144] This is the patriarchal idea, according to which the family is the cell

[008-145] of society, and at the head of the family stands the eldest male adult

[008-146] as a sort of patriarch. The state is simply an extension of the family,

[008-147] "state", of course, meaning simply the class of the feudal lords (the

[008-148] "chün-tz[)u]"). And the organization of the family is also that of the

[008-149] world of the gods. Within the family there are a number of ties, all of

[008-150] them, however, one-sided: that of father to son (the son having to obey

[008-151] the father unconditionally and having no rights of his own;) that of

[008-152] husband to wife (the wife had no rights); that of elder to younger

[008-153] brother. An extension of these is the association of friend with friend,

[008-154] which is conceived as an association between an elder and a younger

[008-155] brother. The final link, and the only one extending beyond the family

[008-156] and uniting it with the state, is the association of the ruler with the

[008-157] subject, a replica of that between father and son. The ruler in turn is

[008-158] in the position of son to Heaven. Thus in Confucianism the cult of

[008-159] Heaven, the family system, and the state are welded into unity. The

[008-160] frictionless functioning of this whole system is effected by everyone

[008-161] adhering to the rites, which prescribe every important action. It is

[008-162] necessary, of course, that in a large family, in which there may be up

[008-163] to a hundred persons living together, there shall be a precisely

[008-164] established ordering of relationships between individuals if there is

[008-165] not to be continual friction. Since the scholars of Confucius's type

[008-166] specialized in the knowledge and conduct of ceremonies, Confucius gave

[008-167] ritualism a correspondingly important place both in spiritual and in

[008-168] practical life.

[008-169] So far as we have described it above, the teaching of Confucius was a

[008-170] further development of the old cult of Heaven. Through bitter

[008-171] experience, however, Confucius had come to realize that nothing could be

[008-172] done with the ruling house as it existed in his day. So shadowy a figure

[008-173] as the Chou ruler of that time could not fulfil what Confucius required

[008-174] of the "Son of Heaven". But the opinions of students of Confucius's

[008-175] actual ideas differ. Some say that in the only book in which he

[008-176] personally had a hand, the so-called _Annals of Spring and Autumn_, he

[008-177] intended to set out his conception of the character of a true emperor;

[008-178] others say that in that book he showed how he would himself have acted

[008-179] as emperor, and that he was only awaiting an opportunity to make himself

[008-180] emperor. He was called indeed, at a later time, the "uncrowned ruler".

[008-181] In any case, the _Annals of Spring and Autumn_ seem to be simply a dry

[008-182] work of annals, giving the history of his native state of Lu on the

[008-183] basis of the older documents available to him. In his text, however,

[008-184] Confucius made small changes by means of which he expressed criticism or

[008-185] recognition; in this way he indirectly made known how in his view a

[008-186] ruler should act or should not act. He did not shrink from falsifying

[008-187] history, as can today be demonstrated. Thus on one occasion a ruler had

[008-188] to flee from a feudal prince, which in Confucius's view was impossible

[008-189] behaviour for the ruler; accordingly he wrote instead that the ruler

[008-190] went on a hunting expedition. Elsewhere he tells of an eclipse of the

[008-191] sun on a certain day, on which in fact there was no eclipse. By writing

[008-192] of an eclipse he meant to criticize the way a ruler had acted, for the

[008-193] sun symbolized the ruler, and the eclipse meant that the ruler had not

[008-194] been guided by divine illumination. The demonstration that the _Annals

[008-195] of Spring and Autumn_ can only be explained in this way was the

[008-196] achievement some thirty-five years ago of Otto Franke, and through this

[008-197] discovery Confucius's work, which the old sinologists used to describe

[008-198] as a dry and inadequate book, has become of special value to us. The

[008-199] book ends with the year 481 B.C., and in spite of its distortions it is

[008-200] the principal source for the two-and-a-half centuries with which it

[008-201] deals.

## c9.xhtml
