---
description: "Chapter 9 of A History of China"
id: ch09
label: "Section 9"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 9

[009-001] Rendered alert by this experience, we are able to see and to show that

[009-002] most of the other later official works of history follow the example of

[009-003] the _Annals of Spring and Autumn_ in containing things that have been

[009-004] deliberately falsified. This is especially so in the work called

[009-005] _T'ung-chien kang-mu_, which was the source of the history of the

[009-006] Chinese empire translated into French by de Mailla.

[009-007] Apart from Confucius's criticism of the inadequate capacity of the

[009-008] emperor of his day, there is discernible, though only in the form of

[009-009] cryptic hints, a fundamentally important progressive idea. It is that a

[009-010] nobleman (chün-tz[)u] should not be a member of the ruling _élite_ by

[009-011] right of birth alone, but should be a man of superior moral qualities.

[009-012] From Confucius on, "chün-tz[)u]" became to mean "a gentleman".

[009-013] Consequently, a country should not be ruled by a dynasty based on

[009-014] inheritance through birth, but by members of the nobility who show

[009-015] outstanding moral qualification for rulership. That is to say, the rule

[009-016] should pass from the worthiest to the worthiest, the successor first

[009-017] passing through a period of probation as a minister of state. In an

[009-018] unscrupulous falsification of the tradition, Confucius declared that

[009-019] this principle was followed in early times. It is probably safe to

[009-020] assume that Confucius had in view here an eventual justification of

[009-021] claims to rulership of his own.

[009-022] Thus Confucius undoubtedly had ideas of reform, but he did not interfere

[009-023] with the foundations of feudalism. For the rest, his system consists

[009-024] only of a social order and a moral teaching. Metaphysics, logic,

[009-025] epistemology, i.e. branches of philosophy which played so great a part

[009-026] in the West, are of no interest to him. Nor can he be described as the

[009-027] founder of a religion; for the cult of Heaven of which he speaks and

[009-028] which he takes over existed in exactly the same form before his day. He

[009-029] is merely the man who first systematized those notions. He had no

[009-030] successes in his lifetime and gained no recognition; nor did his

[009-031] disciples or their disciples gain any general recognition; his work did

[009-032] not become of importance until some three hundred years after his death,

[009-033] when in the second century B.C. his teaching was adjusted to the new

[009-034] social conditions: out of a moral system for the decaying feudal society

[009-035] of the past centuries developed the ethic of the rising social order of

[009-036] the gentry. The gentry (in much the same way as the European

[009-037] bourgeoisie) continually claimed that there should be access for every

[009-038] civilized citizen to the highest places in the social pyramid, and the

[009-039] rules of Confucianism became binding on every member of society if he

[009-040] was to be considered a gentleman. Only then did Confucianism begin to

[009-041] develop into the imposing system that dominated China almost down to the

[009-042] present day. Confucianism did not become a religion. It was comparable

[009-043] to the later Japanese Shintoism, or to a group of customs among us which

[009-044] we all observe, if we do not want to find ourselves excluded from our

[009-045] community, but which we should never describe as religion. We stand up

[009-046] when the national anthem is played, we give precedency to older people,

[009-047] we erect war memorials and decorate them with flowers, and by these and

[009-048] many other things show our sense of belonging. A similar but much more

[009-049] conscious and much more powerful part was played by Confucianism in the

[009-050] life of the average Chinese, though he was not necessarily interested in

[009-051] philosophical ideas.

[009-052] While the West has set up the ideal of individualism and is suffering

[009-053] now because it no longer has any ethical system to which individuals

[009-054] voluntarily submit; while for the Indians the social problem consisted

[009-055] in the solving of the question how every man could be enabled to live

[009-056] his life with as little disturbance as possible from his fellow-men,

[009-057] Confucianism solved the problem of how families with groups of hundreds

[009-058] of members could live together in peace and co-operation in a densely

[009-059] populated country. Everyone knew his position in the family and so, in a

[009-060] broader sense, in the state; and this prescribed his rights and duties.

[009-061] We may feel that the rules to which he was subjected were pedantic; but

[009-062] there was no limit to their effectiveness: they reduced to a minimum the

[009-063] friction that always occurs when great masses of people live close

[009-064] together; they gave Chinese society the strength through which it has

[009-065] endured; they gave security to its individuals. China's first real

[009-066] social crisis after the collapse of feudalism, that is to say, after the

[009-067] fourth or third century B.C., began only in the present century with the

[009-068] collapse of the social order of the gentry and the breakdown of the

[009-069] family system.

[009-070] 7 _Lao Tz[)u]_

[009-071] In eighteenth-century Europe Confucius was the only Chinese philosopher

[009-072] held in regard; in the last hundred years, the years of Europe's

[009-073] internal crisis, the philosopher Lao Tz[)u] steadily advanced in repute,

[009-074] so that his book was translated almost a hundred times into various

[009-075] European languages. According to the general view among the Chinese, Lao

[009-076] Tz[)u] was an older contemporary of Confucius; recent Chinese and

[009-077] Western research (A. Waley; H.H. Dubs) has contested this view and

[009-078] places Lao Tz[)u] in the latter part of the fourth century B.C., or even

[009-079] later. Virtually nothing at all is known about his life; the oldest

[009-080] biography of Lao Tz[)u], written about 100 B.C., says that he lived as

[009-081] an official at the ruler's court and, one day, became tired of the life

[009-082] of an official and withdrew from the capital to his estate, where he

[009-083] died in old age. This, too, may be legendary, but it fits well into the

[009-084] picture given to us by Lao Tz[)u]'s teaching and by the life of his

[009-085] later followers. From the second century A.D., that is to say at least

[009-086] four hundred years after his death, there are legends of his migrating

[009-087] to the far west. Still later narratives tell of his going to Turkestan

[009-088] (where a temple was actually built in his honour in the Medieval

[009-089] period); according to other sources he travelled as far as India or

[009-090] Sogdiana (Samarkand and Bokhara), where according to some accounts he

[009-091] was the teacher or forerunner of Buddha, and according to others of

[009-092] Mani, the founder of Manichaeism. For all this there is not a vestige of

[009-093] documentary evidence.

[009-094] Lao Tz[)u]'s teaching is contained in a small book, the _Tao Tê Ching_,

[009-095] the "Book of the World Law and its Power". The book is written in quite

[009-096] simple language, at times in rhyme, but the sense is so vague that

[009-097] countless versions, differing radically from each other, can be based on

[009-098] it, and just as many translations are possible, all philologically

[009-099] defensible. This vagueness is deliberate.

[009-100] Lao Tz[)u]'s teaching is essentially an effort to bring man's life on

[009-101] earth into harmony with the life and law of the universe (Tao). This was

[009-102] also Confucius's purpose. But while Confucius set out to attain that

[009-103] purpose in a sort of primitive scientific way, by laying down a number

[009-104] of rules of human conduct, Lao Tz[)u] tries to attain his ideal by an

[009-105] intuitive, emotional method. Lao Tz[)u] is always described as a mystic,

[009-106] but perhaps this is not entirely appropriate; it must be borne in mind

[009-107] that in his time the Chinese language, spoken and written, still had

[009-108] great difficulties in the expression of ideas. In reading Lao Tz[)u]'s

[009-109] book we feel that he is trying to express something for which the

[009-110] language of his day was inadequate; and what he wanted to express

[009-111] belonged to the emotional, not the intellectual, side of the human

[009-112] character, so that any perfectly clear expression of it in words was

[009-113] entirely impossible. It must be borne in mind that the Chinese language

[009-114] lacks definite word categories like substantive, adjective, adverb, or

[009-115] verb; any word can be used now in one category and now in another, with

[009-116] a few exceptions; thus the understanding of a combination like "white

[009-117] horse" formed a difficult logical problem for the thinker of the fourth

[009-118] century B.C.: did it mean "white" plus "horse"? Or was "white horse" no

[009-119] longer a horse at all but something quite different?

[009-120] Confucius's way of bringing human life into harmony with the life of the

[009-121] universe was to be a process of assimilating Man as a social being, Man

[009-122] in his social environment, to Nature, and of so maintaining his activity

[009-123] within the bounds of the community. Lao Tz[)u] pursues another path, the

[009-124] path for those who feel disappointed with life in the community. A

[009-125] Taoist, as a follower of Lao Tz[)u] is called, withdraws from all social

[009-126] life, and carries out none of the rites and ceremonies which a man of

[009-127] the upper class should observe throughout the day. He lives in

[009-128] self-imposed seclusion, in an elaborate primitivity which is often

[009-129] described in moving terms that are almost convincing of actual

[009-130] "primitivity". Far from the city, surrounded by Nature, the Taoist lives

[009-131] his own life, together with a few friends and his servants, entirely

[009-132] according to his nature. His own nature, like everything else,

[009-133] represents for him a part of the Tao, and the task of the individual

[009-134] consists in the most complete adherence to the Tao that is conceivable,

[009-135] as far as possible performing no act that runs counter to the Tao. This

[009-136] is the main element of Lao Tz[)u]'s doctrine, the doctrine of _wu-wei_,

[009-137] "passive achievement".

[009-138] Lao Tz[)u] seems to have thought that this doctrine could be applied to

[009-139] the life of the state. He assumed that an ideal life in society was

[009-140] possible if everyone followed his own nature entirely and no artificial

[009-141] restrictions were imposed. Thus he writes: "The more the people are

[009-142] forbidden to do this and that, the poorer will they be. The more sharp

[009-143] weapons the people possess, the more will darkness and bewilderment

[009-144] spread through the land. The more craft and cunning men have, the more

[009-145] useless and pernicious contraptions will they invent. The more laws and

[009-146] edicts are imposed, the more thieves and bandits there will be. 'If I

[009-147] work through Non-action,' says the Sage, 'the people will transform

[009-148] themselves.'"[1] Thus according to Lao Tz[)u], who takes the existence

[009-149] of a monarchy for granted, the ruler must treat his subjects as follows:

[009-150] "By emptying their hearts of desire and their minds of envy, and by

[009-151] filling their stomachs with what they need; by reducing their ambitions

[009-152] and by strengthening their bones and sinews; by striving to keep them

[009-153] without the knowledge of what is evil and without cravings. Thus are the

[009-154] crafty ones given no scope for tempting interference. For it is by

[009-155] Non-action that the Sage governs, and nothing is really left

[009-156] uncontrolled."[2]

[009-157] [Footnote 1: _The Way of Acceptance_: a new version of Lao Tz[)u]'s _Tao

[009-158] Tê Ching_, by Hermon Ould (Dakers, 1946), Ch. 57.]

[009-159] [Footnote 2: _The Way of Acceptance_, Ch. 3.]

[009-160] Lao Tz[)u] did not live to learn that such rule of good government would

[009-161] be followed by only one sort of rulers--dictators; and as a matter of

[009-162] fact the "Legalist theory" which provided the philosophic basis for

[009-163] dictatorship in the third century B.C. was attributable to Lao Tz[)u].

[009-164] He was not thinking, however, of dictatorship; he was an individualistic

[009-165] anarchist, believing that if there were no active government all men

[009-166] would be happy. Then everyone could attain unity with Nature for

[009-167] himself. Thus we find in Lao Tz[)u], and later in all other Taoists, a

[009-168] scornful repudiation of all social and official obligations. An answer

[009-169] that became famous was given by the Taoist Chuang Tz[)u] (see below)

[009-170] when it was proposed to confer high office in the state on him (the

[009-171] story may or may not be true, but it is typical of Taoist thought): "I

[009-172] have heard," he replied, "that in Ch'u there is a tortoise sacred to the

[009-173] gods. It has now been dead for 3,000 years, and the king keeps it in a

[009-174] shrine with silken cloths, and gives it shelter in the halls of a

[009-175] temple. Which do you think that tortoise would prefer--to be dead and

[009-176] have its vestigial bones so honoured, or to be still alive and dragging

[009-177] its tail after it in the mud?" the officials replied: "No doubt it would

[009-178] prefer to be alive and dragging its tail after it in the mud." Then

[009-179] spoke Chuang Tz[)u]: "Begone! I, too, would rather drag my tail after me

[009-180] in the mud!" (Chuang Tz[)u] 17, 10.)

## c10.xhtml
