---
description: "Chapter 10 of A History of China"
id: ch10
label: "Section 10"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 10

[010-001] The true Taoist withdraws also from his family. Typical of this is

[010-002] another story, surely apocryphal, from Chuang Tz[)u] (Ch. 3, 3). At the

[010-003] death of Lao Tz[)u] a disciple went to the family and expressed his

[010-004] sympathy quite briefly and formally. The other disciples were

[010-005] astonished, and asked his reason. He said: "Yes, at first I thought that

[010-006] he was our man, but he is not. When I went to grieve, the old men were

[010-007] bewailing him as though they were bewailing a son, and the young wept as

[010-008] though they were mourning a mother. To bind them so closely to himself,

[010-009] he must have spoken words which he should not have spoken, and wept

[010-010] tears which he should not have wept. That, however, is a falling away

[010-011] from the heavenly nature."

[010-012] Lao Tz[)u]'s teaching, like that of Confucius, cannot be described as

[010-013] religion; like Confucius's, it is a sort of social philosophy, but of

[010-014] irrationalistic character. Thus it was quite possible, and later it

[010-015] became the rule, for one and the same person to be both Confucian and

[010-016] Taoist. As an official and as the head of his family, a man would think

[010-017] and act as a Confucian; as a private individual, when he had retired far

[010-018] from the city to live in his country mansion (often modestly described

[010-019] as a cave or a thatched hut), or when he had been dismissed from his

[010-020] post or suffered some other trouble, he would feel and think as a

[010-021] Taoist. In order to live as a Taoist it was necessary, of course, to

[010-022] possess such an estate, to which a man could retire with his servants,

[010-023] and where he could live without himself doing manual work. This

[010-024] difference between the Confucian and the Taoist found a place in the

[010-025] works of many Chinese poets. I take the following quotation from an

[010-026] essay by the statesman and poet Ts'ao Chih, of the end of the second

[010-027] century A.D.:

[010-028] "Master Mysticus lived in deep seclusion on a mountain in the

[010-029] wilderness; he had withdrawn as in flight from the world, desiring to

[010-030] purify his spirit and give rest to his heart. He despised official

[010-031] activity, and no longer maintained any relations with the world; he

[010-032] sought quiet and freedom from care, in order in this way to attain

[010-033] everlasting life. He did nothing but send his thoughts wandering between

[010-034] sky and clouds, and consequently there was nothing worldly that could

[010-035] attract and tempt him.

[010-036] [Illustration: 1 Painted pottery from Kansu: Neolithic. _In the

[010-037] collection of the Museum für Völkerkunde, Berlin_.]

[010-038] [Illustration: 2 Ancient bronze tripod found at Anyang. _From G. Ecke:

[010-039] Frühe chinesische Bronzen aus der Sammlung Oskar Trautmann, Peking_

[010-040] 1939, _plate_ 3.]

[010-041] "When Mr. Rationalist heard of this man, he desired to visit him, in

[010-042] order to persuade him to alter his views. He harnessed four horses, who

[010-043] could quickly traverse the plain, and entered his light fast carriage.

[010-044] He drove through the plain, leaving behind him the ruins of abandoned

[010-045] settlements; he entered the boundless wilderness, and finally reached

[010-046] the dwelling of Master Mysticus. Here there was a waterfall on one side,

[010-047] and on the other were high crags; at the back a stream flowed deep down

[010-048] in its bed, and in front was an odorous wood. The master wore a white

[010-049] doeskin cap and a striped fox-pelt. He came forward from a cave buried

[010-050] in the mountain, leaned against the tall crag, and enjoyed the prospect

[010-051] of wild nature. His ideas floated on the breezes, and he looked as if

[010-052] the wide spaces of the heavens and the countries of the earth were too

[010-053] narrow for him; as if he was going to fly but had not yet left the

[010-054] ground; as if he had already spread his wings but wanted to wait a

[010-055] moment. Mr. Rationalist climbed up with the aid of vine shoots, reached

[010-056] the top of the crag, and stepped up to him, saying very respectfully:

[010-057] "'I have heard that a man of nobility does not flee from society, but

[010-058] seeks to gain fame; a man of wisdom does not swim against the current,

[010-059] but seeks to earn repute. You, however, despise the achievements of

[010-060] civilization and culture; you have no regard for the splendour of

[010-061] philanthropy and justice; you squander your powers here in the

[010-062] wilderness and neglect ordered relations between man....'"

[010-063] Frequently Master Mysticus and Mr. Rationalist were united in a single

[010-064] person. Thus, Shih Ch'ung wrote in an essay on himself:

[010-065] "In my youth I had great ambition and wanted to stand out above the

[010-066] multitude. Thus it happened that at a little over twenty years of age I

[010-067] was already a court official; I remained in the service for twenty-five

[010-068] years. When I was fifty I had to give up my post because of an

[010-069] unfortunate occurrence.... The older I became, the more I appreciated

[010-070] the freedom I had acquired; and as I loved forest and plain, I retired

[010-071] to my villa. When I built this villa, a long embankment formed the

[010-072] boundary behind it; in front the prospect extended over a clear canal;

[010-073] all around grew countless cypresses, and flowing water meandered round

[010-074] the house. There were pools there, and outlook towers; I bred birds and

[010-075] fishes. In my harem there were always good musicians who played dance

[010-076] tunes. When I went out I enjoyed nature or hunted birds and fished. When

[010-077] I came home, I enjoyed playing the lute or reading; I also liked to

[010-078] concoct an elixir of life and to take breathing exercises,[3] because I

[010-079] did not want to die, but wanted one day to lift myself to the skies,

[010-080] like an immortal genius. Suddenly I was drawn back into the official

[010-081] career, and became once more one of the dignitaries of the Emperor."

[010-082] [Footnote 3: Both Taoist practices.]

[010-083] Thus Lao Tz[)u]'s individualist and anarchist doctrine was not suited to

[010-084] form the basis of a general Chinese social order, and its employment in

[010-085] support of dictatorship was certainly not in the spirit of Lao Tz[)u].

[010-086] Throughout history, however, Taoism remained the philosophic attitude of

[010-087] individuals of the highest circle of society; its real doctrine never

[010-088] became popularly accepted; for the strong feeling for nature that

[010-089] distinguishes the Chinese, and their reluctance to interfere in the

[010-090] sanctified order of nature by technical and other deliberate acts, was

[010-091] not actually a result of Lao Tz[)u]'s teaching, but one of the

[010-092] fundamentals from which his ideas started.

[010-093] If the date assigned to Lao Tz[)u] by present-day research (the fourth

[010-094] instead of the sixth century B.C.) is correct, he was more or less

[010-095] contemporary with Chuang Tz[)u], who was probably the most gifted poet

[010-096] among the Chinese philosophers and Taoists. A thin thread extends from

[010-097] them as far as the fourth century A.D.: Huai-nan Tz[)u], Chung-ch'ang

[010-098] T'ung, Yüan Chi (210-263), Liu Ling (221-300), and T'ao Ch'ien

[010-099] (365-427), are some of the most eminent names of Taoist philosophers.

[010-100] After that the stream of original thought dried up, and we rarely find a

[010-101] new idea among the late Taoists. These gentlemen living on their estates

[010-102] had acquired a new means of expressing their inmost feelings: they wrote

[010-103] poetry and, above all, painted. Their poems and paintings contain in a

[010-104] different outward form what Lao Tz[)u] had tried to express with the

[010-105] inadequate means of the language of his day. Thus Lao Tz[)u]'s teaching

[010-106] has had the strongest influence to this day in this field, and has

[010-107] inspired creative work which is among the finest achievements of

[010-108] mankind.

[010-109] Chapter Four

[010-110] THE CONTENDING STATES (481-256 B.C.): DISSOLUTION OF THE FEUDAL SYSTEM

[010-111] 1 _Social and military changes_

[010-112] The period following that of the Chou dictatorships is known as that of

[010-113] the Contending States. Out of over a thousand states, fourteen remained,

[010-114] of which, in the period that now followed, one after another

[010-115] disappeared, until only one remained. This period is the fullest, or one

[010-116] of the fullest, of strife in all Chinese history. The various feudal

[010-117] states had lost all sense of allegiance to the ruler, and acted in

[010-118] entire independence. It is a pure fiction to speak of a Chinese State in

[010-119] this period; the emperor had no more power than the ruler of the Holy

[010-120] Roman Empire in the late medieval period of Europe, and the so-called

[010-121] "feudal states" of China can be directly compared with the developing

[010-122] national states of Europe. A comparison of this period with late

[010-123] medieval Europe is, indeed, of highest interest. If we adopt a political

[010-124] system of periodization, we might say that around 500 B.C. the unified

[010-125] feudal state of the first period of Antiquity came to an end and the

[010-126] second, a period of the national states began, although formally, the

[010-127] feudal system continued and the national states still retained many

[010-128] feudal traits.

[010-129] As none of these states was strong enough to control and subjugate the

[010-130] rest, alliances were formed. The most favoured union was the north-south

[010-131] axis; it struggled against an east-west league. The alliances were not

[010-132] stable but broke up again and again through bribery or intrigue, which

[010-133] produced new combinations. We must confine ourselves to mentioning the

[010-134] most important of the events that took place behind this military

[010-135] façade.

[010-136] Through the continual struggles more and more feudal lords lost their

[010-137] lands; and not only they, but the families of the nobles dependent on

[010-138] them, who had received so-called sub-fiefs. Some of the landless nobles

[010-139] perished; some offered their services to the remaining feudal lords as

[010-140] soldiers or advisers. Thus in this period we meet with a large number of

[010-141] migratory politicians who became competitors of the wandering scholars.

[010-142] Both these groups recommended to their lord ways and means of gaining

[010-143] victory over the other feudal lords, so as to become sole ruler. In

[010-144] order to carry out their plans the advisers claimed the rank of a

[010-145] Minister or Chancellor.

[010-146] Realistic though these advisers and their lords were in their thinking,

[010-147] they did not dare to trample openly on the old tradition. The emperor

[010-148] might in practice be a completely powerless figurehead, but he belonged

[010-149] nevertheless, according to tradition, to a family of divine origin,

[010-150] which had obtained its office not merely by the exercise of force but

[010-151] through a "divine mandate". Accordingly, if one of the feudal lords

[010-152] thought of putting forward a claim to the imperial throne, he felt

[010-153] compelled to demonstrate that his family was just as much of divine

[010-154] origin as the emperor's, and perhaps of remoter origin. In this matter

[010-155] the travelling "scholars" rendered valuable service as manufacturers of

[010-156] genealogical trees. Each of the old noble families already had its

[010-157] family tree, as an indispensable requisite for the sacrifices to

[010-158] ancestors. But in some cases this tree began as a branch of that of the

[010-159] imperial family: this was the case of the feudal lords who were of

[010-160] imperial descent and whose ancestors had been granted fiefs after the

[010-161] conquest of the country. Others, however, had for their first ancestor a

[010-162] local deity long worshipped in the family's home country, such as the

[010-163] ancient agrarian god Huang Ti, or the bovine god Shen Nung. Here the

[010-164] "scholars" stepped in, turning the local deities into human beings and

[010-165] "emperors". This suddenly gave the noble family concerned an imperial

[010-166] origin. Finally, order was brought into this collection of ancient

[010-167] emperors. They were arranged and connected with each other in

[010-168] "dynasties" or in some other "historical" form. Thus at a stroke Huang

[010-169] Ti, who about 450 B.C. had been a local god in the region of southern

[010-170] Shansi, became the forefather of almost all the noble families,

[010-171] including that of the imperial house of the Chou. Needless to say, there

[010-172] would be discrepancies between the family trees constructed by the

[010-173] various scholars for their lords, and later, when this problem had lost

[010-174] its political importance, the commentators laboured for centuries on the

[010-175] elaboration of an impeccable system of "ancient emperors"--and to this

[010-176] day there are sinologists who continue to present these humanized gods

[010-177] as historical personalities.

## c11.xhtml
