---
description: "Chapter 11 of A History of China"
id: ch11
label: "Section 11"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 11

[011-001] In the earlier wars fought between the nobles they were themselves the

[011-002] actual combatants, accompanied only by their retinue. As the struggles

[011-003] for power grew in severity, each noble hired such mercenaries as he

[011-004] could, for instance the landless nobles just mentioned. Very soon it

[011-005] became the custom to arm peasants and send them to the wars. This

[011-006] substantially increased the armies. The numbers of soldiers who were

[011-007] killed in particular battles may have been greatly exaggerated (in a

[011-008] single battle in 260 B.C., for instance, the number who lost their lives

[011-009] was put at 450,000, a quite impossible figure); but there must have been

[011-010] armies of several thousand men, perhaps as many as 10,000. The

[011-011] population had grown considerably by that time.

[011-012] The armies of the earlier period consisted mainly of the nobles in their

[011-013] war chariots; each chariot surrounded by the retinue of the nobleman.

[011-014] Now came large troops of commoners as infantry as well, drawn from the

[011-015] peasant population. To these, cavalry were first added in the fifth

[011-016] century B.C., by the northern state of Chao (in the present Shansi),

[011-017] following the example of its Turkish and Mongol neighbours. The general

[011-018] theory among ethnologists is that the horse was first harnessed to a

[011-019] chariot, and that riding came much later; but it is my opinion that

[011-020] riders were known earlier, but could not be efficiently employed in war

[011-021] because the practice had not begun of fighting in disciplined troops of

[011-022] horsemen, and the art had not been learnt of shooting accurately with

[011-023] the bow from the back of a galloping horse, especially shooting to the

[011-024] rear. In any case, its cavalry gave the feudal state of Chao a military

[011-025] advantage for a short time. Soon the other northern states copied it one

[011-026] after another--especially Ch'in, in north-west China. The introduction

[011-027] of cavalry brought a change in clothing all over China, for the former

[011-028] long skirt-like garb could not be worn on horseback. Trousers and the

[011-029] riding-cap were introduced from the north.

[011-030] The new technique of war made it important for every state to possess as

[011-031] many soldiers as possible, and where it could to reduce the enemy's

[011-032] numbers. One result of this was that wars became much more sanguinary;

[011-033] another was that men in other countries were induced to immigrate and

[011-034] settle as peasants, so that the taxes they paid should provide the means

[011-035] for further recruitment of soldiers. In the state of Ch'in, especially,

[011-036] the practice soon started of using the whole of the peasantry

[011-037] simultaneously as a rough soldiery. Hence that state was particularly

[011-038] anxious to attract peasants in large numbers.

[011-039] 2 _Economic changes_

[011-040] In the course of the wars much land of former noblemen had become free.

[011-041] Often the former serfs had then silently become landowners. Others had

[011-042] started to cultivate empty land in the area inhabited by the indigenous

[011-043] population and regarded this land, which they themselves had made

[011-044] fertile, as their private family property. There was, in spite of the

[011-045] growth of the population, still much cultivable land available.

[011-046] Victorious feudal lords induced farmers to come to their territory and

[011-047] to cultivate the wasteland. This is a period of great migrations,

[011-048] internal and external. It seems that from this period on not only

[011-049] merchants but also farmers began to migrate southward into the area of

[011-050] the present provinces of Kwangtung and Kwangsi and as far as Tonking.

[011-051] As long as the idea that all land belonged to the great clans of the

[011-052] Chou prevailed, sale of land was inconceivable; but when individual

[011-053] family heads acquired land or cultivated new land, they regarded it as

[011-054] their natural right to dispose of the land as they wished. From now on

[011-055] until the end of the medieval period, the family head as representative

[011-056] of the family could sell or buy land. However, the land belonged to the

[011-057] family and not to him as a person. This development was favoured by the

[011-058] spread of money. In time land in general became an asset with a market

[011-059] value and could be bought and sold.

[011-060] Another important change can be seen from this time on. Under the feudal

[011-061] system of the Chou strict primogeniture among the nobility existed: the

[011-062] fief went to the oldest son by the main wife. The younger sons were

[011-063] given independent pieces of land with its inhabitants as new, secondary

[011-064] fiefs. With the increase in population there was no more such land that

[011-065] could be set up as a new fief. From now on, primogeniture was retained

[011-066] in the field of ritual and religion down to the present time: only the

[011-067] oldest son of the main wife represents the family in the ancestor

[011-068] worship ceremonies; only the oldest son of the emperor could become his

[011-069] successor. But the landed property from now on was equally divided among

[011-070] all sons. Occasionally the oldest son was given some extra land to

[011-071] enable him to pay the expenses for the family ancestral worship. Mobile

[011-072] property, on the other side, was not so strictly regulated and often the

[011-073] oldest son was given preferential treatment in the inheritance.

[011-074] The technique of cultivation underwent some significant changes. The

[011-075] animal-drawn plough seems to have been invented during this period, and

[011-076] from now on, some metal agricultural implements like iron sickles and

[011-077] iron plough-shares became more common. A fallow system was introduced so

[011-078] that cultivation became more intensive. Manuring of fields was already

[011-079] known in Shang time. It seems that the consumption of meat decreased

[011-080] from this period on: less mutton and beef were eaten. Pig and dog

[011-081] became the main sources of meat, and higher consumption of beans made

[011-082] up for the loss of proteins. All this indicates a strong population

[011-083] increase. We have no statistics for this period, but by 400 B.C. it is

[011-084] conceivable that the population under the control of the various

[011-085] individual states comprised something around twenty-five millions. The

[011-086] eastern plains emerge more and more as centres of production.

[011-087] The increased use of metal and the invention of coins greatly stimulated

[011-088] trade. Iron which now became quite common, was produced mainly in

[011-089] Shansi, other metals in South China. But what were the traders to do

[011-090] with their profits? Even later in China, and almost down to recent

[011-091] times, it was never possible to hoard large quantities of money.

[011-092] Normally the money was of copper, and a considerable capital in the form

[011-093] of copper coin took up a good deal of room and was not easy to conceal.

[011-094] If anyone had much money, everyone in his village knew it. No one dared

[011-095] to hoard to any extent for fear of attracting bandits and creating

[011-096] lasting insecurity. On the other hand the merchants wanted to attain the

[011-097] standard of living which the nobles, the landowners, used to have. Thus

[011-098] they began to invest their money in land. This was all the easier for

[011-099] them since it often happened that one of the lesser nobles or a peasant

[011-100] fell deeply into debt to a merchant and found himself compelled to give

[011-101] up his land in payment of the debt.

[011-102] Soon the merchants took over another function. So long as there had been

[011-103] many small feudal states, and the feudal lords had created lesser lords

[011-104] with small fiefs, it had been a simple matter for the taxes to be

[011-105] collected, in the form of grain, from the peasants through the agents of

[011-106] the lesser lords. Now that there were only a few great states in

[011-107] existence, the old system was no longer effectual. This gave the

[011-108] merchants their opportunity. The rulers of the various states entrusted

[011-109] the merchants with the collection of taxes, and this had great

[011-110] advantages for the ruler: he could obtain part of the taxes at once, as

[011-111] the merchant usually had grain in stock, or was himself a landowner and

[011-112] could make advances at any time. Through having to pay the taxes to the

[011-113] merchant, the village population became dependent on him. Thus the

[011-114] merchants developed into the first administrative officials in the

[011-115] provinces.

[011-116] In connection with the growth of business, the cities kept on growing.

[011-117] It is estimated that at the beginning of the third century, the city of

[011-118] Lin-chin, near the present Chi-nan in Shantung, had a population of

[011-119] 210,000 persons. Each of its walls had a length of 4,000 metres; thus,

[011-120] it was even somewhat larger than the famous city of Loyang, capital of

[011-121] China during the Later Han dynasty, in the second century A.D. Several

[011-122] other cities of this period have been recently excavated and must have

[011-123] had populations far above 10,000 persons. There were two types of

[011-124] cities: the rectangular, planned city of the Chou conquerors, a seat of

[011-125] administration; and the irregularly shaped city which grew out of a

[011-126] market place and became only later an administrative centre. We do not

[011-127] know much about the organization and administration of these cities, but

[011-128] they seem to have had considerable independence because some of them

[011-129] issued their own city coins.

[011-130] When these cities grew, the food produced in the neighbourhood of the

[011-131] towns no longer sufficed for their inhabitants. This led to the building

[011-132] of roads, which also facilitated the transport of supplies for great

[011-133] armies. These roads mainly radiated from the centre of consumption into

[011-134] the surrounding country, and they were less in use for communication

[011-135] between one administrative centre and another. For long journeys the

[011-136] rivers were of more importance, since transport by wagon was always

[011-137] expensive owing to the shortage of draught animals. Thus we see in this

[011-138] period the first important construction of canals and a development of

[011-139] communications. With the canal construction was connected the

[011-140] construction of irrigation and drainage systems, which further promoted

[011-141] agricultural production. The cities were places in which often great

[011-142] luxury developed; music, dance, and other refinements were cultivated;

[011-143] but the cities also seem to have harboured considerable industries.

[011-144] Expensive and technically superior silks were woven; painters decorated

[011-145] the walls of temples and palaces; blacksmiths and bronze-smiths produced

[011-146] beautiful vessels and implements. It seems certain that the art of

[011-147] casting iron and the beginnings of the production of steel were already

[011-148] known at this time. The life of the commoners in these cities was

[011-149] regulated by laws; the first codes are mentioned in 536 B.C. By the end

[011-150] of the fourth century B.C. a large body of criminal law existed,

[011-151] supposedly collected by Li K'uei, which became the foundation of all

[011-152] later Chinese law. It seems that in this period the states of China

[011-153] moved quickly towards a money economy, and an observer to whom the later

[011-154] Chinese history was not known could have predicted the eventual

[011-155] development of a capitalistic society out of the apparent tendencies.

[011-156] So far nothing has been said in these chapters about China's foreign

[011-157] policy. Since the central ruling house was completely powerless, and the

[011-158] feudal lords were virtually independent rulers, little can be said, of

[011-159] course, about any "Chinese" foreign policy. There is less than ever to

[011-160] be said about it for this period of the "Contending States". Chinese

[011-161] merchants penetrated southward, and soon settlers moved in increasing

[011-162] numbers into the plains of the south-east. In the north, there were

[011-163] continual struggles with Turkish and Mongol tribes, and about 300 B.C.

[011-164] the name of the Hsiung-nu (who are often described as "The Huns of the

[011-165] Far East") makes its first appearance. It is known that these northern

[011-166] peoples had mastered the technique of horseback warfare and were far

[011-167] ahead of the Chinese, although the Chinese imitated their methods. The

[011-168] peasants of China, as they penetrated farther and farther north, had to

[011-169] be protected by their rulers against the northern peoples, and since the

[011-170] rulers needed their armed forces for their struggles within China, a

[011-171] beginning was made with the building of frontier walls, to prevent

[011-172] sudden raids of the northern peoples against the peasant settlements.

[011-173] Thus came into existence the early forms of the "Great Wall of China".

[011-174] This provided for the first time a visible frontier between Chinese and

[011-175] non-Chinese. Along this frontier, just as by the walls of towns, great

[011-176] markets were held at which Chinese peasants bartered their produce to

[011-177] non-Chinese nomads. Both partners in this trade became accustomed to it

[011-178] and drew very substantial profits from it. We even know the names of

[011-179] several great horse-dealers who bought horses from the nomads and sold

[011-180] them within China.

## c12.xhtml
