---
description: "Chapter 12 of A History of China"
id: ch12
label: "Section 12"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 12

[012-001] 3 _Cultural changes_

[012-002] Together with the economic and social changes in this period, there came

[012-003] cultural changes. New ideas sprang up in exuberance, as would seem

[012-004] entirely natural, because in times of change and crisis men always come

[012-005] forward to offer solutions for pressing problems. We shall refer here

[012-006] only briefly to the principal philosophers of the period.

[012-007] Mencius (_c_. 372-289 B.C.) and Hsün Tz[)u] (_c_. 298-238 B.C.) were

[012-008] both followers of Confucianism. Both belonged to the so-called

[012-009] "scholars", and both lived in the present Shantung, that is to say, in

[012-010] eastern China. Both elaborated the ideas of Confucius, but neither of

[012-011] them achieved personal success. Mencius (Meng Tz[)u]) recognized that

[012-012] the removal of the ruling house of the Chou no longer presented any

[012-013] difficulty. The difficult question for him was when a change of ruler

[012-014] would be justified. And how could it be ascertained whom Heaven had

[012-015] destined as successor if the existing dynasty was brought down? Mencius

[012-016] replied that the voice of the "people", that is to say of the upper

[012-017] class and its following, would declare the right man, and that this man

[012-018] would then be Heaven's nominee. This theory persisted throughout the

[012-019] history of China. Hsün Tz[)u]'s chief importance lies in the fact that

[012-020] he recognized that the "laws" of nature are unchanging but that man's

[012-021] fate is determined not by nature alone but, in addition, by his own

[012-022] activities. Man's nature is basically bad, but by working on himself

[012-023] within the framework of society, he can change his nature and can

[012-024] develop. Thus, Hsün Tz[)u]'s philosophy contains a dynamic element, fit

[012-025] for a dynamic period of history.

[012-026] In the strongest contrast to these thinkers was the school of Mo Ti (at

[012-027] some time between 479 and 381 B.C.). The Confucian school held fast to

[012-028] the old feudal order of society, and was only ready to agree to a few

[012-029] superficial changes. The school of Mo Ti proposed to alter the

[012-030] fundamental principles of society. Family ethics must no longer be

[012-031] retained; the principles of family love must be extended to the whole

[012-032] upper class, which Mo Ti called the "people". One must love another

[012-033] member of the upper class just as much as one's own father. Then the

[012-034] friction between individuals and between states would cease. Instead of

[012-035] families, large groups of people friendly to one another must be

[012-036] created. Further one should live frugally and not expend endless money

[012-037] on effete rites, as the Confucianists demanded. The expenditure on

[012-038] weddings and funerals under the Confucianist ritual consumed so much

[012-039] money that many families fell into debt and, if they were unable to pay

[012-040] off the debt, sank from the upper into the lower class. In order to

[012-041] maintain the upper class, therefore, there must be more frugality. Mo

[012-042] Ti's teaching won great influence. He and his successors surrounded

[012-043] themselves with a private army of supporters which was rigidly organized

[012-044] and which could be brought into action at any time as its leader wished.

[012-045] Thus the Mohists came forward everywhere with an approach entirely

[012-046] different from that of the isolated Confucians. When the Mohists offered

[012-047] their assistance to a ruler, they brought with them a group of technical

[012-048] and military experts who had been trained on the same principles. In

[012-049] consequence of its great influence this teaching was naturally hotly

[012-050] opposed by the Confucianists.

[012-051] We see clearly in Mo Ti's and his followers' ideas the influence of the

[012-052] changed times. His principle of "universal love" reflects the breakdown

[012-053] of the clans and the general weakening of family bonds which had taken

[012-054] place. His ideal of social organization resembles organizations of

[012-055] merchants and craftsmen which we know only of later periods. His stress

[012-056] upon frugality, too, reflects a line of thought which is typical of

[012-057] businessmen. The rationality which can also be seen in his metaphysical

[012-058] ideas and which has induced modern Chinese scholars to call him an early

[012-059] materialist is fitting to an age in which a developing money economy and

[012-060] expanding trade required a cool, logical approach to the affairs of this

[012-061] world.

[012-062] A similar mentality can be seen in another school which appeared from

[012-063] the fifth century B.C. on, the "dialecticians". Here are a number of

[012-064] names to mention: the most important are Kung-sun Lung and Hui Tz[)u],

[012-065] who are comparable with the ancient Greek dialecticians and Sophists.

[012-066] They saw their main task in the development of logic. Since, as we have

[012-067] mentioned, many "scholars" journeyed from one princely court to another,

[012-068] and other people came forward, each recommending his own method to the

[012-069] prince for the increase of his power, it was of great importance to be

[012-070] able to talk convincingly, so as to defeat a rival in a duel of words on

[012-071] logical grounds.

[012-072] Unquestionably, however, the most important school of this period was

[012-073] that of the so-called Legalists, whose most famous representative was

[012-074] Shang Yang (or Shang Tz[)u], died 338 B.C.). The supporters of this

[012-075] school came principally from old princely families that had lost their

[012-076] feudal possessions, and not from among the so-called scholars. They were

[012-077] people belonging to the upper class who possessed political experience

[012-078] and now offered their knowledge to other princes who still reigned.

[012-079] These men had entirely given up the old conservative traditions of

[012-080] Confucianism; they were the first to make their peace with the new

[012-081] social order. They recognized that little or nothing remained of the old

[012-082] upper class of feudal lords and their following. The last of the feudal

[012-083] lords collected around the heads of the last remaining princely courts,

[012-084] or lived quietly on the estates that still remained to them. Such a

[012-085] class, with its moral and economic strength broken, could no longer

[012-086] lead. The Legalists recognized, therefore, only the ruler and next to

[012-087] him, as the really active and responsible man, the chancellor; under

[012-088] these there were to be only the common people, consisting of the richer

[012-089] and poorer peasants; the people's duty was to live and work for the

[012-090] ruler, and to carry out without question whatever orders they received.

[012-091] They were not to discuss or think, but to obey. The chancellor was to

[012-092] draft laws which came automatically into operation. The ruler himself

[012-093] was to have nothing to do with the government or with the application of

[012-094] the laws. He was only a symbol, a representative of the equally inactive

[012-095] Heaven. Clearly these theories were much the best suited to the

[012-096] conditions of the break-up of feudalism about 300 B.C. Thus they were

[012-097] first adopted by the state in which the old idea of the feudal state had

[012-098] been least developed, the state of Ch'in, in which alien peoples were

[012-099] most strongly represented. Shang Yang became the actual organizer of the

[012-100] state of Ch'in. His ideas were further developed by Han Fei Tz[)u] (died

[012-101] 233 B.C.). The mentality which speaks out of his writings has closest

[012-102] similarity to the famous Indian Arthashastra which originated slightly

[012-103] earlier; both books exhibit a "Machiavellian" spirit. It must be

[012-104] observed that these theories had little or nothing to do with the ideas

[012-105] of the old cult of Heaven or with family allegiance; on the other hand,

[012-106] the soldierly element, with the notion of obedience, was well suited to

[012-107] the militarized peoples of the west. The population of Ch'in, organized

[012-108] throughout on these principles, was then in a position to remove one

[012-109] opponent after another. In the middle of the third century B.C. the

[012-110] greater part of the China of that time was already in the hands of

[012-111] Ch'in, and in 256 B.C. the last emperor of the Chou dynasty was

[012-112] compelled, in his complete impotence, to abdicate in favour of the ruler

[012-113] of Ch'in.

[012-114] Apart from these more or less political speculations, there came into

[012-115] existence in this period, by no mere chance, a school of thought which

[012-116] never succeeded in fully developing in China, concerned with natural

[012-117] science and comparable with the Greek natural philosophy. We have

[012-118] already several times pointed to parallels between Chinese and Indian

[012-119] thoughts. Such similarities may be the result of mere coincidence. But

[012-120] recent findings in Central Asia indicate that direct connections between

[012-121] India, Persia, and China may have started at a time much earlier than we

[012-122] had formerly thought. Sogdian merchants who later played a great role in

[012-123] commercial contacts might have been active already from 350 or 400 B.C.

[012-124] on and might have been the transmitters of new ideas. The most important

[012-125] philosopher of this school was Tsou Yen (flourished between 320 and 295

[012-126] B.C.); he, as so many other Chinese philosophers of this time, was a

[012-127] native of Shantung, and the ports of the Shantung coast may well have

[012-128] been ports of entrance of new ideas from Western Asia as were the roads

[012-129] through the Turkestan basin into Western China. Tsou Yen's basic ideas

[012-130] had their root in earlier Chinese speculations: the doctrine that all

[012-131] that exists is to be explained by the positive, creative, or the

[012-132] negative, passive action (Yang and Yin) of the five elements, wood,

[012-133] fire, earth, metal, and water (Wu hsing). But Tsou Yen also considered

[012-134] the form of the world, and was the first to put forward the theory that

[012-135] the world consists not of a single continent with China in the middle of

[012-136] it, but of nine continents. The names of these continents sound like

[012-137] Indian names, and his idea of a central world-mountain may well have

[012-138] come from India. The "scholars" of his time were quite unable to

[012-139] appreciate this beginning of science, which actually led to the

[012-140] contention of this school, in the first century B.C., that the earth was

[012-141] of spherical shape. Tsou Yen himself was ridiculed as a dreamer; but

[012-142] very soon, when the idea of the reciprocal destruction of the elements

[012-143] was applied, perhaps by Tsou Yen himself, to politics, namely when, in

[012-144] connection with the astronomical calculations much cultivated by this

[012-145] school and through the identification of dynasties with the five

[012-146] elements, the attempt was made to explain and to calculate the duration

[012-147] and the supersession of dynasties, strong pressure began to be brought

[012-148] to bear against this school. For hundreds of years its books were

[012-149] distributed and read only in secret, and many of its members were

[012-150] executed as revolutionaries. Thus, this school, instead of becoming the

[012-151] nucleus of a school of natural science, was driven underground. The

[012-152] secret societies which started to arise clearly from the first century

[012-153] B.C. on, but which may have been in existence earlier, adopted the

[012-154] politico-scientific ideas of Tsou Yen's school. Such secret societies

[012-155] have existed in China down to the present time. They all contained a

[012-156] strong religious, but heterodox element which can often be traced back

[012-157] to influences from a foreign religion. In times of peace they were

[012-158] centres of a true, emotional religiosity. In times of stress, a

[012-159] "messianic" element tended to become prominent: the world is bad and

[012-160] degenerating; morality and a just social order have decayed, but the

[012-161] coming of a savior is close; the saviour will bring a new, fair order

[012-162] and destroy those who are wicked. Tsou Yen's philosophy seemed to allow

[012-163] them to calculate when this new order would start; later secret

[012-164] societies contained ideas from Iranian Mazdaism, Manichaeism and

[012-165] Buddhism, mixed with traits from the popular religions and often couched

[012-166] in terms taken from the Taoists. The members of such societies were,

[012-167] typically, ordinary farmers who here found an emotional outlet for their

[012-168] frustrations in daily life. In times of stress, members of the leading

[012-169] _élite_ often but not always established contacts with these societies,

[012-170] took over their leadership and led them to open rebellion. The fate of

[012-171] Tsou Yen's school did not mean that the Chinese did not develop in the

[012-172] field of sciences. At about Tsou Yen's lifetime, the first mathematical

[012-173] handbook was written. From these books it is obvious that the interest

[012-174] of the government in calculating the exact size of fields, the content

[012-175] of measures for grain, and other fiscal problems stimulated work in this

[012-176] field, just as astronomy developed from the interest of the government

[012-177] in the fixation of the calendar. Science kept on developing in other

[012-178] fields, too, but mainly as a hobby of scholars and in the shops of

[012-179] craftsmen, if it did not have importance for the administration and

[012-180] especially taxation and budget calculations.

## c13.xhtml
