---
description: "Chapter 13 of A History of China"
id: ch13
label: "Section 13"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 13

[013-001] Chapter Five

[013-002] THE CH'IN DYNASTY (256-207 B.C.)

[013-003] 1 _Towards the unitary State_

[013-004] In 256 B.C. the last ruler of the Chou dynasty abdicated in favour of

[013-005] the feudal lord of the state of Ch'in. Some people place the beginning

[013-006] of the Ch'in dynasty in that year, 256 B.C.; others prefer the date 221

[013-007] B.C., because it was only in that year that the remaining feudal states

[013-008] came to their end and Ch'in really ruled all China.

[013-009] The territories of the state of Ch'in, the present Shensi and eastern

[013-010] Kansu, were from a geographical point of view transit regions, closed

[013-011] off in the north by steppes and deserts and in the south by almost

[013-012] impassable mountains. Only between these barriers, along the rivers Wei

[013-013] (in Shensi) and T'ao (in Kansu), is there a rich cultivable zone which

[013-014] is also the only means of transit from east to west. All traffic from

[013-015] and to Turkestan had to take this route. It is believed that strong

[013-016] relations with eastern Turkestan began in this period, and the state of

[013-017] Ch'in must have drawn big profits from its "foreign trade". The merchant

[013-018] class quickly gained more and more importance. The population was

[013-019] growing through immigration from the east which the government

[013-020] encouraged. This growing population with its increasing means of

[013-021] production, especially the great new irrigation systems, provided a

[013-022] welcome field for trade which was also furthered by the roads, though

[013-023] these were actually built for military purposes.

[013-024] The state of Ch'in had never been so closely associated with the feudal

[013-025] communities of the rest of China as the other feudal states. A great

[013-026] part of its population, including the ruling class, was not purely

[013-027] Chinese but contained an admixture of Turks and Tibetans. The other

[013-028] Chinese even called Ch'in a "barbarian state", and the foreign influence

[013-029] was, indeed, unceasing. This was a favourable soil for the overcoming of

[013-030] feudalism, and the process was furthered by the factors mentioned in the

[013-031] preceding chapter, which were leading to a change in the social

[013-032] structure of China. Especially the recruitment of the whole population,

[013-033] including the peasantry, for war was entirely in the interest of the

[013-034] influential nomad fighting peoples within the state. About 250 B.C.,

[013-035] Ch'in was not only one of the economically strongest among the feudal

[013-036] states, but had already made an end of its own feudal system.

[013-037] Every feudal system harbours some seeds of a bureaucratic system of

[013-038] administration: feudal lords have their personal servants who are not

[013-039] recruited from the nobility, but who by their easy access to the lord

[013-040] can easily gain importance. They may, for instance, be put in charge of

[013-041] estates, workshops, and other properties of the lord and thus acquire

[013-042] experience in administration and an efficiency which are obviously of

[013-043] advantage to the lord. When Chinese lords of the preceding period, with

[013-044] the help of their sub-lords of the nobility, made wars, they tended to

[013-045] put the newly-conquered areas not into the hands of newly-enfeoffed

[013-046] noblemen, but to keep them as their property and to put their

[013-047] administration into the hands of efficient servants; these were the

[013-048] first bureaucratic officials. Thus, in the course of the later Chou

[013-049] period, a bureaucratic system of administration had begun to develop,

[013-050] and terms like "district" or "prefecture" began to appear, indicating

[013-051] that areas under a bureaucratic administration existed beside and inside

[013-052] areas under feudal rule. This process had gone furthest in Ch'in and was

[013-053] sponsored by the representatives of the Legalist School, which was best

[013-054] adapted to the new economic and social situation.

[013-055] A son of one of the concubines of the penultimate feudal ruler of Ch'in

[013-056] was living as a hostage in the neighbouring state of Chao, in what is

[013-057] now northern Shansi. There he made the acquaintance of an unusual man,

[013-058] the merchant Lü Pu-wei, a man of education and of great political

[013-059] influence. Lü Pu-wei persuaded the feudal ruler of Ch'in to declare this

[013-060] son his successor. He also sold a girl to the prince to be his wife, and

[013-061] the son of this marriage was to be the famous and notorious Shih

[013-062] Huang-ti. Lü Pu-wei came with his protege to Ch'in, where he became his

[013-063] Prime Minister, and after the prince's death in 247 B.C. Lü Pu-wei

[013-064] became the regent for his young son Shih Huang-ti (then called Cheng).

[013-065] For the first time in Chinese history a merchant, a commoner, had

[013-066] reached one of the highest positions in the state. It is not known what

[013-067] sort of trade Lü Pu-wei had carried on, but probably he dealt in horses,

[013-068] the principal export of the state of Chao. As horses were an absolute

[013-069] necessity for the armies of that time, it is easy to imagine that a

[013-070] horse-dealer might gain great political influence.

[013-071] Soon after Shih Huang-ti's accession Lü Pu-wei was dismissed, and a new

[013-072] group of advisers, strong supporters of the Legalist school, came into

[013-073] power. These new men began an active policy of conquest instead of the

[013-074] peaceful course which Lü Pu-wei had pursued. One campaign followed

[013-075] another in the years from 230 to 222, until all the feudal states had

[013-076] been conquered, annexed, and brought under Shih Huang-ti's rule.

[013-077] 2 _Centralization in every field_

[013-078] The main task of the now gigantic realm was the organization of

[013-079] administration. One of the first acts after the conquest of the other

[013-080] feudal states was to deport all the ruling families and other important

[013-081] nobles to the capital of Ch'in; they were thus deprived of the basis of

[013-082] their power, and their land could be sold. These upper-class families

[013-083] supplied to the capital a class of consumers of luxury goods which

[013-084] attracted craftsmen and businessmen and changed the character of the

[013-085] capital from that of a provincial town to a centre of arts and crafts.

[013-086] It was decided to set up the uniform system of administration throughout

[013-087] the realm, which had already been successfully introduced in Ch'in: the

[013-088] realm was split up into provinces and the provinces into prefectures;

[013-089] and an official was placed in charge of each province or prefecture.

[013-090] Originally the prefectures in Ch'in had been placed directly under the

[013-091] central administration, with an official, often a merchant, being

[013-092] responsible for the collection of taxes; the provinces, on the other

[013-093] hand, formed a sort of military command area, especially in the

[013-094] newly-conquered frontier territories. With the growing militarization of

[013-095] Ch'in, greater importance was assigned to the provinces, and the

[013-096] prefectures were made subordinate to them. Thus the officials of the

[013-097] provinces were originally army officers but now, in the reorganization

[013-098] of the whole realm, the distinction between civil and military

[013-099] administration was abolished. At the head of the province were a civil

[013-100] and also a military governor, and both were supervised by a controller

[013-101] directly responsible to the emperor. Since there was naturally a

[013-102] continual struggle for power between these three officials, none of them

[013-103] was supreme and none could develop into a sort of feudal lord. In this

[013-104] system we can see the essence of the later Chinese administration.

[013-105] [Illustration: 3 Bronze plaque representing two horses fighting each

[013-106] other. Ordos region, animal style. _From V. Griessmaier: Sammlung Baron

[013-107] Eduard von der Heydt, Vienna_ 1936, _illustration No_. 6.]

[013-108] [Illustration: 4 Hunting scene: detail from the reliefs in the tombs at

[013-109] Wu-liang-tz'u. _From a print in the author's possession_.]

[013-110] [Illustration: 5 Part of the 'Great Wall'. _Photo Eberhard_.]

[013-111] Owing to the centuries of division into independent feudal states, the

[013-112] various parts of the country had developed differently. Each province

[013-113] spoke a different dialect which also contained many words borrowed from

[013-114] the language of the indigenous population; and as these earlier

[013-115] populations sometimes belonged to different races with different

[013-116] languages, in each state different words had found their way into the

[013-117] Chinese dialects. This caused divergences not only in the spoken but in

[013-118] the written language, and even in the characters in use for writing.

[013-119] There exist to this day dictionaries in which the borrowed words of that

[013-120] time are indicated, and keys to the various old forms of writing also

[013-121] exist. Thus difficulties arose if, for instance, a man from the old

[013-122] territory of Ch'in was to be transferred as an official to the east: he

[013-123] could not properly understand the language and could not read the

[013-124] borrowed words, if he could read at all! For a large number of the

[013-125] officials of that time, especially the officers who became military

[013-126] governors, were certainly unable to read. The government therefore

[013-127] ordered that the language of the whole country should be unified, and

[013-128] that a definite style of writing should be generally adopted. The words

[013-129] to be used were set out in lists, so that the first lexicography came

[013-130] into existence simply through the needs of practical administration, as

[013-131] had happened much earlier in Babylon. Thus, the few recently found

[013-132] manuscripts from pre-Ch'in times still contain a high percentage of

[013-133] Chinese characters which we cannot read because they were local

[013-134] characters; but all words in texts after the Ch'in time can be read

[013-135] because they belong to the standardized script. We know now that all

[013-136] classical texts of pre-Ch'in time as we have them today, have been

[013-137] re-written in this standardized script in the second century B.C.: we do

[013-138] not know which words they actually contained at the time when they were

[013-139] composed, nor how these words were actually pronounced, a fact which

[013-140] makes the reconstruction of Chinese language before Ch'in very

[013-141] difficult.

[013-142] The next requirement for the carrying on of the administration was the

[013-143] unification of weights and measures and, a surprising thing to us, of

[013-144] the gauge of the tracks for wagons. In the various feudal states there

[013-145] had been different weights and measures in use, and this had led to

[013-146] great difficulties in the centralization of the collection of taxes. The

[013-147] centre of administration, that is to say the new capital of Ch'in, had

[013-148] grown through the transfer of nobles and through the enormous size of

[013-149] the administrative staff into a thickly populated city with very large

[013-150] requirements of food. The fields of the former state of Ch'in alone

[013-151] could not feed the city; and the grain supplied in payment of taxation

[013-152] had to be brought in from far around, partly by cart. The only roads

[013-153] then existing consisted of deep cart-tracks. If the axles were not of

[013-154] the same length for all carts, the roads were simply unusable for many

[013-155] of them. Accordingly a fixed length was laid down for axles. The

[013-156] advocates of all these reforms were also their beneficiaries, the

[013-157] merchants.

[013-158] The first principle of the Legalist school, a principle which had been

[013-159] applied in Ch'in and which was to be extended to the whole realm, was

[013-160] that of the training of the population in discipline and obedience, so

[013-161] that it should become a convenient tool in the hands of the officials.

[013-162] This requirement was best met by a people composed as far as possible

[013-163] only of industrious, uneducated, and tax-paying peasants. Scholars and

[013-164] philosophers were not wanted, in so far as they were not directly

[013-165] engaged in work commissioned by the state. The Confucianist writings

[013-166] came under special attack because they kept alive the memory of the old

[013-167] feudal conditions, preaching the ethic of the old feudal class which had

[013-168] just been destroyed and must not be allowed to rise again if the state

[013-169] was not to suffer fresh dissolution or if the central administration was

[013-170] not to be weakened. In 213 B.C. there took place the great holocaust of

[013-171] books which destroyed the Confucianist writings with the exception of

[013-172] one copy of each work for the State Library. Books on practical subjects

[013-173] were not affected. In the fighting at the end of the Ch'in dynasty the

[013-174] State Library was burnt down, so that many of the old works have only

[013-175] come down to us in an imperfect state and with doubtful accuracy. The

[013-176] real loss arose, however, from the fact that the new generation was

[013-177] little interested in the Confucianist literature, so that when, fifty

[013-178] years later, the effort was made to restore some texts from the oral

[013-179] tradition, there no longer existed any scholars who really knew them by

[013-180] heart, as had been customary in the past.

## c14.xhtml
