---
description: "Chapter 14 of A History of China"
id: ch14
label: "Section 14"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 14

[014-001] In 221 B.C. Shih Huang-ti had become emperor of all China. The judgments

[014-002] passed on him vary greatly: the official Chinese historiography rejects

[014-003] him entirely--naturally, for he tried to exterminate Confucianism, while

[014-004] every later historian was himself a Confucian. Western scholars often

[014-005] treat him as one of the greatest men in world history. Closer research

[014-006] has shown that Shih Huang-ti was evidently an average man without any

[014-007] great gifts, that he was superstitious, and shared the tendency of his

[014-008] time to mystical and shamanistic notions. His own opinion was that he

[014-009] was the first of a series of ten thousand emperors of his dynasty (Shih

[014-010] Huang-ti means "First Emperor"), and this merely suggests megalomania.

[014-011] The basic principles of his administration had been laid down long

[014-012] before his time by the philosophers of the Legalist school, and were

[014-013] given effect by his Chancellor Li Ss[)u]. Li Ss[)u] was the really great

[014-014] personality of that period. The Legalists taught that the ruler must do

[014-015] as little as possible himself. His Ministers were there to act for him.

[014-016] He himself was to be regarded as a symbol of Heaven. In that capacity

[014-017] Shih Huang-ti undertook periodical journeys into the various parts of

[014-018] the empire, less for any practical purpose of inspection than for

[014-019] purposes of public worship. They corresponded to the course of the sun,

[014-020] and this indicates that Shih Huang-ti had adopted a notion derived from

[014-021] the older northern culture of the nomad peoples.

[014-022] He planned the capital in an ambitious style but, although there was

[014-023] real need for extension of the city, his plans can scarcely be regarded

[014-024] as of great service. His enormous palace, and also his mausoleum which

[014-025] was built for him before his death, were constructed in accordance with

[014-026] astral notions. Within the palace the emperor continually changed his

[014-027] residential quarters, probably not only from fear of assassination but

[014-028] also for astral reasons. His mausoleum formed a hemispherical dome, and

[014-029] all the stars of the sky were painted on its interior.

[014-030] 3 _Frontier defence. Internal collapse_

[014-031] When the empire had been unified by the destruction of the feudal

[014-032] states, the central government became responsible for the protection of

[014-033] the frontiers from attack from without. In the south there were only

[014-034] peoples in a very low state of civilization, who could offer no serious

[014-035] menace to the Chinese. The trading colonies that gradually extended to

[014-036] Canton and still farther south served as Chinese administrative centres

[014-037] for provinces and prefectures, with small but adequate armies of their

[014-038] own, so that in case of need they could defend themselves. In the north

[014-039] the position was much more difficult. In addition to their conquest

[014-040] within China, the rulers of Ch'in had pushed their frontier far to the

[014-041] north. The nomad tribes had been pressed back and deprived of their best

[014-042] pasturage, namely the Ordos region. When the livelihood of nomad peoples

[014-043] is affected, when they are threatened with starvation, their tribes

[014-044] often collect round a tribal leader who promises new pasturage and

[014-045] better conditions of life for all who take part in the common campaigns.

[014-046] In this way the first great union of tribes in the north of China came

[014-047] into existence in this period, forming the realm of the Hsiung-nu under

[014-048] their first leader, T'ou-man. This first realm of the Hsiung-nu was not

[014-049] yet extensive, but its ambitious and warlike attitude made it a danger

[014-050] to Ch'in. It was therefore decided to maintain a large permanent army in

[014-051] the north. In addition to this, the frontier walls already existing in

[014-052] the mountains were rebuilt and made into a single great system. Thus

[014-053] came into existence in 214 B.C., out of the blood and sweat of countless

[014-054] pressed labourers, the famous Great Wall.

[014-055] On one of his periodical journeys the emperor fell ill and died. His

[014-056] death was the signal for the rising of many rebellious elements. Nobles

[014-057] rose in order to regain power and influence; generals rose because they

[014-058] objected to the permanent pressure from the central administration and

[014-059] their supervision by controllers; men of the people rose as popular

[014-060] leaders because the people were more tormented than ever by forced

[014-061] labour, generally at a distance from their homes. Within a few months

[014-062] there were six different rebellions and six different "rulers".

[014-063] Assassinations became the order of the day; the young heir to the throne

[014-064] was removed in this way and replaced by another young prince. But as

[014-065] early as 206 B.C. one of the rebels, Liu Chi (also called Liu Pang),

[014-066] entered the capital and dethroned the nominal emperor. Liu Chi at first

[014-067] had to retreat and was involved in hard fighting with a rival, but

[014-068] gradually he succeeded in gaining the upper hand and defeated not only

[014-069] his rival but also the other eighteen states that had been set up anew

[014-070] in China in those years.

[014-071] THE MIDDLE AGES

[014-072] Chapter Six

[014-073] THE HAN DYNASTY (206 B.C.-A.D. 220)

[014-074] I _Development of the gentry-state_

[014-075] In 206 B.C. Liu Chi assumed the title of Emperor and gave his dynasty

[014-076] the name of the Han Dynasty. After his death he was given as emperor the

[014-077] name of Kao Tsu.[4] The period of the Han dynasty may be described as

[014-078] the beginning of the Chinese Middle Ages, while that of the Ch'in

[014-079] dynasty represents the transition from antiquity to the Middle Ages; for

[014-080] under the Han dynasty we meet in China with a new form of state, the

[014-081] "gentry state". The feudalism of ancient times has come definitely to

[014-082] its end.

[014-083] [Footnote 4: From then on, every emperor was given after his death an

[014-084] official name as emperor, under which he appears in the Chinese sources.

[014-085] We have adopted the original or the official name according to which of

[014-086] the two has come into the more general use in Western books.]

[014-087] Emperor Kao Tsu came from eastern China, and his family seems to have

[014-088] been a peasant family; in any case it did not belong to the old

[014-089] nobility. After his destruction of his strongest rival, the removal of

[014-090] the kings who had made themselves independent in the last years of the

[014-091] Ch'in dynasty was a relatively easy task for the new autocrat, although

[014-092] these struggles occupied the greater part of his reign. A much more

[014-093] difficult question, however, faced him: How was the empire to be

[014-094] governed? Kao Tsu's old friends and fellow-countrymen, who had helped

[014-095] him into power, had been rewarded by appointment as generals or high

[014-096] officials. Gradually he got rid of those who had been his best comrades,

[014-097] as so many upstart rulers have done before and after him in every

[014-098] country in the world. An emperor does not like to be reminded of a very

[014-099] humble past, and he is liable also to fear the rivalry of men who

[014-100] formerly were his equals. It is evident that little attention was paid

[014-101] to theories of administration; policy was determined mainly by practical

[014-102] considerations. Kao Tsu allowed many laws and regulations to remain in

[014-103] force, including the prohibition of Confucianist writings. On the other

[014-104] hand, he reverted to the allocation of fiefs, though not to old noble

[014-105] families but to his relatives and some of his closest adherents,

[014-106] generally men of inferior social standing. Thus a mixed administration

[014-107] came into being: part of the empire was governed by new feudal princes,

[014-108] and another part split up into provinces and prefectures and placed

[014-109] directly under the central power through its officials.

[014-110] But whence came the officials? Kao Tsu and his supporters, as farmers

[014-111] from eastern China, looked down upon the trading population to which

[014-112] farmers always regard themselves as superior. The merchants were ignored

[014-113] as potential officials although they had often enough held official

[014-114] appointments under the former dynasty. The second group from which

[014-115] officials had been drawn under the Ch'in was that of the army officers,

[014-116] but their military functions had now, of course, fallen to Kao Tsu's

[014-117] soldiers. The emperor had little faith, however, in the loyalty of

[014-118] officers, even of his own, and apart from that he would have had first

[014-119] to create a new administrative organization for them. Accordingly he

[014-120] turned to another class which had come into existence, the class later

[014-121] called the _gentry_, which in practice had the power already in its

[014-122] hands.

[014-123] The term "gentry" has no direct parallel in Chinese texts; the later

[014-124] terms "shen-shih" and "chin-shen" do not quite cover this concept. The

[014-125] basic unit of the gentry class are families, not individuals. Such

[014-126] families often derive their origin from branches of the Chou nobility.

[014-127] But other gentry families were of different and more recent origin in

[014-128] respect to land ownership. Some late Chou and Ch'in officials of

[014-129] non-noble origin had become wealthy and had acquired land; the same was

[014-130] true for wealthy merchants and finally, some non-noble farmers who were

[014-131] successful in one or another way, bought additional land reaching the

[014-132] size of large holdings. All "gentry" families owned substantial estates

[014-133] in the provinces which they leased to tenants on a kind of contract

[014-134] basis. The tenants, therefore, cannot be called "serfs" although their

[014-135] factual position often was not different from the position of serfs. The

[014-136] rents of these tenants, usually about half the gross produce, are the

[014-137] basis of the livelihood of the gentry. One part of a gentry family

[014-138] normally lives in the country on a small home farm in order to be able

[014-139] to collect the rents. If the family can acquire more land and if this

[014-140] new land is too far away from the home farm to make collection of rents

[014-141] easy, a new home farm is set up under the control of another branch of

[014-142] the family. But the original home remains to be regarded as the real

[014-143] family centre.

[014-144] In a typical gentry family, another branch of the family is in the

[014-145] capital or in a provincial administrative centre in official positions.

[014-146] These officials at the same time are the most highly educated members

[014-147] of the family and are often called the "literati". There are also always

[014-148] individual family members who are not interested in official careers or

[014-149] who failed in their careers and live as free "literati" either in the

[014-150] big cities or on the home farms. It seems, to judge from much later

[014-151] sources, that the families assisted their most able members to enter the

[014-152] official careers, while those individuals who were less able were used

[014-153] in the administration of the farms. This system in combination with the

[014-154] strong familism of the Chinese, gave a double security to the gentry

[014-155] families. If difficulties arose in the estates either by attacks of

[014-156] bandits or by war or other catastrophes, the family members in official

[014-157] positions could use their influence and power to restore the property in

[014-158] the provinces. If, on the other hand, the family members in official

[014-159] positions lost their positions or even their lives by displeasing the

[014-160] court, the home branch could always find ways to remain untouched and

[014-161] could, in a generation or two, recruit new members and regain power and

[014-162] influence in the government. Thus, as families, the gentry was secure,

[014-163] although failures could occur to individuals. There are many gentry

[014-164] families who remained in the ruling _élite_ for many centuries, some

[014-165] over more than a thousand years, weathering all vicissitudes of life.

[014-166] Some authors believe that Chinese leading families generally pass

[014-167] through a three- or four-generation cycle: a family member by his

[014-168] official position is able to acquire much land, and his family moves

[014-169] upward. He is able to give the best education and other facilities to

[014-170] his sons who lead a good life. But either these sons or the grandsons

[014-171] are spoiled and lazy; they begin to lose their property and status. The

[014-172] family moves downward, until in the fourth or fifth generation a new

[014-173] rise begins. Actual study of families seems to indicate that this is not

[014-174] true. The main branch of the family retains its position over centuries.

[014-175] But some of the branch families, created often by the less able family

[014-176] members, show a tendency towards downward social mobility.

## c15.xhtml
