---
description: "Chapter 15 of A History of China"
id: ch15
label: "Section 15"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 15

[015-001] It is clear from the above that a gentry family should be interested in

[015-002] having a fair number of children. The more sons they have, the more

[015-003] positions of power the family can occupy and thus, the more secure it

[015-004] will be; the more daughters they have, the more "political" marriages

[015-005] they can conclude, i.e. marriages with sons of other gentry families in

[015-006] positions of influence. Therefore, gentry families in China tend to be,

[015-007] on the average, larger than ordinary families, while in our Western

[015-008] countries the leading families usually were smaller than the lower class

[015-009] families. This means that gentry families produced more children than

[015-010] was necessary to replenish the available leading positions; thus, some

[015-011] family members had to get into lower positions and had to lose status.

[015-012] In view of this situation it was very difficult for lower class families

[015-013] to achieve access into this gentry group. In European countries the

[015-014] leading _élite_ did not quite replenish their ranks in the next

[015-015] generation, so that there was always some chance for the lower classes

[015-016] to move up into leading ranks. The gentry society was, therefore, a

[015-017] comparably stable society with little upward social mobility but with

[015-018] some downward mobility. As a whole and for reasons of gentry

[015-019] self-interest, the gentry stood for stability and against change.

[015-020] The gentry members in the bureaucracy collaborated closely with one

[015-021] another because they were tied together by bonds of blood or marriage.

[015-022] It was easy for them to find good tutors for their children, because a

[015-023] pupil owed a debt of gratitude to his teacher and a child from a gentry

[015-024] family could later on nicely repay this debt; often, these teachers

[015-025] themselves were members of other gentry families. It was easy for sons

[015-026] of the gentry to get into official positions, because the people who had

[015-027] to recommend them for office were often related to them or knew the

[015-028] position of their family. In Han time, local officials had the duty to

[015-029] recommend young able men; if these men turned out to be good, the

[015-030] officials were rewarded, if not they were blamed or even punished. An

[015-031] official took less of a chance, if he recommended a son of an

[015-032] influential family, and he obliged such a candidate so that he could

[015-033] later count on his help if he himself should come into difficulties.

[015-034] When, towards the end of the second century B.C., a kind of examination

[015-035] system was introduced, this attitude was not basically changed.

[015-036] The country branch of the family by the fact that it controlled large

[015-037] tracts of land, supplied also the logical tax collectors: they had the

[015-038] standing and power required for this job. Even if they were appointed in

[015-039] areas other than their home country (a rule which later was usually

[015-040] applied), they knew the gentry families of the other district or were

[015-041] related to them and got their support by appointing their members as

[015-042] their assistants.

[015-043] Gentry society continued from Kao Tsu's time to 1948, but it went

[015-044] through a number of phases of development and changed considerably in

[015-045] time. We will later outline some of the most important changes. In

[015-046] general the number of politically leading gentry families was around one

[015-047] hundred (texts often speak of "the hundred families" in this time) and

[015-048] they were concentrated in the capital; the most important home seats of

[015-049] these families in Han time were close to the capital and east of it or

[015-050] in the plains of eastern China, at that time the main centre of grain

[015-051] production.

[015-052] We regard roughly the first one thousand years of "Gentry Society" as

[015-053] the period of the Chinese "Middle Ages", beginning with the Han dynasty;

[015-054] the preceding time of the Ch'in was considered as a period of

[015-055] transition, a time in which the feudal period of "Antiquity" came to a

[015-056] formal end and a new organization of society began to become visible.

[015-057] Even those authors who do not accept a sociological classification of

[015-058] periods and many authors who use Marxist categories, believe that with

[015-059] Ch'in and Han a new era in Chinese history began.

[015-060] 2 _Situation of the Hsiung-nu empire; its relation to the Han empire.

[015-061] Incorporation of South China_

[015-062] In the time of the Ch'in dynasty there had already come into unpleasant

[015-063] prominence north of the Chinese frontier the tribal union, then

[015-064] relatively small, of the Hsiung-nu. Since then, the Hsiung-nu empire had

[015-065] destroyed the federation of the Yüeh-chih tribes (some of which seem to

[015-066] have been of Indo-European language stock) and incorporated their people

[015-067] into their own federation; they had conquered also the less well

[015-068] organized eastern pastoral tribes, the Tung-hu and thus had become a

[015-069] formidable power. Everything goes to show that it had close relations

[015-070] with the territories of northern China. Many Chinese seem to have

[015-071] migrated to the Hsiung-nu empire, where they were welcome as artisans

[015-072] and probably also as farmers; but above all they were needed for the

[015-073] staffing of a new state administration. The scriveners in the newly

[015-074] introduced state secretariat were Chinese and wrote Chinese, for at that

[015-075] time the Hsiung-nu apparently had no written language. There were

[015-076] Chinese serving as administrators and court officials, and even as

[015-077] instructors in the army administration, teaching the art of warfare

[015-078] against non-nomads. But what was the purpose of all this? Mao Tun, the

[015-079] second ruler of the Hsiung-nu, and his first successors undoubtedly

[015-080] intended ultimately to conquer China, exactly as many other northern

[015-081] peoples after them planned to do, and a few of them did. The main

[015-082] purpose of this was always to bring large numbers of peasants under the

[015-083] rule of the nomad rulers and so to solve, once for all, the problem of

[015-084] the provision of additional winter food. Everything that was needed, and

[015-085] everything that seemed to be worth trying to get as they grew more

[015-086] civilized, would thus be obtained better and more regularly than by

[015-087] raids or by tedious commercial negotiations. But if China was to be

[015-088] conquered and ruled there must exist a state organization of equal

[015-089] authority to hers; the Hsiung-nu ruler must himself come forward as Son

[015-090] of Heaven and develop a court ceremonial similar to that of a Chinese

[015-091] emperor. Thus the basis of the organization of the Hsiung-nu state lay

[015-092] in its rivalry with the neighbouring China; but the details naturally

[015-093] corresponded to the special nature of the Hsiung-nu social system. The

[015-094] young Hsiung-nu feudal state differed from the ancient Chinese feudal

[015-095] state not only in depending on a nomad economy with only supplementary

[015-096] agriculture, but also in possessing, in addition to a whole class of

[015-097] nobility and another of commoners, a stratum of slavery to be analysed

[015-098] further below. Similar to the Chou state, the Hsiung-nu state contained,

[015-099] especially around the ruler, an element of court bureaucracy which,

[015-100] however, never developed far enough to replace the basically feudal

[015-101] character of administration.

[015-102] Thus Kao Tsu was faced in Mao Tun not with a mere nomad chieftain but

[015-103] with the most dangerous of enemies, and Kao Tsu's policy had to be

[015-104] directed to preventing any interference of the Hsiung-nu in North

[015-105] Chinese affairs, and above all to preventing alliances between Hsiung-nu

[015-106] and Chinese. Hsiung-nu alone, with their technique of horsemen's

[015-107] warfare, would scarcely have been equal to the permanent conquest of the

[015-108] fortified towns of the north and the Great Wall, although they

[015-109] controlled a population which may have been in excess of 2,000,000

[015-110] people. But they might have succeeded with Chinese aid. Actually a

[015-111] Chinese opponent of Kao Tsu had already come to terms with Mao Tun, and

[015-112] in 200 B.C. Kao Tsu was very near suffering disaster in northern Shansi,

[015-113] as a result of which China would have come under the rule of the

[015-114] Hsiung-nu. But it did not come to that, and Mao Tun made no further

[015-115] attempt, although the opportunity came several times. Apparently the

[015-116] policy adopted by his court was not imperialistic but national, in the

[015-117] uncorrupted sense of the word. It was realized that a country so thickly

[015-118] populated as China could only be administered from a centre within

[015-119] China. The Hsiung-nu would thus have had to abandon their home territory

[015-120] and rule in China itself. That would have meant abandoning the flocks,

[015-121] abandoning nomad life, and turning into Chinese. The main supporters of

[015-122] the national policy, the first principle of which was loyalty to the old

[015-123] ways of life, seem to have been the tribal chieftains. Mao Tun fell in

[015-124] with their view, and the Hsiung-nu maintained their state as long as

[015-125] they adhered to that principle--for some seven hundred years. Other

[015-126] nomad peoples, Toba, Mongols, and Manchus, followed the opposite policy,

[015-127] and before long they were caught in the mechanism of the much more

[015-128] highly developed Chinese economy and culture, and each of them

[015-129] disappeared from the political scene in the course of a century or so.

[015-130] The national line of policy of the Hsiung-nu did not at all mean an end

[015-131] of hostilities and raids on Chinese territory, so that Kao Tsu declared

[015-132] himself ready to give the Hsiung-nu the foodstuffs and clothing

[015-133] materials they needed if they would make an end of their raids. A treaty

[015-134] to this effect was concluded, and sealed by the marriage of a Chinese

[015-135] princess with Mao Tun. This was the first international treaty in the

[015-136] Far East between two independent powers mutually recognized as equals,

[015-137] and the forms of international diplomacy developed in this time remained

[015-138] the standard forms for the next thousand years. The agreement was

[015-139] renewed at the accession of each new ruler, but was never adhered to

[015-140] entirely by either side. The needs of the Hsiung-nu increased with the

[015-141] expansion of their empire and the growing luxury of their court; the

[015-142] Chinese, on the other hand, wanted to give as little as possible, and no

[015-143] doubt they did all they could to cheat the Hsiung-nu. Thus, in spite of

[015-144] the treaties the Hsiung-nu raids went on. With China's progressive

[015-145] consolidation, the voluntary immigration of Chinese into the Hsiung-nu

[015-146] empire came to an end, and the Hsiung-nu actually began to kidnap

[015-147] Chinese subjects. These were the main features of the relations between

[015-148] Chinese and Hsiung-nu almost until 100 B.C.

[015-149] In the extreme south, around the present-day Canton, another independent

[015-150] empire had been formed in the years of transition, under the leadership

[015-151] of a Chinese. The narrow basis of this realm was no doubt provided by

[015-152] the trading colonies, but the indigenous population of Yüeh tribes was

[015-153] insufficiently civilized for the building up of a state that could have

[015-154] maintained itself against China. Kao Tsu sent a diplomatic mission to

[015-155] the ruler of this state, and invited him to place himself under Chinese

[015-156] suzerainty (196 B.C.). The ruler realized that he could offer no serious

[015-157] resistance, while the existing circumstances guaranteed him virtual

[015-158] independence and he yielded to Kao Tsu without a struggle.

[015-159] 3 _Brief feudal reaction. Consolidation of the gentry_

[015-160] Kao Tsu died in 195 B.C. From then to 179 the actual ruler was his

[015-161] widow, the empress Lü, while children were officially styled emperors.

[015-162] The empress tried to remove all the representatives of the emperor's

[015-163] family and to replace them with members of her own family. To secure her

[015-164] position she revived the feudal system, but she met with strong

[015-165] resistance from the dynasty and its supporters who already belonged in

[015-166] many cases to the new gentry, and who did not want to find their

[015-167] position jeopardized by the creation of new feudal lords.

[015-168] On the death of the empress her opponents rose, under the leadership of

[015-169] Kao Tsu's family. Every member of the empress's family was exterminated,

[015-170] and a son of Kao Tsu, known later under the name of Wen Ti (Emperor

[015-171] Wen), came to the throne. He reigned from 179 to 157 B.C. Under him

[015-172] there were still many fiefs, but with the limitation which the emperor

[015-173] Kao Tsu had laid down shortly before his death: only members of the

[015-174] imperial family should receive fiefs, to which the title of King was

[015-175] attached. Thus all the more important fiefs were in the hands of the

[015-176] imperial family, though this did not mean that rivalries came to an end.

## c16.xhtml
