---
description: "Chapter 16 of A History of China"
id: ch16
label: "Section 16"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 16

[016-001] On the whole Wen Ti's period of rule passed in comparative peace. For

[016-002] the first time since the beginning of Chinese history, great areas of

[016-003] continuous territory were under unified rule, without unending internal

[016-004] warfare such as had existed under Shih Huang-ti and Kao Tsu. The

[016-005] creation of so extensive a region of peace produced great economic

[016-006] advance. The burdens that had lain on the peasant population were

[016-007] reduced, especially since under Wen Ti the court was very frugal. The

[016-008] population grew and cultivated fresh land, so that production increased

[016-009] and with it the exchange of goods. The most outstanding sign of this was

[016-010] the abandonment of restrictions on the minting of copper coin, in order

[016-011] to prevent deflation through insufficiency of payment media. As a

[016-012] consequence more taxes were brought in, partly in kind, partly in coin,

[016-013] and this increased the power of the central government. The new gentry

[016-014] streamed into the towns, their standard of living rose, and they made

[016-015] themselves more and more into a class apart from the general population.

[016-016] As people free from material cares, they were able to devote themselves

[016-017] to scholarship. They went back to the old writings and studied them once

[016-018] more. They even began to identify themselves with the nobles of feudal

[016-019] times, to adopt the rules of good behaviour and the ceremonial described

[016-020] in the Confucianist books, and very gradually, as time went on, to make

[016-021] these their textbooks of good form. From this point the Confucianist

[016-022] ideals first began to penetrate the official class recruited from the

[016-023] gentry, and then the state organization itself. It was expected that an

[016-024] official should be versed in Confucianism, and schools were set up for

[016-025] Confucianist education. Around 100 B.C. this led to the introduction of

[016-026] the examination system, which gradually became the one method of

[016-027] selection of new officials. The system underwent many changes, but

[016-028] remained in operation in principle until 1904. The object of the

[016-029] examinations was not to test job efficiency but command of the ideals of

[016-030] the gentry and knowledge of the literature inculcating them: this was

[016-031] regarded as sufficient qualification for any position in the service of

[016-032] the state.

[016-033] In theory this path to training of character and to admission to the

[016-034] state service was open to every "respectable" citizen. Of the

[016-035] traditional four "classes" of Chinese society, only the first two,

[016-036] officials (_shih_) and farmers (_nung_) were always regarded as fully

[016-037] "respectable" (_liang-min_). Members of the other two classes, artisans

[016-038] (_kung_) and merchants (_shang_), were under numerous restrictions.

[016-039] Below these were classes of "lowly people" (_ch'ien-min_) and below

[016-040] these the slaves which were not part of society proper. The privileges

[016-041] and obligations of these categories were soon legally fixed. In

[016-042] practice, during the first thousand years of the existence of the

[016-043] examination system no peasant had a chance to become an official by

[016-044] means of the examinations. In the Han period the provincial officials

[016-045] had to propose suitable young persons for examination, and so for

[016-046] admission to the state service, as was already mentioned. In addition,

[016-047] schools had been instituted for the sons of officials; it is interesting

[016-048] to note that there were, again and again, complaints about the low level

[016-049] of instruction in these schools. Nevertheless, through these schools all

[016-050] sons of officials, whatever their capacity or lack of capacity, could

[016-051] become officials in their turn. In spite of its weaknesses, the system

[016-052] had its good side. It inoculated a class of people with ideals that were

[016-053] unquestionably of high ethical value. The Confucian moral system gave a

[016-054] Chinese official or any member of the gentry a spiritual attitude and an

[016-055] outward bearing which in their best representatives has always commanded

[016-056] respect, an integrity that has always preserved its possessors, and in

[016-057] consequence Chinese society as a whole, from moral collapse, from

[016-058] spiritual nihilism, and has thus contributed to the preservation of

[016-059] Chinese cultural values in spite of all foreign conquerors.

[016-060] In the time of Wen Ti and especially of his successors, the revival at

[016-061] court of the Confucianist ritual and of the earlier Heaven-worship

[016-062] proceeded steadily. The sacrifices supposed to have been performed in

[016-063] ancient times, the ritual supposed to have been prescribed for the

[016-064] emperor in the past, all this was reintroduced. Obviously much of it was

[016-065] spurious: much of the old texts had been lost, and when fragments were

[016-066] found they were arbitrarily completed. Moreover, the old writing was

[016-067] difficult to read and difficult to understand; thus various things were

[016-068] read into the texts without justification. The new Confucians who came

[016-069] forward as experts in the moral code were very different men from their

[016-070] predecessors; above all, like all their contemporaries, they were

[016-071] strongly influenced by the shamanistic magic that had developed in the

[016-072] Ch'in period.

[016-073] Wen Ti's reign had brought economic advance and prosperity;

[016-074] intellectually it had been a period of renaissance, but like every such

[016-075] period it did not simply resuscitate what was old, but filled the

[016-076] ancient moulds with an entirely new content. Socially the period had

[016-077] witnessed the consolidation of the new upper class, the gentry, who

[016-078] copied the mode of life of the old nobility. This is seen most clearly

[016-079] in the field of law. In the time of the Legalists the first steps had

[016-080] been taken in the codification of the criminal law. They clearly

[016-081] intended these laws to serve equally for all classes of the people. The

[016-082] Ch'in code which was supposedly Li K'uei's code, was used in the Han

[016-083] period, and was extensively elaborated by Siao Ho (died 193 B.C.) and

[016-084] others. This code consisted of two volumes of the chief laws for grave

[016-085] cases, one of mixed laws for the less serious cases, and six volumes on

[016-086] the imposition of penalties. In the Han period "decisions" were added,

[016-087] so that about A.D. 200 the code had grown to 26,272 paragraphs with over

[016-088] 17,000,000 words. The collection then consisted of 960 volumes. This

[016-089] colossal code has been continually revised, abbreviated, or expanded,

[016-090] and under its last name of "Collected Statues of the Manchu Dynasty" it

[016-091] retained its validity down to the present century.

[016-092] Alongside this collection there was another book that came to be

[016-093] regarded and used as a book of precedences. The great Confucianist

[016-094] philosopher Tung Chung-shu (179-104 B.C.), a firm supporter of the

[016-095] ideology of the new gentry class, declared that the classic Confucianist

[016-096] writings, and especially the book _Ch'un-ch'iu_, "Annals of Spring and

[016-097] Autumn", attributed to Confucius himself, were essentially books of

[016-098] legal decisions. They contained "cases" and Confucius's decisions of

[016-099] them. Consequently any case at law that might arise could be decided by

[016-100] analogy with the cases contained in "Annals of Spring and Autumn". Only

[016-101] an educated person, of course, a member of the gentry, could claim that

[016-102] his action should be judged by the decisions of Confucius and not by the

[016-103] code compiled for the common people, for Confucius had expressly stated

[016-104] that his rules were intended only for the upper class. Thus, right down

[016-105] to modern times an educated person could be judged under regulations

[016-106] different from those applicable to the common people, or if judged on

[016-107] the basis of the laws, he had to expect a special treatment. The

[016-108] principle of the "equality before the law" which the Legalists had

[016-109] advocated and which fitted well into the absolutistic, totalitarian

[016-110] system of the Ch'in, had been attacked by the feudal nobility at that

[016-111] time and was attacked by the new gentry of the Han time. Legalist

[016-112] thinking remained an important undercurrent for many centuries to come,

[016-113] but application of the equalitarian principle was from now on never

[016-114] seriously considered.

[016-115] Against the growing influence of the officials belonging to the gentry

[016-116] there came a last reaction. It came as a reply to the attempt of a

[016-117] representative of the gentry to deprive the feudal princes of the whole

[016-118] of their power. In the time of Wen Ti's successor a number of feudal

[016-119] kings formed an alliance against the emperor, and even invited the

[016-120] Hsiung-nu to join them. The Hsiung-nu did not do so, because they saw

[016-121] that the rising had no prospect of success, and it was quelled. After

[016-122] that the feudal princes were steadily deprived of rights. They were

[016-123] divided into two classes, and only privileged ones were permitted to

[016-124] live in the capital, the others being required to remain in their

[016-125] domains. At first, the area was controlled by a "minister" of the

[016-126] prince, an official of the state; later the area remained under normal

[016-127] administration and the feudal prince kept only an empty title; the tax

[016-128] income of a certain number of families of an area was assigned to him

[016-129] and transmitted to him by normal administrative channels. Often, the

[016-130] number of assigned families was fictional in that the actual income was

[016-131] from far fewer families. This system differs from the Near Eastern

[016-132] system in which also no actual enforcement took place, but where

[016-133] deserving men were granted the right to collect themselves the taxes of

[016-134] a certain area with certain numbers of families.

[016-135] Soon after this the whole government was given the shape which it

[016-136] continued to have until A.D. 220, and which formed the point of

[016-137] departure for all later forms of government. At the head of the state

[016-138] was the emperor, in theory the holder of absolute power in the state

[016-139] restricted only by his responsibility towards "Heaven", i.e. he had to

[016-140] follow and to enforce the basic rules of morality, otherwise "Heaven"

[016-141] would withdraw its "mandate", the legitimation of the emperor's rule,

[016-142] and would indicate this withdrawal by sending natural catastrophes. Time

[016-143] and again we find emperors publicly accusing themselves for their faults

[016-144] when such catastrophes occurred; and to draw the emperor's attention to

[016-145] actual or made-up calamities or celestial irregularities was one way to

[016-146] criticize an emperor and to force him to change his behaviour. There are

[016-147] two other indications which show that Chinese emperors--excepting a few

[016-148] individual cases--at least in the first ten centuries of gentry society

[016-149] were not despots: it can be proved that in some fields the

[016-150] responsibility for governmental action did not lie with the emperor but

[016-151] with some of his ministers. Secondly, the emperor was bound by the law

[016-152] code: he could not change it nor abolish it. We know of cases in which

[016-153] the ruler disregarded the code, but then tried to "defend" his arbitrary

[016-154] action. Each new dynasty developed a new law code, usually changing only

[016-155] details of the punishment, not the basic regulations. Rulers could issue

[016-156] additional "regulations", but these, too, had to be in the spirit of

[016-157] the general code and the existing moral norms. This situation has some

[016-158] similarity to the situation in Muslim countries. At the ruler's side

[016-159] were three counsellors who had, however, no active functions. The real

[016-160] conduct of policy lay in the hands of the "chancellor", or of one of the

[016-161] "nine ministers". Unlike the practice with which we are familiar in the

[016-162] West, the activities of the ministries (one of them being the court

[016-163] secretariat) were concerned primarily with the imperial palace. As,

[016-164] however, the court secretariat, one of the nine ministries, was at the

[016-165] same time a sort of imperial statistical office, in which all economic,

[016-166] financial, and military statistical material was assembled, decisions on

[016-167] issues of critical importance for the whole country could and did come

[016-168] from it. The court, through the Ministry of Supplies, operated mines and

[016-169] workshops in the provinces and organized the labour service for public

[016-170] constructions. The court also controlled centrally the conscription for

[016-171] the general military service. Beside the ministries there was an

[016-172] extensive administration of the capital with its military guards. The

[016-173] various parts of the country, including the lands given as fiefs to

[016-174] princes, had a local administration, entirely independent of the central

[016-175] government and more or less elaborated according to their size. The

[016-176] regional administration was loosely associated with the central

[016-177] government through a sort of primitive ministry of the interior, and

[016-178] similarly the Chinese representatives in the protectorates, that is to

[016-179] say the foreign states which had submitted to Chinese protective

[016-180] overlordship, were loosely united with a sort of foreign ministry in the

[016-181] central government. When a rising or a local war broke out, that was the

[016-182] affair of the officer of the region concerned. If the regional troops

[016-183] were insufficient, those of the adjoining regions were drawn upon; if

[016-184] even these were insufficient, a real "state of war" came into being;

[016-185] that is to say, the emperor appointed eight generals-in-chief, mobilized

[016-186] the imperial troops, and intervened. This imperial army then had

[016-187] authority over the regional and feudal troops, the troops of the

[016-188] protectorates, the guards of the capital, and those of the imperial

[016-189] palace. At the end of the war the imperial army was demobilized and the

[016-190] generals-in-chief were transferred to other posts.

## c17.xhtml
