---
description: "Chapter 18 of A History of China"
id: ch18
label: "Section 18"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 18

[018-001] In 108 B.C. the western part of Korea was also conquered. Korea was

[018-002] already an important transit region for the trade with Japan. Thus this

[018-003] trade also came under the direct influence of the Chinese government.

[018-004] Although this conquest represented a peril to the eastern flank of the

[018-005] Hsiung-nu, it did not by any means mean that they were conquered. The

[018-006] Hsiung-nu while weakened evaded the Chinese pressure, but in 104 B.C.

[018-007] and again in 91 they inflicted defeats on the Chinese. The Hsiung-nu

[018-008] were indirectly threatened by Chinese foreign policy, for the Chinese

[018-009] concluded an alliance with old enemies of the Hsiung-nu, the Wu-sun, in

[018-010] the north of the Tarim basin. This made the Tarim basin secure for the

[018-011] Chinese, and threatened the Hsiung-nu with a new danger in their rear.

[018-012] Finally the Chinese did all they could through intrigue, espionage, and

[018-013] sabotage to promote disunity and disorder within the Hsiung-nu, though

[018-014] it cannot be seen from the Chinese accounts how far the Chinese were

[018-015] responsible for the actual conflicts and the continual changes of

[018-016] _shan-yü_. Hostilities against the Hsiung-nu continued incessantly,

[018-017] after the death of Wu Ti, under his successor, so that the Hsiung-nu

[018-018] were further weakened. In consequence of this it was possible to rouse

[018-019] against them other tribes who until then had been dependent on them--the

[018-020] Ting-ling in the north and the Wu-huan in the east. The internal

[018-021] difficulties of the Hsiung-nu increased further.

[018-022] Wu Ti's active policy had not been directed only against the Hsiung-nu.

[018-023] After heavy fighting he brought southern China, with the region round

[018-024] Canton, and the south-eastern coast, firmly under Chinese dominion--in

[018-025] this case again on account of trade interests. No doubt there were

[018-026] already considerable colonies of foreign merchants in Canton and other

[018-027] coastal towns, trading in Indian and Middle East goods. The traders seem

[018-028] often to have been Sogdians. The southern wars gave Wu Ti the control of

[018-029] the revenues from this commerce. He tried several times to advance

[018-030] through Yünnan in order to secure a better land route to India, but

[018-031] these attempts failed. Nevertheless, Chinese influence became stronger

[018-032] in the south-west.

[018-033] In spite of his long rule, Wu Ti did not leave an adult heir, as the

[018-034] crown prince was executed, with many other persons, shortly before Wu

[018-035] Ti's death. The crown prince had been implicated in an alleged attempt

[018-036] by a large group of people to remove the emperor by various sorts of

[018-037] magic. It is difficult to determine today what lay behind this affair;

[018-038] probably it was a struggle between two cliques of the gentry. Thus a

[018-039] regency council had to be set up for the young heir to the throne; it

[018-040] included a member of a Hsiung-nu tribe. The actual government was in the

[018-041] hands of a general and his clique until the death of the heir to the

[018-042] throne, and at the beginning of his successor's reign.

[018-043] At this time came the end of the Hsiung-nu empire--a foreign event of

[018-044] the utmost importance. As a result of the continual disastrous wars

[018-045] against the Chinese, in which not only many men but, especially, large

[018-046] quantities of cattle fell into Chinese hands, the livelihood of the

[018-047] Hsiung-nu was seriously threatened; their troubles were increased by

[018-048] plagues and by unusually severe winters. To these troubles were added

[018-049] political difficulties, including unsettled questions in regard to the

[018-050] succession to the throne. The result of all this was that the Hsiung-nu

[018-051] could no longer offer effective military resistance to the Chinese.

[018-052] There were a number of _shan-yü_ ruling contemporaneously as rivals, and

[018-053] one of them had to yield to the Chinese in 58 B.C.; in 51 he came as a

[018-054] vassal to the Chinese court. The collapse of the Hsiung-nu empire was

[018-055] complete. After 58 B.C. the Chinese were freed from all danger from that

[018-056] quarter and were able, for a time, to impose their authority in Central

[018-057] Asia.

[018-058] 5 _Impoverishment. Cliques. End of the Dynasty_

[018-059] In other respects the Chinese were not doing as well as might have been

[018-060] assumed. The wars carried on by Wu Ti and his successors had been

[018-061] ruinous. The maintenance of large armies of occupation in the new

[018-062] regions, especially in Turkestan, also meant a permanent drain on the

[018-063] national funds. There was a special need for horses, for the people of

[018-064] the steppes could only be fought by means of cavalry. As the Hsiung-nu

[018-065] were supplying no horses, and the campaigns were not producing horses

[018-066] enough as booty, the peasants had to rear horses for the government.

[018-067] Additional horses were bought at very high prices, and apart from this

[018-068] the general financing of the wars necessitated increased taxation of the

[018-069] peasants, a burden on agriculture no less serious than was the enrolment

[018-070] of many peasants for military service. Finally, the new external trade

[018-071] did not by any means bring the advantages that had been hoped for. The

[018-072] tribute missions brought tribute but, to begin with, this meant an

[018-073] obligation to give presents in return; moreover, these missions had to

[018-074] be fed and housed in the capital, often for months, as the official

[018-075] receptions took place only on New Year's Day. Their maintenance entailed

[018-076] much expense, and meanwhile the members of the missions traded privately

[018-077] with the inhabitants and the merchants of the capital, buying things

[018-078] they needed and selling things they had brought in addition to the

[018-079] tribute. The tribute itself consisted mainly of "precious articles",

[018-080] which meant strange or rare things of no practical value. The emperor

[018-081] made use of them as elements of personal luxury, or made presents of

[018-082] some of them to deserving officials. The gifts offered by the Chinese in

[018-083] return consisted mainly of silk. Silk was received by the government as

[018-084] a part of the tax payments and formed an important element of the

[018-085] revenue of the state. It now went abroad without bringing in any

[018-086] corresponding return. The private trade carried on by the members of the

[018-087] missions was equally unserviceable to the Chinese. It, too, took from

[018-088] them goods of economic value, silk and gold, which went abroad in

[018-089] exchange for luxury articles of little or no economic importance, such

[018-090] as glass, precious stones, or stud horses, which in no way benefited the

[018-091] general population. Thus in this last century B.C. China's economic

[018-092] situation grew steadily and fairly rapidly worse. The peasants, more

[018-093] heavily taxed than ever, were impoverished, and yet the exchequer became

[018-094] not fuller but emptier, so that gold began even to be no longer

[018-095] available for payments. Wu Ti was aware of the situation and called

[018-096] different groups together to discuss the problems of economics. Under

[018-097] the name "Discussions on Salt and Iron" the gist of these talks is

[018-098] preserved and shows that one group under the leadership of Sang

[018-099] Hung-yang (143-80 B.C.) was business-oriented and thinking in economic

[018-100] terms, while their opponents, mainly Confucianists, regarded the

[018-101] situation mainly as a moral crisis. Sang proposed an "equable

[018-102] transportation" and a "standardization" system and favoured other state

[018-103] monopolies and controls; these ideas were taken up later and continued

[018-104] to be discussed, again and again.

[018-105] Already under Wu Ti there had been signs of a development which now

[018-106] appeared constantly in Chinese history. Among the new gentry, families

[018-107] entered into alliances with each other, sealed their mutual allegiance

[018-108] by matrimonial unions, and so formed large cliques. Each clique made it

[018-109] its concern to get the most important government positions into its

[018-110] hands, so that it should itself control the government. Under Wu Ti, for

[018-111] example, almost all the important generals had belonged to a certain

[018-112] clique, which remained dominant under his two successors. Two of the

[018-113] chief means of attaining power were for such a clique to give the

[018-114] emperor a girl from its ranks as wife, and to see to it that all the

[018-115] eunuchs around the emperor should be persons dependent on the clique.

[018-116] Eunuchs came generally from the poorer classes; they were launched at

[018-117] court by members of the great cliques, or quite openly presented to the

[018-118] emperor.

[018-119] The chief influence of the cliques lay, however, in the selection of

[018-120] officials. It is not surprising that the officials recommended only sons

[018-121] of people in their own clique--their family or its closest associates.

[018-122] On top of all this, the examiners were in most cases themselves members

[018-123] of the same families to which the provincial officials belonged. Thus it

[018-124] was made doubly certain that only those candidates who were to the

[018-125] liking of the dominant group among the gentry should pass.

[018-126] Surrounded by these cliques, the emperors became in most cases powerless

[018-127] figureheads. At times energetic rulers were able to play off various

[018-128] cliques against each other, and so to acquire personal power; but the

[018-129] weaker emperors found themselves entirely in the hands of cliques. Not a

[018-130] few emperors in China were removed by cliques which they had attempted

[018-131] to resist; and various dynasties were brought to their end by the

[018-132] cliques; this was the fate of the Han dynasty.

[018-133] The beginning of its fall came with the activities of the widow of the

[018-134] emperor Yüan Ti. She virtually ruled in the name of her

[018-135] eighteen-year-old son, the emperor Ch'eng Ti (32-7 B.C.), and placed all

[018-136] her brothers, and also her nephew, Wang Mang, in the principal

[018-137] government posts. They succeeded at first in either removing the

[018-138] strongest of the other cliques or bringing them into dependence. Within

[018-139] the Wang family the nephew Wang Mang steadily advanced, securing direct

[018-140] supporters even in some branches of the imperial family; these

[018-141] personages declared their readiness to join him in removing the existing

[018-142] line of the imperial house. When Ch'eng Ti died without issue, a young

[018-143] nephew of his (Ai Ti, 6-1 B.C.) was placed on the throne by Wang Mang,

[018-144] and during this period the power of the Wangs and their allies grew

[018-145] further, until all their opponents had been removed and the influence of

[018-146] the imperial family very greatly reduced. When Ai Ti died, Wang Mang

[018-147] placed an eight-year-old boy on the throne, himself acting as regent;

[018-148] four years later the boy fell ill and died, probably with Wang Mang's

[018-149] aid. Wang Mang now chose a one-year-old baby, but soon after he felt

[018-150] that the time had come for officially assuming the rulership. In A.D. 8

[018-151] he dethroned the baby, ostensibly at Heaven's command, and declared

[018-152] himself emperor and first of the Hsin ("new") dynasty. All the members

[018-153] of the old imperial family in the capital were removed from office and

[018-154] degraded to commoners, with the exception of those who had already been

[018-155] supporting Wang Mang. Only those members who held unimportant posts at a

[018-156] distance remained untouched.

[018-157] Wang Mang's "usurpation" is unusual from two points of view. First, he

[018-158] paid great attention to public opinion and induced large masses of the

[018-159] population to write petitions to the court asking the Han ruler to

[018-160] abdicate; he even fabricated "heavenly omina" in his own favour and

[018-161] against the Han dynasty in order to get wide support even from

[018-162] intellectuals. Secondly, he inaugurated a formal abdication ceremony,

[018-163] culminating in the transfer of the imperial seal to himself. This

[018-164] ceremony became standard for the next centuries. The seal was made of a

[018-165] precious stone, once presented to the Ch'in dynasty ruler before he

[018-166] ascended the throne. From now on, the possessor of this seal was the

[018-167] legitimate ruler.

[018-168] 6 _The pseudo-socialistic dictatorship. Revolt of the "Red Eyebrows"_

[018-169] Wang Mang's dynasty lasted only from A.D. 9 to 23; but it was one of the

[018-170] most stirring periods of Chinese history. It is difficult to evaluate

[018-171] Wang Mang, because all we know about him stems from sources hostile

[018-172] towards him. Yet we gain the impression that some of his innovations,

[018-173] such as the legalization of enthronement through the transfer of the

[018-174] seal; the changes in the administration of provinces and in the

[018-175] bureaucratic set-up in the capital; and even some of his economic

[018-176] measures were so highly regarded that they were retained or

[018-177] reintroduced, although this happened in some instances centuries later

[018-178] and without mentioning Wang Mang's name. But most of his policies and

[018-179] actions were certainly neither accepted nor acceptable. He made use of

[018-180] every conceivable resource in order to secure power to his clique. As

[018-181] far as possible he avoided using open force, and resorted to a

[018-182] high-level propaganda. Confucianism, the philosophic basis of the power

[018-183] of the gentry, served him as a bait; he made use of the so-called "old

[018-184] character school" for his purposes. When, after the holocaust of books,

[018-185] it was desired to collect the ancient classics again, texts were found

[018-186] under strange circumstances in the walls of Confucius's house; they were

[018-187] written in an archaic script. The people who occupied themselves with

[018-188] these books were called the old character school. The texts came under

[018-189] suspicion; most scholars had little belief in their genuineness. Wang

[018-190] Mang, however, and his creatures energetically supported the cult of

[018-191] these ancient writings. The texts were edited and issued, and in the

[018-192] process, as can now be seen, certain things were smuggled into them that

[018-193] fitted in well with Wang Mang's intentions. He even had other texts

[018-194] reissued with falsifications. He now represented himself in all his

[018-195] actions as a man who did with the utmost precision the things which the

[018-196] books reported of rulers or ministers of ancient times. As regent he had

[018-197] declared that his model was the brother of the first emperor of the Chou

[018-198] dynasty; as emperor he took for his exemplar one of the mythical

[018-199] emperors of ancient China; of his new laws he claimed that they were

[018-200] simply revivals of decrees of the golden age. In all this he appealed to

[018-201] the authority of literature that had been tampered with to suit his

[018-202] aims. Actually, such laws had never before been customary; either Wang

[018-203] Mang completely misinterpreted passages in an ancient text to suit his

[018-204] purpose, or he had dicta that suited him smuggled into the text. There

[018-205] can be no question that Wang Mang and his accomplices began by

[018-206] deliberately falsifying and deceiving. However, as time went on, he

[018-207] probably began to believe in his own frauds.

## c19.xhtml
