---
description: "Chapter 19 of A History of China"
id: ch19
label: "Section 19"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 19

[019-001] Wang Mang's great series of certain laws has brought him the name of

[019-002] "the first Socialist on the throne of China". But closer consideration

[019-003] reveals that these measures, ostensibly and especially aimed at the good

[019-004] of the poor, were in reality devised simply in order to fill the

[019-005] imperial exchequer and to consolidate the imperial power. When we read

[019-006] of the turning over of great landed estates to the state, do we not

[019-007] imagine that we are faced with a modern land reform? But this applied

[019-008] only to the wealthiest of all the landowners, who were to be deprived in

[019-009] this way of their power. The prohibition of private slave-owning had a

[019-010] similar purpose, the state reserving to itself the right to keep slaves.

[019-011] Moreover, landless peasants were to receive land to till, at the expense

[019-012] of those who possessed too much. This admirable law, however, was not

[019-013] intended seriously to be carried into effect. Instead, the setting up of

[019-014] a system of state credits for peasants held out the promise, in spite of

[019-015] rather reduced interest rates, of important revenue. The peasants had

[019-016] never been in a position to pay back their private debts together with

[019-017] the usurious interest, but there were at least opportunities of coming

[019-018] to terms with a private usurer, whereas the state proved a merciless

[019-019] creditor. It could dispossess the peasant, and either turn his property

[019-020] into a state farm, convey it to another owner, or make the peasant a

[019-021] state slave. Thus this measure worked against the interest of the

[019-022] peasants, as did the state monopoly of the exploitation of mountains and

[019-023] lakes. "Mountains and lakes" meant the uncultivated land around

[019-024] settlements, the "village commons", where people collected firewood or

[019-025] went fishing. They now had to pay money for fishing rights and for the

[019-026] right to collect wood, money for the emperor's exchequer. The same

[019-027] purpose lay behind the wine, salt, and iron tool monopolies. Enormous

[019-028] revenues came to the state from the monopoly of minting coin, when old

[019-029] metal coin of full value was called in and exchanged for debased coin.

[019-030] Another modern-sounding institution, that of the "equalization offices",

[019-031] was supposed to buy cheap goods in times of plenty in order to sell them

[019-032] to the people in times of scarcity at similarly low prices, so

[019-033] preventing want and also preventing excessive price fluctuations. In

[019-034] actual fact these state offices formed a new source of profit, buying

[019-035] cheaply and selling as dearly as possible.

[019-036] Thus the character of these laws was in no way socialistic; nor,

[019-037] however, did they provide an El Dorado for the state finances, for Wang

[019-038] Mang's officials turned all the laws to their private advantage. The

[019-039] revenues rarely reached the capital; they vanished into the pockets of

[019-040] subordinate officials. The result was a further serious lowering of the

[019-041] level of existence of the peasant population, with no addition to the

[019-042] financial resources of the state. Yet Wang Mang had great need of money,

[019-043] because he attached importance to display and because he was planning a

[019-044] new war. He aimed at the final destruction of the Hsiung-nu, so that

[019-045] access to central Asia should no longer be precarious and it should thus

[019-046] be possible to reduce the expense of the military administration of

[019-047] Turkestan. The war would also distract popular attention from the

[019-048] troubles at home. By way of preparation for war, Wang Mang sent a

[019-049] mission to the Hsiung-nu with dishonouring proposals, including changes

[019-050] in the name of the Hsiung-nu and in the title of the _shan-yü_. The name

[019-051] Hsiung-nu was to be given the insulting change of Hsiang-nu, meaning

[019-052] "subjugated slaves". The result was that risings of the Hsiung-nu took

[019-053] place, whereupon Wang Mang commanded that the whole of their country

[019-054] should be partitioned among fifteen _shan-yü_ and declared the country

[019-055] to be a Chinese province. Since this declaration had no practical

[019-056] result, it robbed Wang Mang of the increased prestige he had sought and

[019-057] only further infuriated the Hsiung-nu. Wang Mang concentrated a vast

[019-058] army on the frontier. Meanwhile he lost the whole of the possessions in

[019-059] Turkestan.

[019-060] But before Wang Mang's campaign against the Hsiung-nu could begin, the

[019-061] difficulties at home grew steadily worse. In A.D. 12 Wang Mang felt

[019-062] obliged to abrogate all his reform legislation because it could not be

[019-063] carried into effect; and the economic situation proved more lamentable

[019-064] than ever. There were continual risings, which culminated in A.D. 18 in

[019-065] a great popular insurrection, a genuine revolutionary rising of the

[019-066] peasants, whose distress had grown beyond bearing through Wang Mang's

[019-067] ill-judged measures. The rebels called themselves "Red Eyebrows"; they

[019-068] had painted their eyebrows red by way of badge and in order to bind

[019-069] their members indissolubly to their movement. The nucleus of this rising

[019-070] was a secret society. Such secret societies, usually are harmless, but

[019-071] may, in emergency situations, become an immensely effective instrument

[019-072] in the hands of the rural population. The secret societies then organize

[019-073] the peasants, in order to achieve a forcible settlement of the matter in

[019-074] dispute. Occasionally, however, the movement grows far beyond its

[019-075] leaders' original objective and becomes a popular revolutionary

[019-076] movement, directed against the whole ruling class. That is what happened

[019-077] on this occasion. Vast swarms of peasants marched to the capital,

[019-078] killing all officials and people of position on their way. The troops

[019-079] sent against them by Wang Mang either went over to the Red Eyebrows or

[019-080] copied them, plundering wherever they could and killing officials. Owing

[019-081] to the appalling mass murders and the fighting, the forces placed by

[019-082] Wang Mang along the frontier against the Hsiung-nu received no

[019-083] reinforcements and, instead of attacking the Hsiung-nu, themselves went

[019-084] over to plundering, so that ultimately the army simply disintegrated.

[019-085] Fortunately for China, the _shan-yü_ of the time did not take advantage

[019-086] of his opportunity, perhaps because his position within the Hsiung-nu

[019-087] empire was too insecure.

[019-088] Scarcely had the popular rising begun when descendants of the deposed

[019-089] Han dynasty appeared and tried to secure the support of the upper class.

[019-090] They came forward as fighters against the usurper Wang Mang and as

[019-091] defenders of the old social order against the revolutionary masses. But

[019-092] the armies which these Han princes were able to collect were no better

[019-093] than those of the other sides. They, too, consisted of poor and hungry

[019-094] peasants, whose aim was to get money or goods by robbery; they too,

[019-095] plundered and murdered more than they fought.

[019-096] However, one prince by the name of Liu Hsiu gradually gained the upper

[019-097] hand. The basis of his power was the district of Nanyang in Honan, one

[019-098] of the wealthiest agricultural centres of China at that time and also

[019-099] the centre of iron and steel production. The big landowners, the gentry

[019-100] of Nanyang, joined him, and the prince's party conquered the capital.

[019-101] Wang Mang, placing entire faith in his sanctity, did not flee; he sat in

[019-102] his robes in the throne-room and recited the ancient writings, convinced

[019-103] that he would overcome his adversaries by the power of his words. But a

[019-104] soldier cut off his head (A.D. 22). The skull was kept for two hundred

[019-105] years in the imperial treasury. The fighting, nevertheless, went on.

[019-106] Various branches of the prince's party fought one another, and all of

[019-107] them fought the Red Eyebrows. In those years millions of men came to

[019-108] their end. Finally, in A.D. 24, Liu Hsiu prevailed, becoming the first

[019-109] emperor of the second Han dynasty, also called the Later Han dynasty;

[019-110] his name as emperor was Kuang-wu Ti (A.D. 25-57).

[019-111] 7 _Reaction and Restoration: the Later Han dynasty_

[019-112] Within the country the period that followed was one of reaction and

[019-113] restoration. The massacres of the preceding years had so reduced the

[019-114] population that there was land enough for the peasants who remained

[019-115] alive. Moreover, their lords and the moneylenders of the towns were

[019-116] generally no longer alive, so that many peasants had become free of

[019-117] debt. The government was transferred from Sian to Loyang, in the present

[019-118] province of Honan. This brought the capital nearer to the great

[019-119] wheat-producing regions, so that the transport of grain and other taxes

[019-120] in kind to the capital was cheapened. Soon this cleared foundation was

[019-121] covered by a new stratum, a very sparse one, of great landowners who

[019-122] were supporters and members of the new imperial house, largely

[019-123] descendants of the landowners of the earlier Han period. At first they

[019-124] were not much in evidence, but they gained power more and more rapidly.

[019-125] In spite of this, the first half-century of the Later Han period was one

[019-126] of good conditions on the land and economic recovery.

[019-127] 8 _Hsiung-nu policy_

[019-128] In foreign policy the first period of the Later Han dynasty was one of

[019-129] extraordinary success, both in the extreme south and in the question of

[019-130] the Hsiung-nu. During the period of Wang Mang's rule and the fighting

[019-131] connected with it, there had been extensive migration to the south and

[019-132] south-west. Considerable regions of Chinese settlement had come into

[019-133] existence in Yünnan and even in Annam and Tongking, and a series of

[019-134] campaigns under General Ma Yuan (14 B.C.-A.D. 49) now added these

[019-135] regions to the territory of the empire. These wars were carried on with

[019-136] relatively small forces, as previously in the Canton region, the natives

[019-137] being unable to offer serious resistance owing to their inferiority in

[019-138] equipment and civilization. The hot climate, however, to which the

[019-139] Chinese soldiers were unused, was hard for them to endure.

[019-140] The Hsiung-nu, in spite of internal difficulties, had regained

[019-141] considerable influence in Turkestan during the reign of Wang Mang. But

[019-142] the king of the city state of Yarkand had increased his power by

[019-143] shrewdly playing off Chinese and Hsiung-nu against each other, so that

[019-144] before long he was able to attack the Hsiung-nu. The small states in

[019-145] Turkestan, however, regarded the overlordship of the distant China as

[019-146] preferable to that of Yarkand or the Hsiung-nu both of whom, being

[019-147] nearer, were able to bring their power more effectively into play.

[019-148] Accordingly many of the small states appealed for Chinese aid. Kuang-wu

[019-149] Ti met this appeal with a blank refusal, implying that order had only

[019-150] just been restored in China and that he now simply had not the resources

[019-151] for a campaign in Turkestan. Thus, the king of Yarkand was able to

[019-152] extend his power over the remainder of the small states of Turkestan,

[019-153] since the Hsiung-nu had been obliged to withdraw. Kuang-wu Ti had

[019-154] several frontier wars with the Hsiung-nu without any decisive result.

[019-155] But in the years around A.D. 45 the Hsiung-nu had suffered several

[019-156] severe droughts and also great plagues of locusts, so that they had lost

[019-157] a large part of their cattle. They were no longer able to assert

[019-158] themselves in Turkestan and at the same time to fight the Chinese in the

[019-159] south and the Hsien-pi and the Wu-huan in the east. These two peoples,

[019-160] apparently largely of Mongol origin, had been subject in the past to

[019-161] Hsiung-nu overlordship. They had spread steadily in the territories

[019-162] bordering Manchuria and Mongolia, beyond the eastern frontier of the

[019-163] Hsiung-nu empire. Living there in relative peace and at the same time in

[019-164] possession of very fertile pasturage, these two peoples had grown in

[019-165] strength. And since the great political collapse of 58 B.C. the

[019-166] Hsiung-nu had not only lost their best pasturage in the north of the

[019-167] provinces of Shensi and Shansi, but had largely grown used to living in

[019-168] co-operation with the Chinese. They had become much more accustomed to

[019-169] trade with China, exchanging animals for textiles and grain, than to

[019-170] warfare, so that in the end they were defeated by the Hsien-pi and

[019-171] Wu-huan, who had held to the older form of purely warlike nomad life.

[019-172] Weakened by famine and by the wars against Wu-huan and Hsien-pi, the

[019-173] Hsiung-nu split into two, one section withdrawing to the north.

[019-174] The southern Hsiung-nu were compelled to submit to the Chinese in order

[019-175] to gain security from their other enemies. Thus the Chinese were able to

[019-176] gain a great success without moving a finger: the Hsiung-nu, who for

[019-177] centuries had shown themselves again and again to be the most dangerous

[019-178] enemies of China, were reduced to political insignificance. About a

[019-179] hundred years earlier the Hsiung-nu empire had suffered defeat; now half

[019-180] of what remained of it became part of the Chinese state. Its place was

[019-181] taken by the Hsien-pi and Wu-huan, but at first they were of much less

[019-182] importance.

## c20.xhtml
