---
description: "Chapter 20 of A History of China"
id: ch20
label: "Section 20"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 20

[020-001] In spite of the partition, the northern Hsiung-nu attempted in the years

[020-002] between A.D. 60 and 70 to regain a sphere of influence in Turkestan;

[020-003] this seemed the easier for them since the king of Yarkand had been

[020-004] captured and murdered, and Turkestan was more or less in a state of

[020-005] confusion. The Chinese did their utmost to play off the northern against

[020-006] the southern Hsiung-nu and to maintain a political balance of power in

[020-007] the west and north. So long as there were a number of small states in

[020-008] Turkestan, of which at least some were friendly to China, Chinese trade

[020-009] caravans suffered relatively little disturbance on their journeys.

[020-010] Independent states in Turkestan had proved more profitable for trade

[020-011] than when a large army of occupation had to be maintained there. When,

[020-012] however, there appeared to be the danger of a new union of the two

[020-013] parts of the Hsiung-nu as a restoration of a large empire also

[020-014] comprising all Turkestan, the Chinese trading monopoly was endangered.

[020-015] Any great power would secure the best goods for itself, and there would

[020-016] be no good business remaining for China. For these reasons a great

[020-017] Chinese campaign was undertaken against Turkestan in A.D. 73 under Tou

[020-018] Ku. Mainly owing to the ability of the Chinese deputy commander Pan

[020-019] Ch'ao, the whole of Turkestan was quickly conquered. Meanwhile the

[020-020] emperor Ming Ti (A.D. 58-75) had died, and under the new emperor Chang

[020-021] Ti (76-88) the "isolationist" party gained the upper hand against the

[020-022] clique of Tou Ku and Pan Ch'ao: the danger of the restoration of a

[020-023] Hsiung-nu empire, the isolationists contended, no longer existed;

[020-024] Turkestan should be left to itself; the small states would favour trade

[020-025] with China of their own accord. Meanwhile, a considerable part of

[020-026] Turkestan had fallen away from China, for Chang Ti sent neither money

[020-027] nor troops to hold the conquered territories. Pan Ch'ao nevertheless

[020-028] remained in Turkestan (at Kashgar and Khotan) where he held on amid

[020-029] countless difficulties. Although he reported (A.D. 78) that the troops

[020-030] could feed themselves in Turkestan and needed neither supplies nor money

[020-031] from home, no reinforcements of any importance were sent; only a few

[020-032] hundred or perhaps a thousand men, mostly released criminals, reached

[020-033] him. Not until A.D. 89 did the Pan Ch'ao clique return to power when the

[020-034] mother of the young emperor Ho Ti (89-105) took over the government

[020-035] during his minority: she was a member of the family of Tou Ku. She was

[020-036] interested in bringing to a successful conclusion the enterprise which

[020-037] had been started by members of her family and its followers. In

[020-038] addition, it can be shown that a number of other members of the "war

[020-039] party" had direct interests in the west, mainly in form of landed

[020-040] estates. Accordingly, a campaign was started in 89 under her brother

[020-041] against the northern Hsiung-nu, and it decided the fate of Turkestan in

[020-042] China's favour. Turkestan remained firmly in Chinese possession until

[020-043] the death of Pan Ch'ao in 102. Shortly afterwards heavy fighting broke

[020-044] out again: the Tanguts advanced from the south in an attempt to cut off

[020-045] Chinese access to Turkestan. The Chinese drove back the Tanguts and

[020-046] maintained their hold on Turkestan, though no longer absolutely.

[020-047] 9 _Economic situation. Rebellion of the "Yellow Turbans". Collapse of

[020-048] the Han dynasty_

[020-049] The economic results of the Turkestan trade in this period were not so

[020-050] unfavourable as in the earlier Han period. The army of occupation was

[020-051] incomparably smaller, and under Pan Ch'ao's policy the soldiers were fed

[020-052] and paid in Turkestan itself, so that the cost to China remained small.

[020-053] Moreover, the drain on the national income was no longer serious

[020-054] because, in the intervening period, regular Chinese settlements had been

[020-055] planted in Turkestan including Chinese merchants, so that the trade no

[020-056] longer remained entirely in the hands of foreigners.

[020-057] In spite of the economic consolidation at the beginning of the Later Han

[020-058] dynasty, and in spite of the more balanced trade, the political

[020-059] situation within China steadily worsened from A.D. 80 onwards. Although

[020-060] the class of great landowners was small, a number of cliques formed

[020-061] within it, and their mutual struggle for power soon went beyond the

[020-062] limits of court intrigue. New actors now came upon the stage, namely the

[020-063] eunuchs. With the economic improvement there had been a general increase

[020-064] in the luxury at the court of the Han emperors, and the court steadily

[020-065] increased in size. The many hundred wives and concubines in the palace

[020-066] made necessary a great army of eunuchs. As they had the ear of the

[020-067] emperor and so could influence him, the eunuchs formed an important

[020-068] political factor. For a time the main struggle was between the group of

[020-069] eunuchs and the group of scholars. The eunuchs served a particular

[020-070] clique to which some of the emperor's wives belonged. The scholars, that

[020-071] is to say the ministers, together with members of the ministries and the

[020-072] administrative staff, served the interests of another clique. The

[020-073] struggles grew more and more sanguinary in the middle of the second

[020-074] century A.D. It soon proved that the group with the firmest hold in the

[020-075] provinces had the advantage, because it was not easy to control the

[020-076] provinces from a distance. The result was that, from about A.D. 150,

[020-077] events at court steadily lost importance, the lead being taken by the

[020-078] generals commanding the provincial troops. It would carry us too far to

[020-079] give the details of all these struggles. The provincial generals were at

[020-080] first Ts'ao Ts'ao, Lü Pu, Yüan Shao, and Sun Ts'ê; later came Liu Pei.

[020-081] All were striving to gain control of the government, and all were

[020-082] engaged in mutual hostilities from about 180 onwards. Each general was

[020-083] also trying to get the emperor into his hands. Several times the last

[020-084] emperor of the Later Han dynasty, Hsien Ti (190-220), was captured by

[020-085] one or another of the generals. As the successful general was usually

[020-086] unable to maintain his hold on the capital, he dragged the poor emperor

[020-087] with him from place to place until he finally had to give him up to

[020-088] another general. The point of this chase after the emperor was that

[020-089] according to the idea introduced earlier by Wang Mang the first ruler of

[020-090] a new dynasty had to receive the imperial seals from the last emperor

[020-091] of the previous dynasty. The last emperor must abdicate in proper form.

[020-092] Accordingly, each general had to get possession of the emperor to begin

[020-093] with, in order at the proper time to take over the seals.

[020-094] By about A.D. 200 the new conditions had more or less crystallized.

[020-095] There remained only three great parties. The most powerful was that of

[020-096] Ts'ao Ts'ao, who controlled the north and was able to keep permanent

[020-097] hold of the emperor. In the west, in the province of Szechwan, Liu Pei

[020-098] had established himself, and in the south-east Sun Ts'ê's brother.

[020-099] But we must not limit our view to these generals' struggles. At this

[020-100] time there were two other series of events of equal importance with

[020-101] those. The incessant struggles of the cliques against each other

[020-102] continued at the expense of the people, who had to fight them and pay

[020-103] for them. Thus, after A.D. 150 the distress of the country population

[020-104] grew beyond all limits. Conditions were as disastrous as in the time of

[020-105] Wang Mang. And once more, as then, a popular movement broke out, that of

[020-106] the so-called "Yellow Turbans". This was the first of the two important

[020-107] events. This popular movement had a characteristic which from now on

[020-108] became typical of all these risings of the people. The intellectual

[020-109] leaders of the movement, Chang Ling and others, were members of a

[020-110] particular religious sect. This sect was influenced by Iranian Mazdaism

[020-111] on the one side and by certain ideas from Lao Tz[)u] on the other side;

[020-112] and these influences were superimposed on popular rural as well as,

[020-113] perhaps, local tribal religious beliefs and superstitions. The sect had

[020-114] roots along the coastal settlements of Eastern China, where it seems to

[020-115] have gained the support of the peasantry and their local priests. These

[020-116] priests of the people were opposed to the representatives of the

[020-117] official religion, that is to say the officials drawn from the gentry.

[020-118] In small towns and villages the temples of the gods of the fruits of the

[020-119] field, of the soil, and so on, were administered by authorized local

[020-120] officials, and these officials also carried out the prescribed

[020-121] sacrifices. The old temples of the people were either done away with (we

[020-122] have many edicts of the Han period concerning the abolition of popular

[020-123] forms of religious worship), or their worship was converted into an

[020-124] official cult: the all-powerful gentry extended their domination over

[020-125] religion as well as all else. But the peasants regarded their local

[020-126] unauthorized priests as their natural leaders against the gentry and

[020-127] against gentry forms of religion. One branch, probably the main branch

[020-128] of this movement, developed a stronghold in Eastern Szechwan province,

[020-129] where its members succeeded to create a state of their own which

[020-130] retained its independence for a while. It is the only group which

[020-131] developed real religious communities in which men and women

[020-132] participated, extensive welfare schemes existed and class differences

[020-133] were discouraged. It had a real church organization with dioceses,

[020-134] communal friendship meals and a confession ritual; in short, real piety

[020-135] developed as it could not develop in the official religions. After the

[020-136] annihilation of this state, remnants of the organization can be traced

[020-137] through several centuries, mainly in central and south China. It may

[020-138] well be that the many "Taoistic" traits which can be found in the

[020-139] religions of late and present-day Mongolian and Tibetan tribes, can be

[020-140] derived from this movement of the Yellow Turbans.

[020-141] The rising of the Yellow Turbans began in 184; all parties, cliques and

[020-142] generals alike, were equally afraid of the revolutionaries, since these

[020-143] were a threat to the gentry as such, and so to all parties. Consequently

[020-144] a combined army of considerable size was got together and sent against

[020-145] the rebels. The Yellow Turbans were beaten.

[020-146] During these struggles it became evident that Ts'ao Ts'ao with his

[020-147] troops had become the strongest of all the generals. His troops seem to

[020-148] have consisted not of Chinese soldiers alone, but also of Hsiung-nu. It

[020-149] is understandable that the annals say nothing about this, and it can

[020-150] only be inferred from the facts. It appears that in order to reinforce

[020-151] their armies the generals recruited not only Chinese but foreigners. The

[020-152] generals operating in the region of the present-day Peking had soldiers

[020-153] of the Wu-huan and Hsien-pi, and even of the Ting-ling; Liu Pei, in the

[020-154] west, made use of Tanguts, and Ts'ao Ts'ao clearly went farthest of all

[020-155] in this direction; he seems to have been responsible for settling

[020-156] nineteen tribes of Hsiung-nu in the Chinese province of Shansi between

[020-157] 180 and 200, in return for their armed aid. In this way Ts'ao Ts'ao

[020-158] gained permanent power in the empire by means of these troops, so that

[020-159] immediately after his death his son Ts'ao P'ei, with the support of

[020-160] powerful allied families, was able to force the emperor to abdicate and

[020-161] to found a new dynasty, the Wei dynasty (A.D. 220).

[020-162] This meant, however, that a part of China which for several centuries

[020-163] had been Chinese was given up to the Hsiung-nu. This was not, of course,

[020-164] what Ts'ao Ts'ao had intended; he had given the Hsiung-nu some area of

[020-165] pasturage in Shansi with the idea that they should be controlled and

[020-166] administered by the officials of the surrounding district. His plan had

[020-167] been similar to what the Chinese had often done with success: aliens

[020-168] were admitted into the territory of the empire in a body, but then the

[020-169] influence of the surrounding administrative centres was steadily

[020-170] extended over them, until the immigrants completely lost their own

[020-171] nationality and became Chinese. The nineteen tribes of Hsiung-nu,

[020-172] however, were much too numerous, and after the prolonged struggles in

[020-173] China the provincial administration proved much too weak to be able to

[020-174] carry out the plan. Thus there came into existence here, within China, a

[020-175] small Hsiung-nu realm ruled by several _shan-yü_. This was the second

[020-176] major development, and it became of the utmost importance to the history

[020-177] of the next four centuries.

## c21.xhtml
