---
description: "Chapter 21 of A History of China"
id: ch21
label: "Section 21"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 21

[021-001] 10 _Literature and Art_

[021-002] With the development of the new class of the gentry in the Han period,

[021-003] there was an increase in the number of those who were anxious to

[021-004] participate in what had been in the past an exclusively aristocratic

[021-005] possession--education. Thus it is by no mere chance that in this period

[021-006] many encyclopaedias were compiled. Encyclopaedias convey knowledge in an

[021-007] easily grasped and easily found form. The first compilation of this sort

[021-008] dates from the third century B.C. It was the work of Lü Pu wei, the

[021-009] merchant who was prime minister and regent during the minority of Shih

[021-010] Huang-ti. It contains general information concerning ceremonies,

[021-011] customs, historic events, and other things the knowledge of which was

[021-012] part of a general education. Soon afterwards other encyclopaedias

[021-013] appeared, of which the best known is the Book of the Mountains and Seas

[021-014] (_Shan Hai Ching_). This book, arranged according to regions of the

[021-015] world, contains everything known at the time about geography, natural

[021-016] philosophy, and the animal and plant world, and also about popular

[021-017] myths. This tendency to systemization is shown also in the historical

[021-018] works. The famous _Shih Chi_, one of our main sources for Chinese

[021-019] history, is the first historical work of the modern type, that is to

[021-020] say, built up on a definite plan, and it was also the model for all

[021-021] later official historiography. Its author, Ss[)u]-ma Ch'ien (born 135

[021-022] B.C.), and his father, made use of the material in the state archives

[021-023] and of private documents, old historical and philosophical books,

[021-024] inscriptions, and the results of their own travels. The philosophical

[021-025] and historical books of earlier times (with the exception of those of

[021-026] the nature of chronicles) consisted merely of a few dicta or reports of

[021-027] particular events, but the _Shih Chi_ is a compendium of a mass of

[021-028] source-material. The documents were abbreviated, but the text of the

[021-029] extracts was altered as little as possible, so that the general result

[021-030] retains in a sense the value of an original source. In its arrangement

[021-031] the _Shih Chi_ became a model for all later historians: the first part

[021-032] is in the form of annals, and there follow tables concerning the

[021-033] occupants of official posts and fiefs, and then biographies of various

[021-034] important personalities, though the type of the comprehensive biography

[021-035] did not appear till later. The _Shih Chi_ also, like later historical

[021-036] works, contains many monographs dealing with particular fields of

[021-037] knowledge, such as astronomy, the calendar, music, economics, official

[021-038] dress at court, and much else. The whole type of construction differs

[021-039] fundamentally from such works as those of Thucydides or Herodotus. The

[021-040] Chinese historical works have the advantage that the section of annals

[021-041] gives at once the events of a particular year, the monographs describe

[021-042] the development of a particular field of knowledge, and the biographical

[021-043] section offers information concerning particular personalities. The

[021-044] mental attitude is that of the gentry: shortly after the time of

[021-045] Ss[)u]-ma Ch'ien an historical department was founded, in which members

[021-046] of the gentry worked as historians upon the documents prepared by

[021-047] representatives of the gentry in the various government offices.

[021-048] In addition to encyclopaedias and historical works, many books of

[021-049] philosophy were written in the Han period, but most of them offer no

[021-050] fundamentally new ideas. They were the product of the leisure of rich

[021-051] members of the gentry, and only three of them are of importance. One is

[021-052] the work of Tung Chung-shu, already mentioned. The second is a book by

[021-053] Liu An called _Huai-nan Tz[)u]_. Prince Liu An occupied himself with

[021-054] Taoism and allied problems, gathered around him scholars of different

[021-055] schools, and carried on discussions with them. Many of his writings are

[021-056] lost, but enough is extant to show that he was one of the earliest

[021-057] Chinese alchemists. The question has not yet been settled, but it is

[021-058] probable that alchemy first appeared in China, together with the cult of

[021-059] the "art" of prolonging life, and was later carried to the West, where

[021-060] it flourished among the Arabs and in medieval Europe.

[021-061] The third important book of the Han period was the _Lun Hêng_ (Critique

[021-062] of Opinions) of Wang Ch'ung, which appeared in the first century of the

[021-063] Christian era. Wang Ch'ung advocated rational thinking and tried to pave

[021-064] the way for a free natural science, in continuation of the beginnings

[021-065] which the natural philosophers of the later Chou period had made. The

[021-066] book analyses reports in ancient literature and customs of daily life,

[021-067] and shows how much they were influenced by superstition and by ignorance

[021-068] of the facts of nature. From this attitude a modern science might have

[021-069] developed, as in Europe towards the end of the Middle Ages; but the

[021-070] gentry had every reason to play down this tendency which, with its

[021-071] criticism of all that was traditional, might have proceeded to an attack

[021-072] on the dominance of the gentry and their oppression especially of the

[021-073] merchants and artisans. It is fascinating to observe how it was the

[021-074] needs of the merchants and seafarers of Asia Minor and Greece that

[021-075] provided the stimulus for the growth of the classic sciences, and how on

[021-076] the contrary the growth of Chinese science was stifled because the

[021-077] gentry were so strongly hostile to commerce and navigation, though both

[021-078] had always existed.

[021-079] There were great literary innovations in the field of poetry. The

[021-080] splendour and elegance at the new imperial court of the Han dynasty

[021-081] attracted many poets who sang the praises of the emperor and his court

[021-082] and were given official posts and dignities. These praises were in the

[021-083] form of grandiloquent, overloaded poetry, full of strange similes and

[021-084] allusions, but with little real feeling. In contrast, the many women

[021-085] singers and dancers at the court, mostly slaves from southern China,

[021-086] introduced at the court southern Chinese forms of song and poem, which

[021-087] were soon adopted and elaborated by poets. Poems and dance songs were

[021-088] composed which belonged to the finest that Chinese poetry can show--full

[021-089] of natural feeling, simple in language, moving in content.

[021-090] Our knowledge of the arts is drawn from two sources--literature, and the

[021-091] actual discoveries in the excavations. Thus we know that most of the

[021-092] painting was done on silk, of which plenty came into the market through

[021-093] the control of silk-producing southern China. Paper had meanwhile been

[021-094] invented in the second century B.C., by perfecting the techniques of

[021-095] making bark-cloth and felt. Unfortunately nothing remains of the actual

[021-096] works that were the first examples of what the Chinese everywhere were

[021-097] beginning to call "art". "People", that is to say the gentry, painted as

[021-098] a social pastime, just as they assembled together for poetry,

[021-099] discussion, or performances of song and dance; they painted as an

[021-100] aesthetic pleasure and rarely as a means of earning. We find philosophic

[021-101] ideas or greetings, emotions, and experiences represented by

[021-102] paintings--paintings with fanciful or ideal landscapes; paintings

[021-103] representing life and environment of the cultured class in idealized

[021-104] form, never naturalistic either in fact or in intention. Until recently

[021-105] it was an indispensable condition in the Chinese view that an artist

[021-106] must be "cultured" and be a member of the gentry--distinguished,

[021-107] unoccupied, wealthy. A man who was paid for his work, for instance for a

[021-108] portrait for the ancestral cult, was until late time regarded as a

[021-109] craftsman, not as an artist. Yet, these "craftsmen" have produced in Han

[021-110] time and even earlier, many works which, in our view, undoubtedly belong

[021-111] to the realm of art. In the tombs have been found reliefs whose

[021-112] technique is generally intermediate between simple outline engraving and

[021-113] intaglio. The lining-in is most frequently executed in scratched lines.

[021-114] The representations, mostly in strips placed one above another, are of

[021-115] lively historical scenes, scenes from the life of the dead, great ritual

[021-116] ceremonies, or adventurous scenes from mythology. Bronze vessels have

[021-117] representations in inlaid gold and silver, mostly of animals. The most

[021-118] important documents of the painting of the Han period have also been

[021-119] found in tombs. We see especially ladies and gentlemen of society, with

[021-120] richly ornamented, elegant, expensive clothing that is very reminiscent

[021-121] of the clothing customary to this day in Japan. There are also artistic

[021-122] representations of human figures on lacquer caskets. While sculpture was

[021-123] not strongly developed, the architecture of the Han must have been

[021-124] magnificent and technically highly complex. Sculpture and temple

[021-125] architecture received a great stimulus with the spread of Buddhism in

[021-126] China. According to our present knowledge, Buddhism entered China from

[021-127] the south coast and through Central Asia at latest in the first century

[021-128] B.C.; it came with foreign merchants from India or Central Asia.

[021-129] According to Indian customs, Brahmans, the Hindu caste providing all

[021-130] Hindu priests, could not leave their homes. As merchants on their trips

[021-131] which lasted often several years, did not want to go without religious

[021-132] services, they turned to Buddhist priests as well as to priests of Near

[021-133] Eastern religions. These priests were not prevented from travelling and

[021-134] used this opportunity for missionary purposes. Thus, for a long time

[021-135] after the first arrival of Buddhists, the Buddhist priests in China were

[021-136] foreigners who served foreign merchant colonies. The depressed

[021-137] conditions of the people in the second century A.D. drove members of the

[021-138] lower classes into their arms, while the parts of Indian science which

[021-139] these priests brought with them from India aroused some interest in

[021-140] certain educated circles. Buddhism, therefore, undeniably exercised an

[021-141] influence at the end of the Han dynasty, although no Chinese were

[021-142] priests and few, if any, gentry members were adherents of the religious

[021-143] teachings.

[021-144] With the end of the Han period a further epoch of Chinese history comes

[021-145] to its close. The Han period was that of the final completion and

[021-146] consolidation of the social order of the gentry. The period that

[021-147] followed was that of the conflicts of the Chinese with the populations

[021-148] on their northern borders.

[021-149] Chapter Seven

[021-150] THE EPOCH OF THE FIRST DIVISION OF CHINA (A.D. 220-580)

[021-151] (A) The three kingdoms (220-265)

[021-152] 1 _Social, intellectual, and economic problems during the first

[021-153] division_

[021-154] The end of the Han period was followed by the three and a half centuries

[021-155] of the first division of China into several kingdoms, each with its own

[021-156] dynasty. In fact, once before during the period of the Contending

[021-157] States, China had been divided into a number of states, but at least in

[021-158] theory they had been subject to the Chou dynasty, and none of the

[021-159] contending states had made the claim to be the legitimate ruler of all

[021-160] China. In this period of the "first division" several states claimed to

[021-161] be legitimate rulers, and later Chinese historians tried to decide which

[021-162] of these had "more right" to this claim. At the outset (220-280) there

[021-163] were three kingdoms (Wei, Wu, Shu Han); then came an unstable reunion

[021-164] during twenty-seven years (280-307) under the rule of the Western Chin.

[021-165] This was followed by a still sharper division between north and south:

[021-166] while a wave of non-Chinese nomad dynasties poured over the north, in

[021-167] the south one Chinese clique after another seized power, so that dynasty

[021-168] followed dynasty until finally, in 580, a united China came again into

[021-169] existence, adopting the culture of the north and the traditions of the

[021-170] gentry.

[021-171] In some ways, the period from 220 to 580 can be compared with the period

[021-172] of the coincidentally synchronous breakdown of the Roman Empire: in both

[021-173] cases there was no great increase in population, although in China

[021-174] perhaps no over-all decrease in population as in the Roman Empire;

[021-175] decrease occurred, however, in the population of the great Chinese

[021-176] cities, especially of the capital; furthermore we witness, in both

[021-177] empires, a disorganization of the monetary system, i.e. in China the

[021-178] reversal to a predominance of natural economy after some 400 years of

[021-179] money economy. Yet, this period cannot be simply dismissed as a

[021-180] transition period, as was usually done by the older European works on

[021-181] China. The social order of the gentry, whose birth and development

[021-182] inside China we followed, had for the first time to defend itself

[021-183] against views and systems entirely opposed to it; for the Turkish and

[021-184] Mongol peoples who ruled northern China brought with them their

[021-185] traditions of a feudal nobility with privileges of birth and all that

[021-186] they implied. Thus this period, socially regarded, is especially that of

[021-187] the struggle between the Chinese gentry and the northern nobility, the

[021-188] gentry being excluded at first as a direct political factor in the

[021-189] northern and more important part of China. In the south the gentry

[021-190] continued in the old style with a constant struggle between cliques, the

[021-191] only difference being that the class assumed a sort of "colonial"

[021-192] character through the formation of gigantic estates and through

[021-193] association with the merchant class.

## c22.xhtml
