---
description: "Chapter 22 of A History of China"
id: ch22
label: "Section 22"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 22

[022-001] To throw light on the scale of events, we need to have figures of

[022-002] population. There are no figures for the years around A.D. 220, and we

[022-003] must make do with those of 140; but in order to show the relative

[022-004] strength of the three states it is the ratio between the figures that

[022-005] matters. In 140 the regions which later belonged to Wei had roughly

[022-006] 29,000,000 inhabitants; those later belonging to Wu had 11,700,000;

[022-007] those which belonged later to Shu Han had a bare 7,500,000. (The figures

[022-008] take no account of the primitive native population, which was not yet

[022-009] included in the taxation lists.) The Hsiung-nu formed only a small part

[022-010] of the population, as there were only the nineteen tribes which had

[022-011] abandoned one of the parts, already reduced, of the Hsiung-nu empire.

[022-012] The whole Hsiung-nu empire may never have counted more than some

[022-013] 3,000,000. At the time when the population of what became the Wei

[022-014] territory totalled 29,000,000 the capital with its immediate environment

[022-015] had over a million inhabitants. The figure is exclusive of most of the

[022-016] officials and soldiers, as these were taxable in their homes and so were

[022-017] counted there. It is clear that this was a disproportionate

[022-018] concentration round the capital.

[022-019] It was at this time that both South and North China felt the influence

[022-020] of Buddhism, which until A.D. 220 had no more real effect on China than

[022-021] had, for instance, the penetration of European civilization between 1580

[022-022] and 1842. Buddhism offered new notions, new ideals, foreign science, and

[022-023] many other elements of culture, with which the old Chinese philosophy

[022-024] and science had to contend. At the same time there came with Buddhism

[022-025] the first direct knowledge of the great civilized countries west of

[022-026] China. Until then China had regarded herself as the only existing

[022-027] civilized country, and all other countries had been regarded as

[022-028] barbaric, for a civilized country was then taken to mean a country with

[022-029] urban industrial crafts and agriculture. In our present period, however,

[022-030] China's relations with the Middle East and with southern Asia were so

[022-031] close that the existence of civilized countries outside China had to be

[022-032] admitted. Consequently, when alien dynasties ruled in northern China and

[022-033] a new high civilization came into existence there, it was impossible to

[022-034] speak of its rulers as barbarians any longer. Even the theory that the

[022-035] Chinese emperor was the Son of Heaven and enthroned at the centre of the

[022-036] world was no longer tenable. Thus a vast widening of China's

[022-037] intellectual horizon took place.

[022-038] Economically, our present period witnessed an adjustment in South China

[022-039] between the Chinese way of life, which had penetrated from the north,

[022-040] and that of the natives of the south. Large groups of Chinese had to

[022-041] turn over from wheat culture in dry fields to rice culture in wet

[022-042] fields, and from field culture to market gardening. In North China the

[022-043] conflict went on between Chinese agriculture and the cattle breeding of

[022-044] Central Asia. Was the will of the ruler to prevail and North China to

[022-045] become a country of pasturage, or was the country to keep to the

[022-046] agrarian tradition of the people under this rule? The Turkish and Mongol

[022-047] conquerors had recently given up their old supplementary agriculture and

[022-048] had turned into pure nomads, obtaining the agricultural produce they

[022-049] needed by raiding or trade. The conquerors of North China were now faced

[022-050] with a different question: if they were to remain nomads, they must

[022-051] either drive the peasants into the south, or make them into slave

[022-052] herdsmen, or exterminate them. There was one more possibility: they

[022-053] might install themselves as a ruling upper class, as nobles over the

[022-054] subjugated native peasants. The same question was faced much later by

[022-055] the Mongols, and at first they answered it differently from the peoples

[022-056] of our present period. Only by attention to this problem shall we be in

[022-057] a position to explain why the rule of the Turkish peoples did not last,

[022-058] why these peoples were gradually absorbed and disappeared.

[022-059] 2 _Status of the two southern Kingdoms_

[022-060] When the last emperor of the Han period had to abdicate in favour of

[022-061] Ts'ao P'ei and the Wei dynasty began, China was in no way a unified

[022-062] realm. Almost immediately, in 221, two other army commanders, who had

[022-063] long been independent, declared themselves emperors. In the south-west

[022-064] of China, in the present province of Szechwan, the Shu Han dynasty was

[022-065] founded in this way, and in the south-east, in the region of the present

[022-066] Nanking, the Wu dynasty.

[022-067] The situation of the southern kingdom of Shu Han (221-263) corresponded

[022-068] more or less to that of the Chungking regime in the Second World War.

[022-069] West of it the high Tibetan mountains towered up; there was very little

[022-070] reason to fear any major attack from that direction. In the north and

[022-071] east the realm was also protected by difficult mountain country. The

[022-072] south lay relatively open, but at that time there were few Chinese

[022-073] living there, but only natives with a relatively low civilization. The

[022-074] kingdom could only be seriously attacked from two corners--through the

[022-075] north-west, where there was a negotiable plateau, between the Ch'in-ling

[022-076] mountains in the north and the Tibetan mountains in the west, a plateau

[022-077] inhabited by fairly highly developed Tibetan tribes; and secondly

[022-078] through the south-east corner, where it would be possible to penetrate

[022-079] up the Yangtze. There was in fact incessant fighting at both these

[022-080] dangerous corners.

[022-081] Economically, Shu Han was not in a bad position. The country had long

[022-082] been part of the Chinese wheat lands, and had a fairly large Chinese

[022-083] peasant population in the well irrigated plain of Ch'engtu. There was

[022-084] also a wealthy merchant class, supplying grain to the surrounding

[022-085] mountain peoples and buying medicaments and other profitable Tibetan

[022-086] products. And there were trade routes from here through the present

[022-087] province of Yünnan to India.

[022-088] Shu Han's difficulty was that its population was not large enough to be

[022-089] able to stand against the northern State of Wei; moreover, it was

[022-090] difficult to carry out an offensive from Shu Han, though the country

[022-091] could defend itself well. The first attempt to find a remedy was a

[022-092] campaign against the native tribes of the present Yünnan. The purpose of

[022-093] this was to secure manpower for the army and also slaves for sale; for

[022-094] the south-west had for centuries been a main source for traffic in

[022-095] slaves. Finally it was hoped to gain control over the trade to India.

[022-096] All these things were intended to strengthen Shu Han internally, but in

[022-097] spite of certain military successes they produced no practical result,

[022-098] as the Chinese were unable in the long run to endure the climate or to

[022-099] hold out against the guerrilla tactics of the natives. Shu Han tried to

[022-100] buy the assistance of the Tibetans and with their aid to carry out a

[022-101] decisive attack on Wei, whose dynastic legitimacy was not recognized by

[022-102] Shu Han. The ruler of Shu Han claimed to be a member of the imperial

[022-103] family of the deposed Han dynasty, and therefore to be the rightful,

[022-104] legitimate ruler over China. His descent, however, was a little

[022-105] doubtful, and in any case it depended on a link far back in the past.

[022-106] Against this the Wei of the north declared that the last ruler of the

[022-107] Han dynasty had handed over to them with all due form the seals of the

[022-108] state and therewith the imperial prerogative. The controversy was of no

[022-109] great practical importance, but it played a big part in the Chinese

[022-110] Confucianist school until the twelfth century, and contributed largely

[022-111] to a revision of the old conceptions of legitimacy.

[022-112] The political plans of Shu Han were well considered and far-seeing. They

[022-113] were evolved by the premier, a man from Shantung named Chu-ko Liang; for

[022-114] the ruler died in 226 and his successor was still a child. But Chu-ko

[022-115] Liang lived only for a further eight years, and after his death in 234

[022-116] the decline of Shu Han began. Its political leaders no longer had a

[022-117] sense of what was possible. Thus Wei inflicted several defeats on Shu

[022-118] Han, and finally subjugated it in 263.

[022-119] The situation of the state of Wu was much less favourable than that of

[022-120] Shu Han, though this second southern kingdom lasted from 221 to 280. Its

[022-121] country consisted of marshy, water-logged plains, or mountains with

[022-122] narrow valleys. Here Tai peoples had long cultivated their rice, while

[022-123] in the mountains Yao tribes lived by hunting and by simple agriculture.

[022-124] Peasants immigrating from the north found that their wheat and pulse did

[022-125] not thrive here, and slowly they had to gain familiarity with rice

[022-126] cultivation. They were also compelled to give up their sheep and cattle

[022-127] and in their place to breed pigs and water buffaloes, as was done by the

[022-128] former inhabitants of the country. The lower class of the population was

[022-129] mainly non-Chinese; above it was an upper class of Chinese, at first

[022-130] relatively small, consisting of officials, soldiers, and merchants in a

[022-131] few towns and administrative centres. The country was poor, and its only

[022-132] important economic asset was the trade in metals, timber, and other

[022-133] southern products; soon there came also a growing overseas trade with

[022-134] India and the Middle East, bringing revenues to the state in so far as

[022-135] the goods were re-exported from Wu to the north.

[022-136] Wu never attempted to conquer the whole of China, but endeavoured to

[022-137] consolidate its own difficult territory with a view to building up a

[022-138] state on a firm foundation. In general, Wu played mainly a passive part

[022-139] in the incessant struggles between the three kingdoms, though it was

[022-140] active in diplomacy. The Wu kingdom entered into relations with a man

[022-141] who in 232 had gained control of the present South Manchuria and shortly

[022-142] afterwards assumed the title of king. This new ruler of "Yen", as he

[022-143] called his kingdom, had determined to attack the Wei dynasty, and hoped,

[022-144] by putting pressure on it in association with Wu, to overrun Wei from

[022-145] north and south. Wei answered this plan very effectively by recourse to

[022-146] diplomacy and it began by making Wu believe that Wu had reason to fear

[022-147] an attack from its western neighbour Shu Han. A mission was also

[022-148] dispatched from Wei to negotiate with Japan. Japan was then emerging

[022-149] from its stone age and introducing metals; there were countless small

[022-150] principalities and states, of which the state of Yamato, then ruled by a

[022-151] queen, was the most powerful. Yamato had certain interests in Korea,

[022-152] where it already ruled a small coastal strip in the east. Wei offered

[022-153] Yamato the prospect of gaining the whole of Korea if it would turn

[022-154] against the state of Yen in South Manchuria. Wu, too, had turned to

[022-155] Japan, but the negotiations came to nothing, since Wu, as an ally of

[022-156] Yen, had nothing to offer. The queen of Yamato accordingly sent a

[022-157] mission to Wei; she had already decided in favour of that state. Thus

[022-158] Wei was able to embark on war against Yen, which it annihilated in 237.

[022-159] This wrecked Wu's diplomatic projects, and no more was heard of any

[022-160] ambitious plans of the kingdom of Wu.

[022-161] The two southern states had a common characteristic: both were

[022-162] condottiere states, not built up from their own population but conquered

[022-163] by generals from the north and ruled for a time by those generals and

[022-164] their northern troops. Natives gradually entered these northern armies

[022-165] and reduced their percentage of northerners, but a gulf remained between

[022-166] the native population, including its gentry, and the alien military

[022-167] rulers. This reduced the striking power of the southern states.

[022-168] On the other hand, this period had its positive element. For the first

[022-169] time there was an emperor in south China, with all the organization that

[022-170] implied. A capital full of officials, eunuchs, and all the satellites of

[022-171] an imperial court provided incentives to economic advance, because it

[022-172] represented a huge market. The peasants around it were able to increase

[022-173] their sales and grew prosperous. The increased demand resulted in an

[022-174] increase of tillage and a thriving trade. Soon the transport problem had

[022-175] to be faced, as had happened long ago in the north, and new means of

[022-176] transport, especially ships, were provided, and new trade routes opened

[022-177] which were to last far longer than the three kingdoms; on the other

[022-178] hand, the costs of transport involved fresh taxation burdens for the

[022-179] population. The skilled staff needed for the business of administration

[022-180] came into the new capital from the surrounding districts, for the

[022-181] conquerors and new rulers of the territory of the two southern dynasties

[022-182] had brought with them from the north only uneducated soldiers and

[022-183] almost equally uneducated officers. The influx of scholars and

[022-184] administrators into the chief cities produced cultural and economic

[022-185] centres in the south, a circumstance of great importance to China's

[022-186] later development.

## c23.xhtml
