---
description: "Chapter 23 of A History of China"
id: ch23
label: "Section 23"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 23

[023-001] 3 _The northern State of Wei_

[023-002] The situation in the north, in the state of Wei (220-265) was anything

[023-003] but rosy. Wei ruled what at that time were the most important and

[023-004] richest regions of China, the plain of Shensi in the west and the great

[023-005] plain east of Loyang, the two most thickly populated areas of China. But

[023-006] the events at the end of the Han period had inflicted great economic

[023-007] injury on the country. The southern and south-western parts of the Han

[023-008] empire had been lost, and though parts of Central Asia still gave

[023-009] allegiance to Wei, these, as in the past, were economically more of a

[023-010] burden than an asset, because they called for incessant expenditure. At

[023-011] least the trade caravans were able to travel undisturbed from and to

[023-012] China through Turkestan. Moreover, the Wei kingdom, although much

[023-013] smaller than the empire of the Han, maintained a completely staffed

[023-014] court at great expense, because the rulers, claiming to rule the whole

[023-015] of China, felt bound to display more magnificence than the rulers of the

[023-016] southern dynasties. They had also to reward the nineteen tribes of the

[023-017] Hsiung-nu in the north for their military aid, not only with cessions of

[023-018] land but with payments of money. Finally, they would not disarm but

[023-019] maintained great armies for the continual fighting against the southern

[023-020] states. The Wei dynasty did not succeed, however, in closely

[023-021] subordinating the various army commanders to the central government.

[023-022] Thus the commanders, in collusion with groups of the gentry, were able

[023-023] to enrich themselves and to secure regional power. The inadequate

[023-024] strength of the central government of Wei was further undermined by the

[023-025] rivalries among the dominant gentry. The imperial family (Ts'ao Pei, who

[023-026] reigned from 220 to 226, had taken as emperor the name of Wen Ti) was

[023-027] descended from one of the groups of great landowners that had formed in

[023-028] the later Han period. The nucleus of that group was a family named

[023-029] Ts'ui, of which there is mention from the Han period onward and which

[023-030] maintained its power down to the tenth century; but it remained in the

[023-031] background and at first held entirely aloof from direct intervention in

[023-032] high policy. Another family belonging to this group was the Hsia-hou

[023-033] family which was closely united to the family of Wen Ti by adoption; and

[023-034] very soon there was also the Ss[)u]-ma family. Quite naturally Wen Ti,

[023-035] as soon as he came into power, made provision for the members of these

[023-036] powerful families, for only thanks to their support had he been able to

[023-037] ascend the throne and to maintain his hold on the throne. Thus we find

[023-038] many members of the Hsia-hou and Ss[)u]-ma families in government

[023-039] positions. The Ss[)u]-ma family especially showed great activity, and at

[023-040] the end of Wen Ti's reign their power had so grown that a certain

[023-041] Ss[)u]-ma I was in control of the government, while the new emperor Ming

[023-042] Ti (227-233) was completely powerless. This virtually sealed the fate of

[023-043] the Wei dynasty, so far as the dynastic family was concerned. The next

[023-044] emperor was installed and deposed by the Ss[)u]-ma family; dissensions

[023-045] arose within the ruling family, leading to members of the family

[023-046] assassinating one another. In 264 a member of the Ss[)u]-ma family

[023-047] declared himself king; when he died and was succeeded by his son

[023-048] Ss[)u]-ma Yen, the latter, in 265, staged a formal act of renunciation

[023-049] of the throne of the Wei dynasty and made himself the first ruler of the

[023-050] new Chin dynasty. There is nothing to gain by detailing all the

[023-051] intrigues that led up to this event: they all took place in the

[023-052] immediate environment of the court and in no way affected the people,

[023-053] except that every item of expenditure, including all the bribery, had to

[023-054] come out of the taxes paid by the people.

[023-055] With such a situation at court, with the bad economic situation in the

[023-056] country, and with the continual fighting against the two southern

[023-057] states, there could be no question of any far-reaching foreign policy.

[023-058] Parts of eastern Turkestan still showed some measure of allegiance to

[023-059] Wei, but only because at the time it had no stronger opponent. The

[023-060] Hsiung-nu beyond the frontier were suffering from a period of depression

[023-061] which was at the same time a period of reconstruction. They were

[023-062] beginning slowly to form together with Mongol elements a new unit, the

[023-063] Juan-juan, but at this time were still politically inactive. The

[023-064] nineteen tribes within north China held more and more closely together

[023-065] as militarily organized nomads, but did not yet represent a military

[023-066] power and remained loyal to the Wei. The only important element of

[023-067] trouble seems to have been furnished by the Hsien-pi tribes, who had

[023-068] joined with Wu-huan tribes and apparently also with vestiges of the

[023-069] Hsiung-nu in eastern Mongolia, and who made numerous raids over the

[023-070] frontier into the Wei empire. The state of Yen, in southern Manchuria,

[023-071] had already been destroyed by Wei in 238 thanks to Wei's good relations

[023-072] with Japan. Loose diplomatic relations were maintained with Japan in the

[023-073] period that followed; in that period many elements of Chinese

[023-074] civilization found their way into Japan and there, together with

[023-075] settlers from many parts of China, helped to transform the culture of

[023-076] ancient Japan.

[023-077] (B) The Western Chin dynasty (A.D. 265-317)

[023-078] 1 _Internal situation in the Chin empire_

[023-079] The change of dynasty in the state of Wei did not bring any turn in

[023-080] China's internal history. Ss[)u]-ma Yen, who as emperor was called Wu Ti

[023-081] (265-289), had come to the throne with the aid of his clique and his

[023-082] extraordinarily large and widely ramified family. To these he had to

[023-083] give offices as reward. There began at court once more the same

[023-084] spectacle as in the past, except that princes of the new imperial family

[023-085] now played a greater part than under the Wei dynasty, whose ruling house

[023-086] had consisted of a small family. It was now customary, in spite of the

[023-087] abolition of the feudal system, for the imperial princes to receive

[023-088] large regions to administer, the fiscal revenues of which represented

[023-089] their income. The princes were not, however, to exercise full authority

[023-090] in the style of the former feudal lords: their courts were full of

[023-091] imperial control officials. In the event of war it was their duty to

[023-092] come forward, like other governors, with an army in support of the

[023-093] central government. The various Chin princes succeeded, however, in

[023-094] making other governors, beyond the frontiers of their regions, dependent

[023-095] on them. Also, they collected armies of their own independently of the

[023-096] central government and used those armies to pursue personal policies.

[023-097] The members of the families allied with the ruling house, for their

[023-098] part, did all they could to extend their own power. Thus the first ruler

[023-099] of the dynasty was tossed to and fro between the conflicting interests

[023-100] and was himself powerless. But though intrigue was piled on intrigue,

[023-101] the ruler who, of course, himself had come to the head of the state by

[023-102] means of intrigues, was more watchful than the rulers of the Wei dynasty

[023-103] had been, and by shrewd counter-measures he repeatedly succeeded in

[023-104] playing off one party against another, so that the dynasty remained in

[023-105] power. Numerous widespread and furious risings nevertheless took place,

[023-106] usually led by princes. Thus during this period the history of the

[023-107] dynasty was of an extraordinarily dismal character.

[023-108] In spite of this, the Chin troops succeeded in overthrowing the second

[023-109] southern state, that of Wu (A.D. 280), and in so restoring the unity of

[023-110] the empire, the Shu Han realm having been already conquered by the Wei.

[023-111] After the destruction of Wu there remained no external enemy that

[023-112] represented a potential danger, so that a general disarmament was

[023-113] decreed (280) in order to restore a healthy economic and financial

[023-114] situation. This disarmament applied, of course, to the troops directly

[023-115] under the orders of the dynasty, namely the troops of the court and the

[023-116] capital and the imperial troops in the provinces. Disarmament could

[023-117] not, however, be carried out in the princes' regions, as the princes

[023-118] declared that they needed personal guards. The dismissal of the troops

[023-119] was accompanied by a decree ordering the surrender of arms. It may be

[023-120] assumed that the government proposed to mint money with the metal of the

[023-121] weapons surrendered, for coin (the old coin of the Wei dynasty) had

[023-122] become very scarce; as we indicated previously, money had largely been

[023-123] replaced by goods so that, for instance, grain and silks were used for

[023-124] the payment of salaries. China, from _c_. 200 A.D. on until the eighth

[023-125] century, remained in a period of such partial "natural economy".

[023-126] Naturally the decree for the surrender of weapons remained a

[023-127] dead-letter. The discharged soldiers kept their weapons at first and

[023-128] then preferred to sell them. A large part of them was acquired by the

[023-129] Hsiung-nu and the Hsien-pi in the north of China; apparently they

[023-130] usually gave up land in return. In this way many Chinese soldiers,

[023-131] though not all by any means, went as peasants to the regions in the

[023-132] north of China and beyond the frontier. They were glad to do so, for the

[023-133] Hsiung-nu and the Hsien-pi had not the efficient administration and

[023-134] rigid tax collection of the Chinese; and above all, they had no great

[023-135] landowners who could have organized the collection of taxes. For their

[023-136] part, the Hsiung-nu and the Hsien-pi had no reason to regret this

[023-137] immigration of peasants, who could provide them with the farm produce

[023-138] they needed. And at the same time they were receiving from them large

[023-139] quantities of the most modern weapons.

[023-140] This ineffective disarmament was undoubtedly the most pregnant event of

[023-141] the period of the western Chin dynasty. The measure was intended to save

[023-142] the cost of maintaining the soldiers and to bring them back to the land

[023-143] as peasants (and taxpayers); but the discharged men were not given land

[023-144] by the government. The disarmament achieved nothing, not even the

[023-145] desired increase in the money in circulation; what did happen was that

[023-146] the central government lost all practical power, while the military

[023-147] strength both of the dangerous princes within the country and also of

[023-148] the frontier people was increased. The results of these mistaken

[023-149] measures became evident at once and compelled the government to arm

[023-150] anew.

[023-151] 2 _Effect on the frontier peoples_

[023-152] Four groups of frontier peoples drew more or less advantage from the

[023-153] demobilization law--the people of the Toba, the Tibetans, and the

[023-154] Hsien-pi in the north, and the nineteen tribes of the Hsiung-nu within

[023-155] the frontiers of the empire. In the course of time all sorts of

[023-156] complicated relations developed among those ascending peoples as well

[023-157] as between them and the Chinese.

[023-158] The Toba (T'o-pa) formed a small group in the north of the present

[023-159] province of Shansi, north of the city of Tat'ungfu, and they were about

[023-160] to develop their small state. They were primarily of Turkish origin, but

[023-161] had absorbed many tribes of the older Hsiung-nu and the Hsien-pi. In

[023-162] considering the ethnical relationships of all these northern peoples we

[023-163] must rid ourselves of our present-day notions of national unity. Among

[023-164] the Toba there were many Turkish tribes, but also Mongols, and probably

[023-165] a Tungus tribe, as well as perhaps others whom we cannot yet analyse.

[023-166] These tribes may even have spoken different languages, much as later not

[023-167] only Mongol but also Turkish was spoken in the Mongol empire. The

[023-168] political units they formed were tribal unions, not national states.

[023-169] Such a union or federation can be conceived of, structurally, as a cone.

[023-170] At the top point of the cone there was the person of the ruler of the

[023-171] federation. He was a member of the leading family or clan of the leading

[023-172] tribe (the two top layers of the cone). If we speak of the Toba as of

[023-173] Turkish stock, we mean that according to our present knowledge, this

[023-174] leading tribe (_a_) spoke a language belonging to the Turkish language

[023-175] family and (_b_) exhibited a pattern of culture which belonged to the

[023-176] type called above in Chapter One as "North-western Culture". The next

[023-177] layer of the cone represented the "inner circle of tribes", i.e. such

[023-178] tribes as had joined with the leading tribe at an early moment. The

[023-179] leading family of the leading tribe often took their wives from the

[023-180] leading families of the "inner tribes", and these leaders served as

[023-181] advisors and councillors to the leader of the federation. The next lower

[023-182] layer consisted of the "outer tribes", i.e. tribes which had joined the

[023-183] federation only later, often under strong pressure; their number was

[023-184] always much larger than the number of the "inner tribes", but their

[023-185] political influence was much weaker. Every layer below that of the

[023-186] "outer tribes" was regarded as inferior and more or less "unfree". There

[023-187] was many a tribe which, as a tribe, had to serve a free tribe; and there

[023-188] were others who, as tribes, had to serve the whole federation. In

[023-189] addition, there were individuals who had quit or had been forced to quit

[023-190] their tribe or their home and had joined the federation leader as his

[023-191] personal "bondsmen"; further, there were individual slaves and, finally,

[023-192] there were the large masses of agriculturists who had been conquered by

[023-193] the federation. When such a federation was dissolved, by defeat or inner

[023-194] dissent, individual tribes or groups of tribes could join a new

[023-195] federation or could resume independent life.

## c24.xhtml
