---
description: "Chapter 24 of A History of China"
id: ch24
label: "Section 24"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 24

[024-001] Typically, such federations exhibited two tendencies. In the case of

[024-002] the Hsiung-nu we indicated already previously that the leader of the

[024-003] federation repeatedly attempted to build up a kind of bureaucratic

[024-004] system, using his bondsmen as a nucleus. A second tendency was to

[024-005] replace the original tribal leaders by members of the family of the

[024-006] federation leader. If this initial step, usually first taken when "outer

[024-007] tribes" were incorporated, was successful, a reorganization was

[024-008] attempted: instead of using tribal units in war, military units on the

[024-009] basis of "Groups of Hundred", "Groups of Thousand", etc., were created

[024-010] and the original tribes were dissolved into military regiments. In the

[024-011] course of time, and especially at the time of the dissolution of a

[024-012] federation, these military units had gained social coherence and

[024-013] appeared to be tribes again; we are probably correct in assuming that

[024-014] all "tribes" which we find from this time on were already "secondary"

[024-015] tribes of this type. A secondary tribe often took its name from its

[024-016] leader, but it could also revive an earlier "primary tribe" name.

[024-017] The Toba represented a good example for this "cone" structure of

[024-018] pastoral society. Also the Hsiung-nu of this time seem to have had a

[024-019] similar structure. Incidentally, we will from now on call the Hsiung-nu

[024-020] "Huns" because Chinese sources begin to call them "Hu", a term which

[024-021] also had a more general meaning (all non-Chinese in the north and west

[024-022] of China) as well as a more special meaning (non-Chinese in Central Asia

[024-023] and India).

[024-024] The Tibetans fell apart into two sub-groups, the Ch'iang and the Ti.

[024-025] Both names appeared repeatedly as political conceptions, but the

[024-026] Tibetans, like all other state-forming groups of peoples, sheltered in

[024-027] their realms countless alien elements. In the course of the third and

[024-028] second centuries B.C. the group of the Ti, mainly living in the

[024-029] territory of the present Szechwan, had mixed extensively with remains of

[024-030] the Yüeh-chih; the others, the Ch'iang, were northern Tibetans or

[024-031] so-called Tanguts; that is to say, they contained Turkish and Mongol

[024-032] elements. In A.D. 296 there began a great rising of the Ti, whose leader

[024-033] Ch'i Wan-nien took on the title emperor. The Ch'iang rose with them, but

[024-034] it was not until later, from 312, that they pursued an independent

[024-035] policy. The Ti State, however, though it had a second emperor, very soon

[024-036] lost importance, so that we shall be occupied solely with the Ch'iang.

[024-037] As the tribal structure of Tibetan groups was always weak and as

[024-038] leadership developed among them only in times of war, their states

[024-039] always show a military rather than a tribal structure, and the

[024-040] continuation of these states depended strongly upon the personal

[024-041] qualities of their leaders. Incidentally, Tibetans fundamentally were

[024-042] sheep-breeders and not horse-breeders and, therefore, they always

[024-043] showed inclination to incorporate infantry into their armies. Thus,

[024-044] Tibetan states differed strongly from the aristocratically organized

[024-045] "Turkish" states as well as from the tribal, non-aristocratic "Mongol"

[024-046] states of that period.

[024-047] The Hsien-pi, according to our present knowledge, were under "Mongol"

[024-048] leadership, i.e. we believe that the language of the leading group

[024-049] belonged to the family of Mongolian languages and that their culture

[024-050] belonged to the type described above as "Northern culture". They had, in

[024-051] addition, a strong admixture of Hunnic tribes. Throughout the period

[024-052] during which they played a part in history, they never succeeded in

[024-053] forming any great political unit, in strong contrast to the Huns, who

[024-054] excelled in state formation. The separate groups of the Hsien-pi pursued

[024-055] a policy of their own; very frequently Hsien-pi fought each other, and

[024-056] they never submitted to a common leadership. Thus their history is

[024-057] entirely that of small groups. As early as the Wei period there had been

[024-058] small-scale conflicts with the Hsien-pi tribes, and at times the tribes

[024-059] had some success. The campaigns of the Hsien-pi against North China now

[024-060] increased, and in the course of them the various tribes formed firmer

[024-061] groupings, among which the Mu-jung tribes played a leading part. In 281,

[024-062] the year after the demobilization law, this group marched south into

[024-063] China, and occupied the region round Peking. After fierce fighting, in

[024-064] which the Mu-jung section suffered heavy losses, a treaty was signed in

[024-065] 289, under which the Mu-jung tribe of the Hsien-pi recognized Chinese

[024-066] overlordship. The Mu-jung were driven to this step mainly because they

[024-067] had been continually attacked from southern Manchuria by another

[024-068] Hsien-pi tribe, the Yü-wen, the tribe most closely related to them. The

[024-069] Mu-jung made use of the period of their so-called subjection to organize

[024-070] their community in North China.

[024-071] South of the Toba were the nineteen tribes of the Hsiung-nu or Huns, as

[024-072] we are now calling them. Their leader in A.D. 287, Liu Yüan, was one of

[024-073] the principal personages of this period. His name is purely Chinese, but

[024-074] he was descended from the Hun _shan-yü_, from the family and line of Mao

[024-075] Tun. His membership of that long-famous noble line and old ruling family

[024-076] of Huns gave him a prestige which he increased by his great organizing

[024-077] ability.

[024-078] 3 _Struggles for the throne_

[024-079] We shall return to Liu Yüan later; we must now cast another glance at

[024-080] the official court of the Chin. In that court a family named Yang had

[024-081] become very powerful, a daughter of this family having become empress.

[024-082] When, however, the emperor died, the wife of the new emperor Hui Ti

[024-083] (290-306) secured the assassination of the old empress Yang and of her

[024-084] whole family. Thus began the rule at court of the Chia family. In 299

[024-085] the Chia family got rid of the heir to the throne, to whom they

[024-086] objected, assassinating this prince and another one. This event became

[024-087] the signal for large-scale activity on the part of the princes, each of

[024-088] whom was supported by particular groups of families. The princes had not

[024-089] complied with the disarmament law of 280 and so had become militarily

[024-090] supreme. The generals newly appointed in the course of the imperial

[024-091] rearmament at once entered into alliance with the princes, and thus were

[024-092] quite unreliable as officers of the government. Both the generals and

[024-093] the princes entered into agreements with the frontier peoples to assure

[024-094] their aid in the struggle for power. The most popular of these

[024-095] auxiliaries were the Hsien-pi, who were fighting for one of the princes

[024-096] whose territory lay in the east. Since the Toba were the natural enemies

[024-097] of the Hsien-pi, who were continually contesting their hold on their

[024-098] territory, the Toba were always on the opposite side to that supported

[024-099] by the Hsien-pi, so that they now supported generals who were ostensibly

[024-100] loyal to the government. The Huns, too, negotiated with several generals

[024-101] and princes and received tempting offers. Above all, all the frontier

[024-102] peoples were now militarily well equipped, continually receiving new war

[024-103] material from the Chinese who from time to time were co-operating with

[024-104] them.

[024-105] In A.D. 300 Prince Lun assassinated the empress Chia and removed her

[024-106] group. In 301 he made himself emperor, but in the same year he was

[024-107] killed by the prince of Ch'i. This prince was killed in 302 by the

[024-108] prince of Ch'ang-sha, who in turned was killed in 303 by the prince of

[024-109] Tung-hai. The prince of Ho-chien rose in 302 and was killed in 306; the

[024-110] prince of Ch'engtu rose in 303, conquered the capital in 305, and then,

[024-111] in 306, was himself removed. I mention all these names and dates only to

[024-112] show the disunion within the ruling groups.

[024-113] 4 _Migration of Chinese_

[024-114] All these struggles raged round the capital, for each of the princes

[024-115] wanted to secure full power and to become emperor. Thus the border

[024-116] regions remained relatively undisturbed. Their population suffered much

[024-117] less from the warfare than the unfortunate people in the neighbourhood

[024-118] of the central government. For this reason there took place a mass

[024-119] migration of Chinese from the centre of the empire to its periphery.

[024-120] This process, together with the shifting of the frontier peoples, is one

[024-121] of the most important events of that epoch. A great number of Chinese

[024-122] migrated especially into the present province of Kansu, where a governor

[024-123] who had originally been sent there to fight the Hsien-pi had created a

[024-124] sort of paradise by his good administration and maintenance of peace.

[024-125] The territory ruled by this Chinese, first as governor and then in

[024-126] increasing independence, was surrounded by Hsien-pi, Tibetans, and other

[024-127] peoples, but thanks to the great immigration of Chinese and to its

[024-128] situation on the main caravan route to Turkestan, it was able to hold

[024-129] its own, to expand, and to become prosperous.

[024-130] Other groups of Chinese peasants migrated southward into the

[024-131] territories of the former state of Wu. A Chinese prince of the house of

[024-132] the Chin was ruling there, in the present Nanking. His purpose was to

[024-133] organize that territory, and then to intervene in the struggles of the

[024-134] other princes. We shall meet him again at the beginning of the Hun rule

[024-135] over North China in 317, as founder and emperor of the first south

[024-136] Chinese dynasty, which was at once involved in the usual internal and

[024-137] external struggles. For the moment, however, the southern region was

[024-138] relatively at peace, and was accordingly attracting settlers.

[024-139] Finally, many Chinese migrated northward, into the territories of the

[024-140] frontier peoples, not only of the Hsien-pi but especially of the Huns.

[024-141] These alien peoples, although in the official Chinese view they were

[024-142] still barbarians, at least maintained peace in the territories they

[024-143] ruled, and they left in peace the peasants and craftsmen who came to

[024-144] them, even while their own armies were involved in fighting inside

[024-145] China. Not only peasants and craftsmen came to the north but more and

[024-146] more educated persons. Members of families of the gentry that had

[024-147] suffered from the fighting, people who had lost their influence in

[024-148] China, were welcomed by the Huns and appointed teachers and political

[024-149] advisers of the Hun nobility.

[024-150] 5 _Victory of the Huns. The Hun Han dynasty (later renamed the Earlier

[024-151] Chao dynasty_)

[024-152] With its self-confidence thus increased, the Hun council of nobles

[024-153] declared that in future the Huns should no longer fight now for one and

[024-154] now for another Chinese general or prince. They had promised loyalty to

[024-155] the Chinese emperor, but not to any prince. No one doubted that the

[024-156] Chinese emperor was a complete nonentity and no longer played any part

[024-157] in the struggle for power. It was evident that the murders would

[024-158] continue until one of the generals or princes overcame the rest and made

[024-159] himself emperor. Why should not the Huns have the same right? Why should

[024-160] not they join in this struggle for the Chinese imperial throne?

[024-161] There were two arguments against this course, one of which was already

[024-162] out of date. The Chinese had for many centuries set down the Huns as

[024-163] uncultured barbarians; but the inferiority complex thus engendered in

[024-164] the Huns had virtually been overcome, because in the course of time

[024-165] their upper class had deliberately acquired a Chinese education and so

[024-166] ranked culturally with the Chinese. Thus the ruler Liu Yüan, for

[024-167] example, had enjoyed a good Chinese education and was able to read all

[024-168] the classical texts. The second argument was provided by the rigid

[024-169] conceptions of legitimacy to which the Turkish-Hunnic aristocratic

[024-170] society adhered. The Huns asked themselves: "Have we, as aliens, any

[024-171] right to become emperors and rulers in China, when we are not descended

[024-172] from an old Chinese family?" On this point Liu Yüan and his advisers

[024-173] found a good answer. They called Liu Yüan's dynasty the "Han dynasty",

[024-174] and so linked it with the most famous of all the Chinese dynasties,

[024-175] pointing to the pact which their ancestor Mao Tun had concluded five

[024-176] hundred years earlier with the first emperor of the Han dynasty and

[024-177] which had described the two states as "brethren". They further recalled

[024-178] the fact that the rulers of the Huns were closely related to the Chinese

[024-179] ruling family, because Mao Tun and his successors had married Chinese

[024-180] princesses. Finally, Liu Yüan's Chinese family name, Liu, had also been

[024-181] the family name of the rulers of the Han dynasty. Accordingly the Hun

[024-182] Lius came forward not as aliens but as the rightful successors in

[024-183] continuation of the Han dynasty, as legitimate heirs to the Chinese

[024-184] imperial throne on the strength of relationship and of treaties.

## c25.xhtml
