---
description: "Chapter 26 of A History of China"
id: ch26
label: "Section 26"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 26

[026-001] The empire of the Tibetans was organized quite differently from the

[026-002] empires of the Huns and the Hsien-pi tribes. The Tibetan organization

[026-003] was purely military and had nothing to do with tribal structure. This

[026-004] had its advantages, for the leader of such a formation had no need to

[026-005] take account of tribal chieftains; he was answerable to no one and

[026-006] possessed considerable personal power. Nor was there any need for him to

[026-007] be of noble rank or descended from an old family. The Tibetan ruler Fu

[026-008] Chien organized all his troops, including the non-Tibetans, on this

[026-009] system, without regard to tribal membership.

[026-010] Fu Chien's state showed another innovation: the armies of the Huns and

[026-011] the Hsien-pi had consisted entirely of cavalry, for the nomads of the

[026-012] north were, of course, horsemen; to fight on foot was in their eyes not

[026-013] only contrary to custom but contemptible. So long as a state consisted

[026-014] only of a league of tribes, it was simply out of the question to

[026-015] transform part of the army into infantry. Fu Chien, however, with his

[026-016] military organization that paid no attention to the tribal element,

[026-017] created an infantry in addition to the great cavalry units, recruiting

[026-018] for it large numbers of Chinese. The infantry proved extremely valuable,

[026-019] especially in the fighting in the plains of north China and in laying

[026-020] siege to fortified towns. Fu Chien thus very quickly achieved military

[026-021] predominance over the neighbouring states. As we have seen already, he

[026-022] annexed the "Earlier Yen" realm of the proto-Mongols (370), but he also

[026-023] annihilated the Chinese "Earlier Liang" realm (376) and in the same year

[026-024] the small Turkish Toba realm. This made him supreme over all north China

[026-025] and stronger than any alien ruler before him. He had in his possession

[026-026] both the ancient capitals, Ch'ang-an and Loyang; the whole of the rich

[026-027] agricultural regions of north China belonged to him; he also controlled

[026-028] the routes to Turkestan. He himself had a Chinese education, and he

[026-029] attracted Chinese to his court; he protected the Buddhists; and he tried

[026-030] in every way to make the whole country culturally Chinese. As soon as Fu

[026-031] Chien had all north China in his power, as Liu Yüan and his Huns had

[026-032] done before him, he resolved, like Liu Yüan, to make every effort to

[026-033] gain the mastery over all China, to become emperor of China. Liu Yüan's

[026-034] successors had not had the capacity for which such a venture called; Fu

[026-035] Chien was to fail in it for other reasons. Yet, from a military point

[026-036] of view, his chances were not bad. He had far more soldiers under his

[026-037] command than the Chinese "Eastern Chin dynasty" which ruled the south,

[026-038] and his troops were undoubtedly better. In the time of the founder of

[026-039] the Tibetan dynasty the southern empire had been utterly defeated by his

[026-040] troops (354), and the south Chinese were no stronger now.

[026-041] Against them the north had these assets: the possession of the best

[026-042] northern tillage, the control of the trade routes, and "Chinese" culture

[026-043] and administration. At the time, however, these represented only

[026-044] potentialities and not tangible realities. It would have taken ten to

[026-045] twenty years to restore the capacities of the north after its

[026-046] devastation in many wars, to reorganize commerce, and to set up a really

[026-047] reliable administration, and thus to interlock the various elements and

[026-048] consolidate the various tribes. But as early as 383 Fu Chien started his

[026-049] great campaign against the south, with an army of something like a

[026-050] million men. At first the advance went well. The horsemen from the

[026-051] north, however, were men of the mountain country, and in the soggy

[026-052] plains of the Yangtze region, cut up by hundreds of water-courses and

[026-053] canals, they suffered from climatic and natural conditions to which they

[026-054] were unaccustomed. Their main strength was still in cavalry; and they

[026-055] came to grief. The supplies and reinforcements for the vast army failed

[026-056] to arrive in time; units did not reach the appointed places at the

[026-057] appointed dates. The southern troops under the supreme command of Hsieh

[026-058] Hsüan, far inferior in numbers and militarily of no great efficiency,

[026-059] made surprise attacks on isolated units before these were in regular

[026-060] formation. Some they defeated, others they bribed; they spread false

[026-061] reports. Fu Chien's army was seized with widespread panic, so that he

[026-062] was compelled to retreat in haste. As he did so it became evident that

[026-063] his empire had no inner stability: in a very short time it fell into

[026-064] fragments. The south Chinese had played no direct part in this, for in

[026-065] spite of their victory they were not strong enough to advance far to the

[026-066] north.

[026-067] 3 _The fragmentation of north China_

[026-068] The first to fall away from the Tibetan ruler was a noble of the

[026-069] Mu-jung, a member of the ruling family of the "Earlier Yen dynasty", who

[026-070] withdrew during the actual fighting to pursue a policy of his own. With

[026-071] the vestiges of the Hsien-pi who followed him, mostly cavalry, he fought

[026-072] his way northward into the old homeland of the Hsien-pi and there, in

[026-073] central Hopei, founded the "Later Yen dynasty" (384-409), himself

[026-074] reigning for twelve years. In the remaining thirteen years of the

[026-075] existence of that dynasty there were no fewer than five rulers, the

[026-076] last of them a member of another family. The history of this Hsien-pi

[026-077] dynasty, as of its predecessor, is an unedifying succession of

[026-078] intrigues; no serious effort was made to build up a true state.

[026-079] In the same year 384 there was founded, under several other Mu-jung

[026-080] princes of the ruling family of the "Earlier Yen dynasty", the "Western

[026-081] Yen dynasty" (384-394). Its nucleus was nothing more than a detachment

[026-082] of troops of the Hsien-pi which had been thrown by Fu Chien into the

[026-083] west of his empire, in Shensi, in the neighbourhood of the old capital

[026-084] Ch'ang-an. There its commanders, on learning the news of Fu Chien's

[026-085] collapse, declared their independence. In western China, however, far

[026-086] removed from all liaison with the main body of the Hsien-pi, they were

[026-087] unable to establish themselves, and when they tried to fight their way

[026-088] to the north-east they were dispersed, so that they failed entirely to

[026-089] form an actual state.

[026-090] There was a third attempt in 384 to form a state in north China. A

[026-091] Tibetan who had joined Fu Chien with his followers declared himself

[026-092] independent when Fu Chien came back, a beaten man, to Shensi. He caused

[026-093] Fu Chien and almost the whole of his family to be assassinated, occupied

[026-094] the capital, Ch'ang-an, and actually entered into the heritage of Fu

[026-095] Chien. This Tibetan dynasty is known as the "Later Ch'in dynasty"

[026-096] (384-417). It was certainly the strongest of those founded in 384, but

[026-097] it still failed to dominate any considerable part of China and remained

[026-098] of local importance, mainly confined to the present province of Shensi.

[026-099] Fu Chien's empire nominally had three further rulers, but they did not

[026-100] exert the slightest influence on events.

[026-101] With the collapse of the state founded by Fu Chien, the tribes of

[026-102] Hsien-pi who had left their homeland in the third century and migrated

[026-103] to the Ordos region proceeded to form their own state: a man of the

[026-104] Hsien-pi tribe of the Ch'i-fu founded the so-called "Western Ch'in

[026-105] dynasty" (385-431). Like the other Hsien-pi states, this one was of weak

[026-106] construction, resting on the military strength of a few tribes and

[026-107] failing to attain a really secure basis. Its territory lay in the east

[026-108] of the present province of Kansu, and so controlled the eastern end of

[026-109] the western Asian caravan route, which might have been a source of

[026-110] wealth if the Ch'i-fu had succeeded in attracting commerce by discreet

[026-111] treatment and in imposing taxation on it. Instead of this, the bulk of

[026-112] the long-distance traffic passed through the Ordos region, a little

[026-113] farther north, avoiding the Ch'i-fu state, which seemed to the merchants

[026-114] to be too insecure. The Ch'i-fu depended mainly on cattle-breeding in

[026-115] the remote mountain country in the south of their territory, a region

[026-116] that gave them relative security from attack; on the other hand, this

[026-117] made them unable to exercise any influence on the course of political

[026-118] events in western China.

[026-119] Mention must be made of one more state that rose from the ruins of Fu

[026-120] Chien's empire. It lay in the far west of China, in the western part of

[026-121] the present province of Kansu, and was really a continuation of the

[026-122] Chinese "Earlier Liang" realm, which had been annexed ten years earlier

[026-123] (376) by Fu Chien. A year before his great march to the south, Fu Chien

[026-124] had sent the Tibetan Lü Kuang into the "Earlier Liang" region in order

[026-125] to gain influence over Turkestan. As mentioned previously, after the

[026-126] great Hun rulers Fu Chien was the first to make a deliberate attempt to

[026-127] secure cultural and political overlordship over the whole of China.

[026-128] Although himself a Tibetan, he never succumbed to the temptation of

[026-129] pursuing a "Tibetan" policy; like an entirely legitimate ruler of China,

[026-130] he was concerned to prevent the northern peoples along the frontier from

[026-131] uniting with the Tibetan peoples of the west for political ends. The

[026-132] possession of Turkestan would avert that danger, which had shown signs

[026-133] of becoming imminent of late: some tribes of the Hsien-pi had migrated

[026-134] as far as the high mountains of Tibet and had imposed themselves as a

[026-135] ruling class on the still very primitive Tibetans living there. From

[026-136] this symbiosis there began to be formed a new people, the so-called

[026-137] T'u-yü-hun, a hybridization of Mongol and Tibetan stock with a slight

[026-138] Turkish admixture. Lü Kuang had considerable success in Turkestan; he

[026-139] had brought considerable portions of eastern Turkestan under Fu Chien's

[026-140] sovereignty and administered those regions almost independently. When

[026-141] the news came of Fu Chien's end, he declared himself an independent

[026-142] ruler, of the "Later Liang" dynasty (386-403). Strictly speaking, this

[026-143] was simply a trading State, like the city-states of Turkestan: its basis

[026-144] was the transit traffic that brought it prosperity. For commerce brought

[026-145] good profit to the small states that lay right across the caravan route,

[026-146] whereas it was of doubtful benefit, as we know, to agrarian China as a

[026-147] whole, because the luxury goods which it supplied to the court were paid

[026-148] for out of the production of the general population.

[026-149] This "Later Liang" realm was inhabited not only by a few Tibetans and

[026-150] many Chinese, but also by Hsien-pi and Huns. These heterogeneous

[026-151] elements with their divergent cultures failed in the long run to hold

[026-152] together in this long but extremely narrow strip of territory, which was

[026-153] almost incapable of military defence. As early as 397 a group of Huns in

[026-154] the central section of the country made themselves independent, assuming

[026-155] the name of the "Northern Liang" (397-439). These Huns quickly conquered

[026-156] other parts of the "Later Liang" realm, which then fell entirely to

[026-157] pieces. Chinese again founded a state, "West Liang" (400-421) in western

[026-158] Kansu, and the Hsien-pi founded "South Liang" (379-414) in eastern

[026-159] Kansu. Thus the "Later Liang" fell into three parts, more or less

[026-160] differing ethnically, though they could not be described as ethnically

[026-161] unadulterated states.

[026-162] 4 _Sociological analysis of the two great alien empires_

[026-163] The two great empires of north China at the time of its division had

[026-164] been founded by non-Chinese--the first by the Hun Liu Yüan, the second

[026-165] by the Tibetan Fu Chien. Both rulers went to work on the same principle

[026-166] of trying to build up truly "Chinese" empires, but the traditions of

[026-167] Huns and Tibetans differed, and the two experiments turned out

[026-168] differently. Both failed, but not for the same reasons and not with the

[026-169] same results. The Hun Liu Yüan was the ruler of a league of feudal

[026-170] tribes, which was expected to take its place as an upper class above the

[026-171] unchanged Chinese agricultural population with its system of officials

[026-172] and gentry. But Liu Yüan's successors were national reactionaries who

[026-173] stood for the maintenance of the nomad life against that new plan of

[026-174] transition to a feudal class of urban nobles ruling an agrarian

[026-175] population. Liu Yüan's more far-seeing policy was abandoned, with the

[026-176] result that the Huns were no longer in a position to rule an immense

[026-177] agrarian territory, and the empire soon disintegrated. For the various

[026-178] Hun tribes this failure meant falling back into political

[026-179] insignificance, but they were able to maintain their national character

[026-180] and existence.

## c27.xhtml
