---
description: "Chapter 27 of A History of China"
id: ch27
label: "Section 27"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 27

[027-001] Fu Chien, as a Tibetan, was a militarist and soldier, in accordance with

[027-002] the past of the Tibetans. Under him were grouped Tibetans without tribal

[027-003] chieftains; the great mass of Chinese; and dispersed remnants of tribes

[027-004] of Huns, Hsien-pi, and others. His organization was militaristic and,

[027-005] outside the military sphere, a militaristic bureaucracy. The Chinese

[027-006] gentry, so far as they still existed, preferred to work with him rather

[027-007] than with the feudalist Huns. These gentry probably supported Fu Chien's

[027-008] southern campaign, for, in consequence of the wide ramifications of

[027-009] their families, it was to their interest that China should form a single

[027-010] economic unit. They were, of course, equally ready to work with another

[027-011] group, one of southern Chinese, to attain the same end by other means,

[027-012] if those means should prove more advantageous: thus the gentry were not

[027-013] a reliable asset, but were always ready to break faith. Among other

[027-014] things, Fu Chien's southern campaign was wrecked by that faithlessness.

[027-015] When an essentially military state suffers military defeat, it can only

[027-016] go to pieces. This explains the disintegration of that great empire

[027-017] within a single year into so many diminutive states, as already

[027-018] described.

[027-019] 5 _Sociological analysis of the petty States_

[027-020] The states that took the place of Fu Chien's empire, those many

[027-021] diminutive states (the Chinese speak of the period of the Sixteen

[027-022] Kingdoms), may be divided from the economic point of view into two

[027-023] groups--trading states and warrior states; sociologically they also fall

[027-024] into two groups, tribal states and military states.

[027-025] The small states in the west, in Kansu (the Later Liang and the Western,

[027-026] Northern, and Southern Liang), were trading states: they lived on the

[027-027] earnings of transit trade with Turkestan. The eastern states were

[027-028] warrior states, in which an army commander ruled by means of an armed

[027-029] group of non-Chinese and exploited an agricultural population. It is

[027-030] only logical that such states should be short-lived, as in fact they all

[027-031] were.

[027-032] Sociologically regarded, during this period only the Southern and

[027-033] Northern Liang were still tribal states. In addition to these came the

[027-034] young Toba realm, which began in 385 but of which mention has not yet

[027-035] been made. The basis of that state was the tribe, not the family or the

[027-036] individual; after its political disintegration the separate tribes

[027-037] remained in existence. The other states of the east, however, were

[027-038] military states, made up of individuals with no tribal allegiance but

[027-039] subject to a military commandant. But where there is no tribal

[027-040] association, after the political downfall of a state founded by ethnical

[027-041] groups, those groups sooner or later disappear as such. We see this in

[027-042] the years immediately following Fu Chien's collapse: the Tibetan

[027-043] ethnical group to which he himself belonged disappeared entirely from

[027-044] the historical scene. The two Tibetan groups that outlasted him, also

[027-045] forming military states and not tribal states, similarly came to an end

[027-046] shortly afterwards for all time. The Hsien-pi groups in the various

[027-047] fragments of the empire, with the exception of the petty states in

[027-048] Kansu, also continued, only as tribal fragments led by a few old ruling

[027-049] families. They, too, after brief and undistinguished military rule, came

[027-050] to an end; they disappeared so completely that thereafter we no longer

[027-051] find the term Hsien-pi in history. Not that they had been exterminated.

[027-052] When the social structure and its corresponding economic form fall to

[027-053] pieces, there remain only two alternatives for its individuals. Either

[027-054] they must go over to a new form, which in China could only mean that

[027-055] they became Chinese; many Hsien-pi in this way became Chinese in the

[027-056] decades following 384. Or, they could retain their old way of living in

[027-057] association with another stock of similar formation; this, too, happened

[027-058] in many cases. Both these courses, however, meant the end of the

[027-059] Hsien-pi as an independent ethnical unit. We must keep this process and

[027-060] its reasons in view if we are to understand how a great people can

[027-061] disappear once and for all.

[027-062] The Huns, too, so powerful in the past, were suddenly scarcely to be

[027-063] found any longer. Among the many petty states there were many Hsien-pi

[027-064] kingdoms, but only a single, quite small Hun state, that of the Northern

[027-065] Liang. The disappearance of the Huns was, however, only apparent; at

[027-066] this time they remained in the Ordos region and in Shansi as separate

[027-067] nomad tribes with no integrating political organization; their time had

[027-068] still to come.

[027-069] 6 _Spread of Buddhism_

[027-070] According to the prevalent Chinese view, nothing of importance was

[027-071] achieved during this period in north China in the intellectual sphere;

[027-072] there was no culture in the north, only in the south. This is natural:

[027-073] for a Confucian this period, the fourth century, was one of degeneracy

[027-074] in north China, for no one came into prominence as a celebrated

[027-075] Confucian. Nothing else could be expected, for in the north the gentry,

[027-076] which had been the class that maintained Confucianism since the Han

[027-077] period, had largely been destroyed; from political leadership especially

[027-078] it had been shut out during the periods of alien rule. Nor could we

[027-079] expect to find Taoists in the true sense, that is to say followers of

[027-080] the teaching of Lao Tz[)u], for these, too, had been dependent since the

[027-081] Han period on the gentry. Until the fourth century, these two had

[027-082] remained the dominant philosophies.

[027-083] What could take their place? The alien rulers had left little behind

[027-084] them. Most of them had been unable to write Chinese, and in so far as

[027-085] they were warriors they had no interest in literature or in political

[027-086] philosophy, for they were men of action. Few songs and poems of theirs

[027-087] remain extant in translations from their language into Chinese, but

[027-088] these preserve a strong alien flavour in their mental attitude and in

[027-089] their diction. They are the songs of fighting men, songs that were sung

[027-090] on horseback, songs of war and its sufferings. These songs have nothing

[027-091] of the excessive formalism and aestheticism of the Chinese, but give

[027-092] expression to simple emotions in unpolished language with a direct

[027-093] appeal. The epic of the Turkish peoples had clearly been developed

[027-094] already, and in north China it produced a rudimentary ballad literature,

[027-095] to which four hundred years later no less attention was paid than to the

[027-096] emotional world of contemporary songs. The actual literature, however,

[027-097] and the philosophy of this period are Buddhist. How can we explain that

[027-098] Buddhism had gained such influence?

[027-099] It will be remembered that Buddhism came to China overland and by sea in

[027-100] the Han epoch. The missionary monks who came from abroad with the

[027-101] foreign merchants found little approval among the Chinese gentry. They

[027-102] were regarded as second-rate persons belonging, according to Chinese

[027-103] notions, to an inferior social class. Thus the monks had to turn to the

[027-104] middle and lower classes in China. Among these they found widespread

[027-105] acceptance, not of their profound philosophic ideas, but of their

[027-106] doctrine of the after life. This doctrine was in a certain sense

[027-107] revolutionary: it declared that all the high officials and superiors who

[027-108] treated the people so unjustly and who so exploited them, would in their

[027-109] next reincarnation be born in poor circumstances or into inferior rank

[027-110] and would have to suffer punishment for all their ill deeds. The poor

[027-111] who had to suffer undeserved evils would be born in their next life into

[027-112] high rank and would have a good time. This doctrine brought a ray of

[027-113] light, a promise, to the country people who had suffered so much since

[027-114] the later Han period of the second century A.D. Their situation remained

[027-115] unaltered down to the fourth century; and under their alien rulers the

[027-116] Chinese country population became Buddhist.

[027-117] The merchants made use of the Buddhist monasteries as banks and

[027-118] warehouses. Thus they, too, were well inclined towards Buddhism and gave

[027-119] money and land for its temples. The temples were able to settle peasants

[027-120] on this land as their tenants. In those times a temple was a more

[027-121] reliable landlord than an individual alien, and the poorer peasants

[027-122] readily became temple tenants; this increased their inclination towards

[027-123] Buddhism.

[027-124] The Indian, Sogdian, and Turkestani monks were readily allowed to settle

[027-125] by the alien rulers of China, who had no national prejudice against

[027-126] other aliens. The monks were educated men and brought some useful

[027-127] knowledge from abroad. Educated Chinese were scarcely to be found, for

[027-128] the gentry retired to their estates, which they protected as well as

[027-129] they could from their alien ruler. So long as the gentry had no prospect

[027-130] of regaining control of the threads of political life that extended

[027-131] throughout China, they were not prepared to provide a class of officials

[027-132] and scholars for the anti-Confucian foreigners, who showed interest only

[027-133] in fighting and trading. Thus educated persons were needed at the courts

[027-134] of the alien rulers, and Buddhists were therefore engaged. These foreign

[027-135] Buddhists had all the important Buddhist writings translated into

[027-136] Chinese, and so made use of their influence at court for religious

[027-137] propaganda. This does not mean that every text was translated from

[027-138] Indian languages; especially in the later period many works appeared

[027-139] which came not from India but from Sogdia or Turkestan, or had even been

[027-140] written in China by Sogdians or other natives of Turkestan, and were

[027-141] then translated into Chinese. In Turkestan, Khotan in particular became

[027-142] a centre of Buddhist culture. Buddhism was influenced by vestiges of

[027-143] indigenous cults, so that Khotan developed a special religious

[027-144] atmosphere of its own; deities were honoured there (for instance, the

[027-145] king of Heaven of the northerners) to whom little regard was paid

[027-146] elsewhere. This "Khotan Buddhism" had special influence on the Buddhist

[027-147] Turkish peoples.

[027-148] Big translation bureaux were set up for the preparation of these

[027-149] translations into Chinese, in which many copyists simultaneously took

[027-150] down from dictation a translation made by a "master" with the aid of a

[027-151] few native helpers. The translations were not literal, but were

[027-152] paraphrases, most of them greatly reduced in length, glosses were

[027-153] introduced when the translator thought fit for political or doctrinal

[027-154] reasons, or when he thought that in this way he could better adapt the

[027-155] texts to Chinese feeling.

[027-156] Buddhism, quite apart from the special case of "Khotan Buddhism",

[027-157] underwent extensive modification on its way across Central Asia. Its

[027-158] main Indian form (Hinayana) was a purely individualistic religion of

[027-159] salvation without a God--related in this respect to genuine Taoism--and

[027-160] based on a concept of two classes of people: the monks who could achieve

[027-161] salvation and, secondly, the masses who fed the monks but could not

[027-162] achieve salvation. This religion did not gain a footing in China; only

[027-163] traces of it can be found in some Buddhistic sects in China. Mahayana

[027-164] Buddhism, on the other hand, developed into a true popular religion of

[027-165] salvation. It did not interfere with the indigenous deities and did not

[027-166] discountenance life in human society; it did not recommend Nirvana at

[027-167] once, but placed before it a here-after with all the joys worth striving

[027-168] for. In this form Buddhism was certain of success in Asia. On its way

[027-169] from India to China it divided into countless separate streams, each

[027-170] characterized by a particular book. Every nuance, from profound

[027-171] philosophical treatises to the most superficial little tracts written

[027-172] for the simplest of souls, and even a good deal of Turkestan shamanism

[027-173] and Tibetan belief in magic, found their way into Buddhist writings, so

[027-174] that some Buddhist monks practiced Central Asian Shamanism.

[027-175] In spite of Buddhism, the old religion of the peasants retained its

[027-176] vitality. Local diviners, Chinese shamans (_wu_), sorcerers, continued

[027-177] their practices, although from now on they sometimes used Buddhist

[027-178] phraseology. Often, this popular religion is called "Taoism ", because a

[027-179] systematization of the popular pantheon was attempted, and Lao Tz[)u]

[027-180] and other Taoists played a role in this pantheon. Philosophic Taoism

[027-181] continued in this time, aside from the church-Taoism of Chang Ling and,

[027-182] naturally, all kinds of contacts between these three currents occurred.

[027-183] The Chinese state cult, the cult of Heaven saturated with Confucianism,

[027-184] was another living form of religion. The alien rulers, in turn, had

[027-185] brought their own mixture of worship of Heaven and shamanism. Their

[027-186] worship of Heaven was their official "representative" religion; their

[027-187] shamanism the private religion of the individual in his daily life. The

[027-188] alien rulers, accordingly, showed interest in the Chinese shamans as

[027-189] well as in the shamanistic aspects of Mahayana Buddhism. Not

[027-190] infrequently competitions were arranged by the rulers between priests of

[027-191] the different religious systems, and the rulers often competed for the

[027-192] possession of monks who were particularly skilled in magic or

[027-193] soothsaying.

## c28.xhtml
