---
description: "Chapter 28 of A History of China"
id: ch28
label: "Section 28"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 28

[028-001] But what was the position of the "official" religion? Were the aliens to

[028-002] hold to their own worship of heaven, or were they to take over the

[028-003] official Chinese cult, or what else? This problem posed itself already

[028-004] in the fourth century, but it was left unsolved.

[028-005] (D) The Toba empire in North China (A.D. 385-550)

[028-006] 1 _The rise of the Toba State_

[028-007] On the collapse of Fu Chien's empire one more state made its appearance;

[028-008] it has not yet been dealt with, although it was the most important one.

[028-009] This was the empire of the Toba, in the north of the present province of

[028-010] Shansi. Fu Chien had brought down the small old Toba state in 376, but

[028-011] had not entirely destroyed it. Its territory was partitioned, and part

[028-012] was placed under the administration of a Hun: in view of the old rivalry

[028-013] between Toba and Huns, this seemed to Fu Chien to be the best way of

[028-014] preventing any revival of the Toba. However, a descendant of the old

[028-015] ruling family of the Toba succeeded, with the aid of related families,

[028-016] in regaining power and forming a small new kingdom. Very soon many

[028-017] tribes which still lived in north China and which had not been broken up

[028-018] into military units, joined him. Of these there were ultimately 119,

[028-019] including many Hun tribes from Shansi and also many Hsien-pi tribes.

[028-020] Thus the question who the Toba were is not easy to answer. The leading

[028-021] tribe itself had migrated southward in the third century from the

[028-022] frontier territory between northern Mongolia and northern Manchuria.

[028-023] After this migration the first Toba state, the so-called Tai state, was

[028-024] formed (338-376); not much is known about it. The tribes that, from 385

[028-025] after the break-up of the Tibetan empire, grouped themselves round this

[028-026] ruling tribe, were both Turkish and Mongol; but from the culture and

[028-027] language of the Toba we think it must be inferred that the ruling tribe

[028-028] itself as well as the majority of the other tribes were Turkish; in any

[028-029] case, the Turkish element seems to have been stronger than the

[028-030] Mongolian.

[028-031] Thus the new Toba kingdom was a tribal state, not a military state. But

[028-032] the tribes were no longer the same as in the time of Liu Yüan a hundred

[028-033] years earlier. Their total population must have been quite small; we

[028-034] must assume that they were but the remains of 119 tribes rather than 119

[028-035] full-sized tribes. Only part of them were still living the old nomad

[028-036] life; others had become used to living alongside Chinese peasants and

[028-037] had assumed leadership among the peasants. These Toba now faced a

[028-038] difficult situation. The country was arid and mountainous and did not

[028-039] yield much agricultural produce. For the many people who had come into

[028-040] the Toba state from all parts of the former empire of Fu Chien, to say

[028-041] nothing of the needs of a capital and a court which since the time of

[028-042] Liu Yüan had been regarded as the indispensable entourage of a ruler who

[028-043] claimed imperial rank, the local production of the Chinese peasants was

[028-044] not enough. All the government officials, who were Chinese, and all the

[028-045] slaves and eunuchs needed grain to eat. Attempts were made to settle

[028-046] more Chinese peasants round the new capital, but without success;

[028-047] something had to be done. It appeared necessary to embark on a campaign

[028-048] to conquer the fertile plain of eastern China. In the course of a number

[028-049] of battles the Hsien-pi of the "Later Yen" were annihilated and eastern

[028-050] China conquered (409).

[028-051] Now a new question arose: what should be done with all those people?

[028-052] Nomads used to enslave their prisoners and use them for watching their

[028-053] flocks. Some tribal chieftains had adopted the practice of establishing

[028-054] captives on their tribal territory as peasants. There was an opportunity

[028-055] now to subject the millions of Chinese captives to servitude to the

[028-056] various tribal chieftains in the usual way. But those captives who were

[028-057] peasants could not be taken away from their fields without robbing the

[028-058] country of its food; therefore it would have been necessary to spread

[028-059] the tribes over the whole of eastern China, and this would have added

[028-060] immensely to the strength of the various tribes and would have greatly

[028-061] weakened the central power. Furthermore almost all Chinese officials at

[028-062] the court had come originally from the territories just conquered. They

[028-063] had come from there about a hundred years earlier and still had all

[028-064] their relatives in the east. If the eastern territories had been placed

[028-065] under the rule of separate tribes, and the tribes had been distributed

[028-066] in this way, the gentry in those territories would have been destroyed

[028-067] and reduced to the position of enslaved peasants. The Chinese officials

[028-068] accordingly persuaded the Toba emperor not to place the new territories

[028-069] under the tribes, but to leave them to be administered by officials of

[028-070] the central administration. These officials must have a firm footing in

[028-071] their territory, for only they could extract from the peasants the grain

[028-072] required for the support of the capital. Consequently the Toba

[028-073] government did not enslave the Chinese in the eastern territory, but

[028-074] made the local gentry into government officials, instructing them to

[028-075] collect as much grain as possible for the capital. This Chinese local

[028-076] gentry worked in close collaboration with the Chinese officials at

[028-077] court, a fact which determined the whole fate of the Toba empire.

[028-078] The Hsien-pi of the newly conquered east no longer belonged to any

[028-079] tribe, but only to military units. They were transferred as soldiers to

[028-080] the Toba court and placed directly under the government, which was thus

[028-081] notably strengthened, especially as the millions of peasants under their

[028-082] Chinese officials were also directly responsible to the central

[028-083] administration. The government now proceeded to convert also its own

[028-084] Toba tribes into military formations. The tribal men of noble rank were

[028-085] brought to the court as military officers, and so were separated from

[028-086] the common tribesmen and the slaves who had to remain with the herds.

[028-087] This change, which robbed the tribes of all means of independent action,

[028-088] was not carried out without bloodshed. There were revolts of tribal

[028-089] chieftains which were ruthlessly suppressed. The central government had

[028-090] triumphed, but it realized that more reliance could be placed on Chinese

[028-091] than on its own people, who were used to independence. Thus the Toba

[028-092] were glad to employ more and more Chinese, and the Chinese pressed more

[028-093] and more into the administration. In this process the differing social

[028-094] organizations of Toba and Chinese played an important part. The Chinese

[028-095] have patriarchal families with often hundreds of members. When a member

[028-096] of a family obtains a good position, he is obliged to make provision for

[028-097] the other members of his family and to secure good positions for them

[028-098] too; and not only the members of his own family but those of allied

[028-099] families and of families related to it by marriage. In contrast the Toba

[028-100] had a patriarchal nuclear family system; as nomad warriors with no fixed

[028-101] abode, they were unable to form extended family groups. Among them the

[028-102] individual was much more independent; each one tried to do his best for

[028-103] himself. No Toba thought of collecting a large clique around himself;

[028-104] everybody should be the artificer of his own fortune. Thus, when a

[028-105] Chinese obtained an official post, he was followed by countless others;

[028-106] but when a Toba had a position he remained alone, and so the

[028-107] sinification of the Toba empire went on incessantly.

[028-108] 2 _The Hun kingdom of the Hsia (407-431_)

[028-109] At the rebuilding of the Toba empire, however, a good many Hun tribes

[028-110] withdrew westward into the Ordos region beyond the reach of the Toba,

[028-111] and there they formed the Hun "Hsia" kingdom. Its ruler, Ho-lien

[028-112] P'o-p'o, belonged to the family of Mao Tun and originally, like Liu

[028-113] Yüan, bore the sinified family name Liu; but he altered this to a Hun

[028-114] name, taking the family name of Ho-lien. This one fact alone

[028-115] demonstrates that the Hsia rejected Chinese culture and were

[028-116] nationalistic Hun. Thus there were now two realms in North China, one

[028-117] undergoing progressive sinification, the other falling back to the old

[028-118] traditions of the Huns.

[028-119] 3 _Rise of the Toba to a great Power_

[028-120] The present province of Szechwan, in the west, had belonged to Fu

[028-121] Chien's empire. At the break-up of the Tibetan state that province

[028-122] passed to the southern Chinese empire and gave the southern Chinese

[028-123] access, though it was very difficult access, to the caravan route

[028-124] leading to Turkestan. The small states in Kansu, which dominated the

[028-125] route, now passed on the traffic along two routes, one northward to the

[028-126] Toba and the other alien states in north China, the other through

[028-127] north-west Szechwan to south China. In this way the Kansu states were

[028-128] strengthened both economically and politically, for they were able to

[028-129] direct the commerce either to the northern states or to south China as

[028-130] suited them. When the South Chinese saw the break-up of Fu Chien's

[028-131] empire into numberless fragments, Liu Yü, who was then all-powerful at

[028-132] the South Chinese court, made an attempt to conquer the whole of western

[028-133] China. A great army was sent from South China into the province of

[028-134] Shensi, where the Tibetan empire of the "Later Ch'in" was situated. The

[028-135] Ch'in appealed to the Toba for help, but the Toba were themselves too

[028-136] hotly engaged to be able to spare troops. They also considered that

[028-137] South China would be unable to maintain these conquests, and that they

[028-138] themselves would find them later an easy prey. Thus in 417 the state of

[028-139] "Later Ch'in" received a mortal blow from the South Chinese army. Large

[028-140] numbers of the upper class fled to the Toba. As had been foreseen, the

[028-141] South Chinese were unable to maintain their hold over the conquered

[028-142] territory, and it was annexed with ease by the Hun Ho-lien P'o-p'o. But

[028-143] why not by the Toba?

[028-144] Towards the end of the fourth century, vestiges of Hun, Hsien-pi, and

[028-145] other tribes had united in Mongolia to form the new people of the

[028-146] Juan-juan (also called Ju-juan or Jou-jan). Scholars disagree as to

[028-147] whether the Juan-juan were Turks or Mongols; European investigators

[028-148] believe them to have been identical with the Avars who appeared in the

[028-149] Near East in 558 and later in Europe, and are inclined, on the strength

[028-150] of a few vestiges of their language, to regard them as Mongols.

[028-151] Investigations concerning the various tribes, however, show that among

[028-152] the Juan-juan there were both Mongol and Turkish tribes, and that the

[028-153] question cannot be decided in favour of either group. Some of the tribes

[028-154] belonging to the Juan-juan had formerly lived in China. Others had lived

[028-155] farther north or west and came into the history of the Far East now for

[028-156] the first time.

[028-157] This Juan-juan people threatened the Toba in the rear, from the north.

[028-158] It made raids into the Toba empire for the same reasons for which the

[028-159] Huns in the past had raided agrarian China; for agriculture had made

[028-160] considerable progress in the Toba empire. Consequently, before the Toba

[028-161] could attempt to expand southward, the Juan-juan peril must be removed.

[028-162] This was done in the end, after a long series of hard and not always

[028-163] successful struggles. That was why the Toba had played no part in the

[028-164] fighting against South China, and had been unable to take immediate

[028-165] advantage of that fighting.

[028-166] After 429 the Juan-juan peril no longer existed, and in the years that

[028-167] followed the whole of the small states of the west were destroyed, one

[028-168] after another, by the Toba--the "Hsia kingdom" in 431, bringing down

[028-169] with it the "Western Ch'in", and the "Northern Liang" in 439. The

[028-170] non-Chinese elements of the population of those countries were moved

[028-171] northward and served the Toba as soldiers; the Chinese also, especially

[028-172] the remains of the Kansu "Western Liang" state (conquered in 420), were

[028-173] enslaved, and some of them transferred to the north. Here again,

[028-174] however, the influence of the Chinese gentry made itself felt after a

[028-175] short time. As we know, the Chinese of "Western Liang" in Kansu had

[028-176] originally migrated there from eastern China. Their eastern relatives

[028-177] who had come under Toba rule through the conquest of eastern China and

[028-178] who through their family connections with Chinese officials of the Toba

[028-179] empire had found safety, brought their influence to bear on behalf of

[028-180] the Chinese of Kansu, so that several families regained office and

[028-181] social standing.

## c29.xhtml
