---
description: "Chapter 29 of A History of China"
id: ch29
label: "Section 29"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 29

[029-001] [Illustration: Map 4: The Toba empire (_about A.D. 500_)]

[029-002] Their expansion into Kansu gave the Toba control of the commerce with

[029-003] Turkestan, and there are many mentions of tribute missions to the Toba

[029-004] court in the years that followed, some even from India. The Toba also

[029-005] spread in the east. And finally there was fighting with South China

[029-006] (430-431), which brought to the Toba empire a large part of the province

[029-007] of Honan with the old capital, Loyang. Thus about 440 the Toba must be

[029-008] described as the most powerful state in the Far East, ruling the whole

[029-009] of North China.

[029-010] 4 _Economic and social conditions_

[029-011] The internal changes of which there had only been indications in the

[029-012] first period of the Toba empire now proceeded at an accelerated pace.

[029-013] There were many different factors at work. The whole of the civil

[029-014] administration had gradually passed into Chinese hands, the Toba

[029-015] retaining only the military administration. But the wars in the south

[029-016] called for the services of specialists in fortification and in infantry

[029-017] warfare, who were only to be found among the Chinese. The growing

[029-018] influence of the Chinese was further promoted by the fact that many Toba

[029-019] families were exterminated in the revolts of the tribal chieftains, and

[029-020] others were wiped out in the many battles. Thus the Toba lost ground

[029-021] also in the military administration.

[029-022] The wars down to A.D. 440 had been large-scale wars of conquest,

[029-023] lightning campaigns that had brought in a great deal of booty. With

[029-024] their loot the Toba developed great magnificence and luxury. The

[029-025] campaigns that followed were hard and long-drawn-out struggles,

[029-026] especially against South China, where there was no booty, because the

[029-027] enemy retired so slowly that they could take everything with them. The

[029-028] Toba therefore began to be impoverished, because plunder was the main

[029-029] source of their wealth. In addition to this, their herds gradually

[029-030] deteriorated, for less and less use was made of them; for instance,

[029-031] horses were little required for the campaign against South China, and

[029-032] there was next to no fighting in the north. In contrast with the

[029-033] impoverishment of the Toba, the Chinese gentry grew not only more

[029-034] powerful but more wealthy.

[029-035] The Toba seem to have tried to prevent this development by introducing

[029-036] the famous "land equalization system" (_chün-t'ien_), one of their most

[029-037] important innovations. The direct purposes of this measure were to

[029-038] resettle uprooted farm population; to prevent further migrations of

[029-039] farmers; and to raise production and taxes. The founder of this system

[029-040] was Li An-shih, member of a Toba family and later husband of an imperial

[029-041] princess. The plan was basically accepted in 477, put into action in

[029-042] 485, and remained the land law until _c_. 750. Every man and every

[029-043] woman had a right to receive a certain amount of land for lifetime.

[029-044] After their death, the land was redistributed. In addition to this

[029-045] "personal land" there was so-called "mulberry land" on which farmers

[029-046] could plant mulberries for silk production; but they also could plant

[029-047] other crops under the trees. This land could be inherited from father to

[029-048] son and was not redistributed. Incidentally we know many similar

[029-049] regulations for trees in the Near East and Central Asia. As the tax was

[029-050] levied upon the personal land in form of grain, and on the tree land in

[029-051] form of silk, this regulation stimulated the cultivation of diversified

[029-052] crops on the tree land which then was not taxable. The basic idea behind

[029-053] this law was, that all land belonged to the state, a concept for which

[029-054] the Toba could point to the ancient Chou but which also fitted well for

[029-055] a dynasty of conquest. The new "_chün-t'ien_" system required a complete

[029-056] land and population survey which was done in the next years. We know

[029-057] from much later census fragments that the government tried to enforce

[029-058] this equalization law, but did not always succeed; we read statements

[029-059] such as "X has so and so much land; he has a claim on so and so much

[029-060] land and, therefore, has to get so and so much"; but there are no

[029-061] records that X ever received the land due to him.

[029-062] One consequence of the new land law was a legal fixation of the social

[029-063] classes. Already during Han time (and perhaps even earlier) a

[029-064] distinction had been made between "free burghers" (_liang-min_) and

[029-065] "commoners" (_ch'ien-min_). This distinction had continued as informal

[029-066] tradition until, now, it became a legal concept. Only "burghers", i.e.

[029-067] gentry and free farmers, were real citizens with all rights of a free

[029-068] man. The "commoners" were completely or partly unfree and fell under

[029-069] several heads. Ranking as the lowest class were the real slaves (_nu_),

[029-070] divided into state and private slaves. By law, slaves were regarded as

[029-071] pieces of property, not as members of human society. They were, however,

[029-072] forced to marry and thus, as a class, were probably reproducing at a

[029-073] rate similar to that of the normal population, while slaves in Europe

[029-074] reproduced at a lower rate than the population. The next higher class

[029-075] were serfs (_fan-hu_), hereditary state servants, usually descendants of

[029-076] state slaves. They were obliged to work three months during the year for

[029-077] the state and were paid for this service. They were not registered in

[029-078] their place of residence but under the control of the Ministry of

[029-079] Agriculture which distributed them to other offices, but did not use

[029-080] them for farm work. Similar in status to them were the private bondsmen

[029-081] (_pu-ch'ü_), hereditarily attached to gentry families. These serfs

[029-082] received only 50 per cent of the land which a free burgher received

[029-083] under the land law. Higher than these were the service families

[029-084] (_tsa-hu_), who were registered in their place of residence, but had to

[029-085] perform certain services; here we find "tomb families" who cared for the

[029-086] imperial tombs, "shepherd families", postal families, kiln families,

[029-087] soothsayer families, medical families, and musician families. Each of

[029-088] these categories of commoners had its own laws; each had to marry within

[029-089] the category. No intermarriage or adoption was allowed. It is

[029-090] interesting to observe that a similar fixation of the social status of

[029-091] citizens occurred in the Roman Empire from _c_. A.D. 300 on.

[029-092] Thus in the years between 440 and 490 there were great changes not only

[029-093] in the economic but in the social sphere. The Toba declined in number

[029-094] and influence. Many of them married into rich families of the Chinese

[029-095] gentry and regarded themselves as no longer belonging to the Toba. In

[029-096] the course of time the court was completely sinified.

[029-097] The Chinese at the court now formed the leading element, and they tried

[029-098] to persuade the emperor to claim dominion over all China, at least in

[029-099] theory, by installing his capital in Loyang, the old centre of China.

[029-100] This transfer had the advantage for them personally that the territories

[029-101] in which their properties were situated were close to that capital, so

[029-102] that the grain they produced found a ready market. And it was indeed no

[029-103] longer possible to rule the great Toba empire, now covering the whole of

[029-104] North China from North Shansi. The administrative staff was so great

[029-105] that the transport system was no longer able to bring in sufficient

[029-106] food. For the present capital did not lie on a navigable river, and all

[029-107] the grain had to be carted, an expensive and unsafe mode of transport.

[029-108] Ultimately, in 493-4, the Chinese gentry officials secured the transfer

[029-109] of the capital to Loyang. In the years 490 to 499 the Toba emperor Wen

[029-110] Ti (471-499) took further decisive steps required by the stage reached

[029-111] in internal development. All aliens were prohibited from using their own

[029-112] language in public life. Chinese became the official language. Chinese

[029-113] clothing and customs also became general. The system of administration

[029-114] which had largely followed a pattern developed by the Wei dynasty in the

[029-115] early third century, was changed and took a form which became the model

[029-116] for the T'ang dynasty in the seventh century. It is important to note

[029-117] that in this period, for the first time, an office for religious affairs

[029-118] was created which dealt mainly with Buddhistic monasteries. While after

[029-119] the Toba period such an office for religious affairs disappeared again,

[029-120] this idea was taken up later by Japan when Japan accepted a Chinese-type

[029-121] of administration.

[029-122] [Illustration: 6 Sun Ch'üan, ruler of Wu. _From a painting by Yen

[029-123] Li-pen (c_. 640-680).]

[029-124] [Illustration: 7 General view of the Buddhist cave-temples of Yün-kang.

[029-125] In the foreground, the present village; in the background, the rampart.

[029-126] _Photo H. Hammer-Morrisson_.]

[029-127] Owing to his bringing up, the emperor no longer regarded himself as Toba

[029-128] but as Chinese; he adopted the Chinese culture, acting as he was bound

[029-129] to do if he meant to be no longer an alien ruler in North China. Already

[029-130] he regarded himself as emperor of all China, so that the South Chinese

[029-131] empire was looked upon as a rebel state that had to be conquered. While,

[029-132] however, he succeeded in everything else, the campaign against the south

[029-133] failed except for some local successes.

[029-134] The transfer of the capital to Loyang was a blow to the Toba nobles.

[029-135] Their herds became valueless, for animal products could not be carried

[029-136] over the long distance to the new capital. In Loyang the Toba nobles

[029-137] found themselves parted from their tribes, living in an unaccustomed

[029-138] climate and with nothing to do, for all important posts were occupied by

[029-139] Chinese. The government refused to allow them to return to the north.

[029-140] Those who did not become Chinese by finding their way into Chinese

[029-141] families grew visibly poorer and poorer.

[029-142] 5 _Victory and retreat of Buddhism_

[029-143] What we said in regard to the religious position of the other alien

[029-144] peoples applied also to the Toba. As soon, however, as their empire

[029-145] grew, they, too, needed an "official" religion of their own. For a few

[029-146] years they had continued their old sacrifices to Heaven; then another

[029-147] course opened to them. The Toba, together with many Chinese living in

[029-148] the Toba empire, were all captured by Buddhism, and especially by its

[029-149] shamanist element. One element in their preference of Buddhism was

[029-150] certainly the fact that Buddhism accepted all foreigners alike--both the

[029-151] Toba and the Chinese were "foreign" converts to an essentially Indian

[029-152] religion; whereas the Confucianist Chinese always made the non-Chinese

[029-153] feel that in spite of all their attempts they were still "barbarians"

[029-154] and that only real Chinese could be real Confucianists.

[029-155] Secondly, it can be assumed that the Toba rulers by fostering Buddhism

[029-156] intended to break the power of the Chinese gentry. A few centuries

[029-157] later, Buddhism was accepted by the Tibetan kings to break the power of

[029-158] the native nobility, by the Japanese to break the power of a federation

[029-159] of noble clans, and still later by the Burmese kings for the same

[029-160] reason. The acceptance of Buddhism by rulers in the Far East always

[029-161] meant also an attempt to create a more autocratic, absolutistic regime.

[029-162] Mahayana Buddhism, as an ideal, desired a society without clear-cut

[029-163] classes under one enlightened ruler; in such a society all believers

[029-164] could strive to attain the ultimate goal of salvation.

[029-165] Throughout the early period of Buddhism in the Far East, the question

[029-166] had been discussed what should be the relations between the Buddhist

[029-167] monks and the emperor, whether they were subject to him or not. This was

[029-168] connected, of course, with the fact that to the early fourth century the

[029-169] Buddhist monks were foreigners who, in the view prevalent in the Far

[029-170] East, owed only a limited allegiance to the ruler of the land. The

[029-171] Buddhist monks at the Toba court now submitted to the emperor, regarding

[029-172] him as a reincarnation of Buddha. Thus the emperor became protector of

[029-173] Buddhism and a sort of god. This combination was a good substitute for

[029-174] the old Chinese theory that the emperor was the Son of Heaven; it

[029-175] increased the prestige and the splendour of the dynasty. At the same

[029-176] time the old shamanism was legitimized under a Buddhist

[029-177] reinterpretation. Thus Buddhism became a sort of official religion. The

[029-178] emperor appointed a Buddhist monk as head of the Buddhist state church,

[029-179] and through this "Pope" he conveyed endowments on a large scale to the

[029-180] church. T'an-yao, head of the state church since 460, induced the state

[029-181] to attach state slaves, i.e. enslaved family members of criminals, and

[029-182] their families to state temples. They were supposed to work on temple

[029-183] land and to produce for the upkeep of the temples and monasteries. Thus,

[029-184] the institution of "temple slaves" was created, an institution which

[029-185] existed in South Asia and Burma for a long time, and which greatly

[029-186] strengthened the economic position of Buddhism.

## c30.xhtml
