---
description: "Chapter 30 of A History of China"
id: ch30
label: "Section 30"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 30

[030-001] Like all Turkish peoples, the Toba possessed a myth according to which

[030-002] their ancestors came into the world from a sacred grotto. The Buddhists

[030-003] took advantage of this conception to construct, with money from the

[030-004] emperor, the vast and famous cave-temple of Yün-kang, in northern

[030-005] Shansi. If we come from the bare plains into the green river valley, we

[030-006] may see to this day hundreds of caves cut out of the steep cliffs of the

[030-007] river bank. Here monks lived in their cells, worshipping the deities of

[030-008] whom they had thousands of busts and reliefs sculptured in stone, some

[030-009] of more than life-size, some diminutive. The majestic impression made

[030-010] today by the figures does not correspond to their original effect, for

[030-011] they were covered with a layer of coloured stucco.

[030-012] We know only few names of the artists and craftsmen who made these

[030-013] objects. Probably some at least were foreigners from Turkestan, for in

[030-014] spite of the predominantly Chinese character of these sculptures, some

[030-015] of them are reminiscent of works in Turkestan and even in the Near East.

[030-016] In the past the influences of the Near East on the Far East--influences

[030-017] traced back in the last resort to Greece--were greatly exaggerated; it

[030-018] was believed that Greek art, carried through Alexander's campaign as far

[030-019] as the present Afghanistan, degenerated there in the hands of Indian

[030-020] imitators (the so-called Gandhara art) and ultimately passed on in more

[030-021] and more distorted forms through Turkestan to China. Actually, however,

[030-022] some eight hundred years lay between Alexander's campaign and the Toba

[030-023] period sculptures at Yün-kang and, owing to the different cultural

[030-024] development, the contents of the Greek and the Toba-period art were

[030-025] entirely different. We may say, therefore, that suggestions came from

[030-026] the centre of the Greco-Bactrian culture (in the present Afghanistan)

[030-027] and were worked out by the Toba artists; old forms were filled with a

[030-028] new content, and the elements in the reliefs of Yün-kang that seem to us

[030-029] to be non-Chinese were the result of this synthesis of Western

[030-030] inspiration and Turkish initiative. It is interesting to observe that

[030-031] all steppe rulers showed special interest in sculpture and, as a rule,

[030-032] in architecture; after the Toba period, sculpture flourished in China in

[030-033] the T'ang period, the period of strong cultural influence from Turkish

[030-034] peoples, and there was a further advance of sculpture and of the

[030-035] cave-dwellers' worship in the period of the "Five Dynasties" (906-960;

[030-036] three of these dynasties were Turkish) and in the Mongol period.

[030-037] But not all Buddhists joined the "Church", just as not all Taoists had

[030-038] joined the Church of Chang Ling's Taoism. Some Buddhists remained in the

[030-039] small towns and villages and suffered oppression from the central

[030-040] Church. These village Buddhist monks soon became instigators of a

[030-041] considerable series of attempts at revolution. Their Buddhism was of the

[030-042] so-called "Maitreya school", which promised the appearance on earth of a

[030-043] new Buddha who would do away with all suffering and introduce a Golden

[030-044] Age. The Chinese peasantry, exploited by the gentry, came to the support

[030-045] of these monks whose Messianism gave the poor a hope in this world. The

[030-046] nomad tribes also, abandoned by their nobles in the capital and

[030-047] wandering in poverty with their now worthless herds, joined these monks.

[030-048] We know of many revolts of Hun and Toba tribes in this period, revolts

[030-049] that had a religious appearance but in reality were simply the result of

[030-050] the extreme impoverishment of these remaining tribes.

[030-051] In addition to these conflicts between state and popular Buddhism,

[030-052] clashes between Buddhists and representatives of organized Taoism

[030-053] occurred. Such fights, however, reflected more the power struggle

[030-054] between cliques than between religious groups. The most famous incident

[030-055] was the action against the Buddhists in 446 which brought destruction to

[030-056] many temples and monasteries and death to many monks. Here, a mighty

[030-057] Chinese gentry faction under the leadership of the Ts'ui family had

[030-058] united with the Taoist leader K'ou Ch'ien-chih against another faction

[030-059] under the leadership of the crown prince.

[030-060] With the growing influence of the Chinese gentry, however, Confucianism

[030-061] gained ground again, until with the transfer of the capital to Loyang it

[030-062] gained a complete victory, taking the place of Buddhism and becoming

[030-063] once more as in the past the official religion of the state. This

[030-064] process shows us once more how closely the social order of the gentry

[030-065] was associated with Confucianism.

[030-066] (E) Succession States of the Toba (A.D. 550-580): Northern Ch'i dynasty,

[030-067] Northern Chou dynasty

[030-068] 1 _Reasons for the splitting of the Toba empire_

[030-069] Events now pursued their logical course. The contrast between the

[030-070] central power, now become entirely Chinese, and the remains of the

[030-071] tribes who were with their herds mainly in Shansi and the Ordos region

[030-072] and were hopelessly impoverished, grew more and more acute. From 530

[030-073] onward the risings became more and more formidable. A few Toba who still

[030-074] remained with their old tribes placed themselves at the head of the

[030-075] rebels and conquered not only the whole of Shansi but also the capital,

[030-076] where there was a great massacre of Chinese and pro-Chinese Toba. The

[030-077] rebels were driven back; in this a man of the Kao family distinguished

[030-078] himself, and all the Chinese and pro-Chinese gathered round him. The Kao

[030-079] family, which may have been originally a Hsien-pi family, had its

[030-080] estates in eastern China and so was closely associated with the eastern

[030-081] Chinese gentry, who were the actual rulers of the Toba State. In 534

[030-082] this group took the impotent emperor of their own creation to the city

[030-083] of Yeh in the east, where he reigned _de jure_ for a further sixteen

[030-084] years. Then he was deposed, and Kao Yang made himself the first emperor

[030-085] of the Northern Ch'i dynasty (550-577).

[030-086] The national Toba group, on the other hand, found another man of the

[030-087] imperial family and established him in the west. After a short time this

[030-088] puppet was removed from the throne and a man of the Yü-wen family made

[030-089] himself emperor, founding the "Northern Chou dynasty" (557-580). The

[030-090] Hsien-pi family of Yü-wen was a branch of the Hsien-pi, but was closely

[030-091] connected with the Huns and probably of Turkish origin. All the still

[030-092] existing remains of Toba tribes who had eluded sinification moved into

[030-093] this western empire.

[030-094] The splitting of the Toba empire into these two separate realms was the

[030-095] result of the policy embarked on at the foundation of the empire. Once

[030-096] the tribal chieftains and nobles had been separated from their tribes

[030-097] and organized militarily, it was inevitable that the two elements should

[030-098] have different social destinies. The nobles could not hold their own

[030-099] against the Chinese; if they were not actually eliminated in one way or

[030-100] another, they disappeared into Chinese families. The rest, the people of

[030-101] the tribe, became destitute and were driven to revolt. The northern

[030-102] peoples had been unable to perpetuate either their tribal or their

[030-103] military organization, and the Toba had been equally unsuccessful in

[030-104] their attempt to perpetuate the two forms of organization alongside each

[030-105] other.

[030-106] These social processes are of particular importance because the ethnical

[030-107] disappearance of the northern peoples in China had nothing to do with

[030-108] any racial inferiority or with any particular power of assimilation; it

[030-109] was a natural process resulting from the different economic, social, and

[030-110] cultural organizations of the northern peoples and the Chinese.

[030-111] 2 _Appearance of the (Gök) Turks_

[030-112] The Toba had liberated themselves early in the fifth century from the

[030-113] Juan-juan peril. None of the fighting that followed was of any great

[030-114] importance. The Toba resorted to the old means of defence against

[030-115] nomads--they built great walls. Apart from that, after their move

[030-116] southward to Loyang, their new capital, they were no longer greatly

[030-117] interested in their northern territories. When the Toba empire split

[030-118] into the Ch'i and the Northern Chou, the remaining Juan-juan entered

[030-119] into treaties first with one realm and then with the other: each realm

[030-120] wanted to secure the help of the Juan-juan against the other.

[030-121] Meanwhile there came unexpectedly to the fore in the north a people

[030-122] grouped round a nucleus tribe of Huns, the tribal union of the

[030-123] "T'u-chüeh", that is to say the Gök Turks, who began to pursue a policy

[030-124] of their own under their khan. In 546 they sent a mission to the western

[030-125] empire, then in the making, of the Northern Chou, and created the first

[030-126] bonds with it, following which the Northern Chou became allies of the

[030-127] Turks. The eastern empire, Ch'i, accordingly made terms with the

[030-128] Juan-juan, but in 552 the latter suffered a crushing defeat at the hands

[030-129] of the Turks, their former vassals. The remains of the Juan-juan either

[030-130] fled to the Ch'i state or went reluctantly into the land of the Chou.

[030-131] Soon there was friction between the Juan-juan and the Ch'i, and in 555

[030-132] the Juan-juan in that state were annihilated. In response to pressure

[030-133] from the Turks, the Juan-juan in the western empire of the Northern Chou

[030-134] were delivered up to them and killed in the same year. The Juan-juan

[030-135] then disappeared from the history of the Far East. They broke up into

[030-136] their several tribes, some of which were admitted into the Turks' tribal

[030-137] league. A few years later the Turks also annihilated the Ephtalites,

[030-138] who had been allied with the Juan-juan; this made the Turks the dominant

[030-139] power in Central Asia. The Ephtalites (Yeh-ta, Haytal) were a mixed

[030-140] group which contained elements of the old Yüeh-chih and spoke an

[030-141] Indo-European language. Some scholars regard them as a branch of the

[030-142] Tocharians of Central Asia. One menace to the northern states of China

[030-143] had disappeared--that of the Juan-juan. Their place was taken by a much

[030-144] more dangerous power, the Turks.

[030-145] 3 _The Northern Ch'i dynasty; the Northern Chou dynasty_

[030-146] In consequence of this development the main task of the Northern Chou

[030-147] state consisted in the attempt to come to some settlement with its

[030-148] powerful Turkish neighbours, and meanwhile to gain what it could from

[030-149] shrewd negotiations with its other neighbours. By means of intrigues and

[030-150] diplomacy it intervened with some success in the struggles in South

[030-151] China. One of the pretenders to the throne was given protection; he was

[030-152] installed in the present Hankow as a quasi-feudal lord depending on

[030-153] Chou, and there he founded the "Later Liang dynasty" (555-587). In this

[030-154] way Chou had brought the bulk of South China under its control without

[030-155] itself making any real contribution to that result.

[030-156] Unlike the Chinese state of Ch'i, Chou followed the old Toba tradition.

[030-157] Old customs were revived, such as the old sacrifice to Heaven and the

[030-158] lifting of the emperor on to a carpet at his accession to the throne;

[030-159] family names that had been sinified were turned into Toba names again,

[030-160] and even Chinese were given Toba names; but in spite of this the inner

[030-161] cohesion had been destroyed. After two centuries it was no longer

[030-162] possible to go back to the old nomad, tribal life. There were also too

[030-163] many Chinese in the country, with whom close bonds had been forged

[030-164] which, in spite of all attempts, could not be broken. Consequently there

[030-165] was no choice but to organize a state essentially similar to that of the

[030-166] great Toba empire.

[030-167] There is just as little of importance that can be said of the internal

[030-168] politics of the Ch'i dynasty. The rulers of that dynasty were thoroughly

[030-169] repulsive figures, with no positive achievements of any sort to their

[030-170] credit. Confucianism had been restored in accordance with the Chinese

[030-171] character of the state. It was a bad time for Buddhists, and especially

[030-172] for the followers of the popularized Taoism. In spite of this, about

[030-173] A.D. 555 great new Buddhist cave-temples were created in Lung-men, near

[030-174] Loyang, in imitation of the famous temples of Yün-kang.

[030-175] The fighting with the western empire, the Northern Chou state, still

[030-176] continued, and Ch'i was seldom successful. In 563 Chou made preparations

[030-177] for a decisive blow against Ch'i, but suffered defeat because the Turks,

[030-178] who had promised aid, gave none and shortly afterwards began campaigns

[030-179] of their own against Ch'i. In 571 Ch'i had some success in the west

[030-180] against Chou, but then it lost parts of its territory to the South

[030-181] Chinese empire, and finally in 576-7 it was defeated by Chou in a great

[030-182] counter-offensive. Thus for some three years all North China was once

[030-183] more under a single rule, though of nothing approaching the strength of

[030-184] the Toba at the height of their power. For in all these campaigns the

[030-185] Turks had played an important part, and at the end they annexed further

[030-186] territory in the north of Ch'i, so that their power extended far into

[030-187] the east.

## c31.xhtml
