---
description: "Chapter 31 of A History of China"
id: ch31
label: "Section 31"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 31

[031-001] Meanwhile intrigue followed intrigue at the court of Chou; the mutual

[031-002] assassinations within the ruling group were as incessant as in the last

[031-003] years of the great Toba empire, until the real power passed from the

[031-004] emperor and his Toba entourage to a Chinese family, the Yang. Yang

[031-005] Chien's daughter was the wife of a Chou emperor; his son was married to

[031-006] a girl of the Hun family Tu-ku; her sister was the wife of the father of

[031-007] the Chou emperor. Amid this tangled relationship in the imperial house

[031-008] it is not surprising that Yang Chien should attain great power. The

[031-009] Tu-ku were a very old family of the Hun nobility; originally the name

[031-010] belonged to the Hun house from which the _shan-yü_ had to be descended.

[031-011] This family still observed the traditions of the Hun rulers, and

[031-012] relationship with it was regarded as an honour even by the Chinese.

[031-013] Through their centuries of association with aristocratically organized

[031-014] foreign peoples, some of the notions of nobility had taken root among

[031-015] the Chinese gentry; to be related with old ruling houses was a welcome

[031-016] means of evidencing or securing a position of special distinction among

[031-017] the gentry. Yang Chien gained useful prestige from his family

[031-018] connections. After the leading Chinese cliques had regained predominance

[031-019] in the Chou empire, much as had happened before in the Toba empire, Yang

[031-020] Chien's position was strong enough to enable him to massacre the members

[031-021] of the imperial family and then, in 581, to declare himself emperor.

[031-022] Thus began the Sui dynasty, the first dynasty that was once more to rule

[031-023] all China.

[031-024] But what had happened to the Toba? With the ending of the Chou empire

[031-025] they disappeared for all time, just as the Juan-juan had done a little

[031-026] earlier. So far as the tribes did not entirely disintegrate, the people

[031-027] of the tribes seem during the last years of Toba and Chou to have joined

[031-028] Turkish and other tribes. In any case, nothing more is heard of them as

[031-029] a people, and they themselves lived on under the name of the tribe that

[031-030] led the new tribal league.

[031-031] Most of the Toba nobility, on the other hand, became Chinese. This

[031-032] process can be closely followed in the Chinese annals. The tribes that

[031-033] had disintegrated in the time of the Toba empire broke up into families

[031-034] of which some adopted the name of the tribe as their family name, while

[031-035] others chose Chinese family names. During the centuries that followed,

[031-036] in some cases indeed down to modern times, these families continue to

[031-037] appear, often playing an important part in Chinese history.

[031-038] (F) The Southern Empires

[031-039] 1 _Economic and social situation in the south_

[031-040] During the 260 years of alien rule in North China, the picture of South

[031-041] China also was full of change. When in 317 the Huns had destroyed the

[031-042] Chinese Chin dynasty in the north, a Chin prince who normally would not

[031-043] have become heir to the throne declared himself, under the name Yüan Ti,

[031-044] the first emperor of the "Eastern Chin dynasty" (317-419). The capital

[031-045] of this new southern empire adjoined the present Nanking. Countless

[031-046] members of the Chinese gentry had fled from the Huns at that time and

[031-047] had come into the southern empire. They had not done so out of loyalty

[031-048] to the Chinese dynasty or out of national feeling, but because they saw

[031-049] little prospect of attaining rank and influence at the courts of the

[031-050] alien rulers, and because it was to be feared that the aliens would turn

[031-051] the fields into pasturage, and also that they would make an end of the

[031-052] economic and monetary system which the gentry had evolved for their own

[031-053] benefit.

[031-054] But the south was, of course, not uninhabited. There were already two

[031-055] groups living there--the old autochthonous population, consisting of

[031-056] Yao, Tai and Yüeh, and the earlier Chinese immigrants from the north,

[031-057] who had mainly arrived in the time of the Three Kingdoms, at the

[031-058] beginning of the third century A.D. The countless new immigrants now

[031-059] came into sharp conflict with the old-established earlier immigrants.

[031-060] Each group looked down on the other and abused it. The two immigrant

[031-061] groups in particular not only spoke different dialects but had developed

[031-062] differently in respect to manners and customs. A look for example at

[031-063] Formosa in the years after 1948 will certainly help in an understanding

[031-064] of this situation: analogous tensions developed between the new

[031-065] refugees, the old Chinese immigrants, and the native Formosan

[031-066] population. But let us return to the southern empires.

[031-067] The two immigrant groups also differed economically and socially: the

[031-068] old immigrants were firmly established on the large properties they had

[031-069] acquired, and dominated their tenants, who were largely autochthones; or

[031-070] they had engaged in large-scale commerce. In any case, they possessed

[031-071] capital, and more capital than was usually possessed by the gentry of

[031-072] the north. Some of the new immigrants, on the other hand, were military

[031-073] people. They came with empty hands, and they had no land. They hoped

[031-074] that the government would give them positions in the military

[031-075] administration and so provide them with means; they tried to gain

[031-076] possession of the government and to exclude the old settlers as far as

[031-077] possible. The tension was increased by the effect of the influx of

[031-078] Chinese in bringing more land into cultivation, thus producing a boom

[031-079] period such as is produced by the opening up of colonial land. Everyone

[031-080] was in a hurry to grab as much land as possible. There was yet a further

[031-081] difference between the two groups of Chinese: the old settlers had long

[031-082] lost touch with the remainder of their families in the north. They had

[031-083] become South Chinese, and all their interests lay in the south. The new

[031-084] immigrants had left part of their families in the north under alien

[031-085] rule. Their interests still lay to some extent in the north. They were

[031-086] working for the reconquest of the north by military means; at times

[031-087] individuals or groups returned to the north, while others persuaded the

[031-088] rest of their relatives to come south. It would be wrong to suppose that

[031-089] there was no inter-communication between the two parts into which China

[031-090] had fallen. As soon as the Chinese gentry were able to regain any

[031-091] footing in the territories under alien rule, the official relations,

[031-092] often those of belligerency, proceeded alongside unofficial intercourse

[031-093] between individual families and family groupings, and these latter were,

[031-094] as a rule, in no way belligerent.

[031-095] The lower stratum in the south consisted mainly of the remains of the

[031-096] original non-Chinese population, particularly in border and southern

[031-097] territories which had been newly annexed from time to time. In the

[031-098] centre of the southern state the way of life of the non-Chinese was very

[031-099] quickly assimilated to that of the Chinese, so that the aborigines were

[031-100] soon indistinguishable from Chinese. The remaining part of the lower

[031-101] class consisted of impoverished Chinese peasants. This whole lower

[031-102] section of the population rarely took any active and visible part in

[031-103] politics, except at times in the form of great popular risings.

[031-104] Until the third century, the south had been of no great economic

[031-105] importance, in spite of the good climate and the extraordinary fertility

[031-106] of the Yangtze valley. The country had been too thinly settled, and the

[031-107] indigenous population had not become adapted to organized trade. After

[031-108] the move southward of the Chin dynasty the many immigrants had made the

[031-109] country of the lower Yangtze more thickly populated, but not

[031-110] over-populated. The top-heavy court with more than the necessary number

[031-111] of officials (because there was still hope for a reconquest of the north

[031-112] which would mean many new jobs for administrators) was a great consumer;

[031-113] prices went up and stimulated local rice production. The estates of the

[031-114] southern gentry yielded more than before, and naturally much more than

[031-115] the small properties of the gentry in the north where, moreover, the

[031-116] climate is far less favourable. Thus the southern landowners were able

[031-117] to acquire great wealth, which ultimately made itself felt in the

[031-118] capital.

[031-119] One very important development was characteristic in this period in the

[031-120] south, although it also occurred in the north. Already in pre-Han times,

[031-121] some rulers had gardens with fruit trees. The Han emperors had large

[031-122] hunting parks which were systematically stocked with rare animals; they

[031-123] also had gardens and hot-houses for the production of vegetables for the

[031-124] court. These "gardens" (_yüan_) were often called "manors" (_pieh-yeh_)

[031-125] and consisted of fruit plantations with luxurious buildings. We hear

[031-126] soon of water-cooled houses for the gentry, of artificial ponds for

[031-127] pleasure and fish breeding, artificial water-courses, artificial

[031-128] mountains, bamboo groves, and parks with parrots, ducks, and large

[031-129] animals. Here, the wealthy gentry of both north and south, relaxed from

[031-130] government work, surrounded by their friends and by women. These manors

[031-131] grew up in the hills, on the "village commons" where formerly the

[031-132] villagers had collected their firewood and had grazed their animals.

[031-133] Thus, the village commons begin to disappear. The original farm land was

[031-134] taxed, because it produced one of the two products subject to taxation,

[031-135] namely grain or mulberry leaves for silk production. But the village

[031-136] common had been and remained tax-free because it did not produce taxable

[031-137] things. While land-holdings on the farmland were legally restricted in

[031-138] their size, the "gardens" were unrestricted. Around A.D. 500 the ruler

[031-139] allowed high officials to have manors of three hundred mou size, while

[031-140] in the north a family consisting of husband and wife and children below

[031-141] fifteen years of age were allowed a farm of sixty mou only; but we hear

[031-142] of manors which were many times larger than the allowed size of three

[031-143] hundred. These manors began to play an important economic role, too:

[031-144] they were cultivated by tenants and produced fishes, vegetables, fruit

[031-145] and bamboo for the market, thus they gave more income than ordinary rice

[031-146] or wheat land.

[031-147] With the creation of manors the total amount of land under cultivation

[031-148] increased, though not the amount of grain-producing land. We gain the

[031-149] impression that from _c_. the third century A.D. on to the eleventh

[031-150] century the intensity of cultivation was generally lower than in the

[031-151] period before.

[031-152] The period from _c_. A.D. 300 on also seems to be the time of the second

[031-153] change in Chinese dietary habits. The first change occurred probably

[031-154] between 400 and 100 B.C. when the meat-eating Chinese reduced their meat

[031-155] intake greatly, gave up eating beef and mutton and changed over to some

[031-156] pork and dog meat. This first change was the result of increase of

[031-157] population and decrease of available land for pasturage. Cattle breeding

[031-158] in China was then reduced to the minimum of one cow or water-buffalo per

[031-159] farm for ploughing. Wheat was the main staple for the masses of the

[031-160] people. Between A.D. 300 and 600 rice became the main staple in the

[031-161] southern states although, theoretically, wheat could have been grown and

[031-162] some wheat probably was grown in the south. The vitamin and protein

[031-163] deficiencies which this change from wheat to rice brought forth, were

[031-164] made up by higher consumption of vegetables, especially beans, and

[031-165] partially also by eating of fish and sea food. In the north, rice became

[031-166] the staple food of the upper class, while wheat remained the main food

[031-167] of the lower classes. However, new forms of preparation of wheat, such

[031-168] as dumplings of different types, were introduced. The foreign rulers

[031-169] consumed more meat and milk products. Chinese had given up the use of

[031-170] milk products at the time of the first change, and took to them to some

[031-171] extent only in periods of foreign rule.

[031-172] 2 _Struggles between cliques under the Eastern Chin dynasty_ (A.D.

[031-173] 317-419)

[031-174] The officials immigrating from the north regarded the south as colonial

[031-175] country, and so as more or less uncivilized. They went into its

[031-176] provinces in order to get rich as quickly as possible, and they had no

[031-177] desire to live there for long: they had the same dislike of a provincial

[031-178] existence as had the families of the big landowners. Thus as a rule the

[031-179] bulk of the families remained in the capital, close to the court.

[031-180] Thither the products accumulated in the provinces were sent, and they

[031-181] found a ready sale, as the capital was also a great and long-established

[031-182] trading centre with a rich merchant class. Thus in the capital there was

[031-183] every conceivable luxury and every refinement of civilization. The

[031-184] people of the gentry class, who were maintained in the capital by

[031-185] relatives serving in the provinces as governors or senior officers,

[031-186] themselves held offices at court, though these gave them little to do.

[031-187] They had time at their disposal, and made use of it--in much worse

[031-188] intrigues than ever before, but also in music and poetry and in the

[031-189] social life of the harems. There is no question at all that the highest

[031-190] refinement of the civilization of the Far East between the fourth and

[031-191] the sixth century was to be found in South China, but the accompaniments

[031-192] of this over-refinement were terrible.

## c32.xhtml
