---
description: "Chapter 34 of A History of China"
id: ch34
label: "Section 34"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 34

[034-001] Chapter Eight

[034-002] THE EMPIRES OF THE SUI AND THE T'ANG

[034-003] (A) The Sui dynasty (A.D. 580-618)

[034-004] 1 _Internal situation in the newly unified empire_

[034-005] The last of the northern dynasties, the Northern Chou, had been brought

[034-006] to an end by Yang Chien: rapid campaigns had made an end of the

[034-007] remaining petty states, and thus the Sui dynasty had come into power.

[034-008] China, reunited after 360 years, was again under Chinese rule. This

[034-009] event brought about a new epoch in the history of the Far East. But the

[034-010] happenings of 360 years could not be wiped out by a change of dynasty.

[034-011] The short Sui period can only be described as a period of transition to

[034-012] unified forms.

[034-013] In the last resort the union of the various parts of China proceeded

[034-014] from the north. The north had always, beyond question, been militarily

[034-015] superior, because its ruling class had consisted of warlike peoples. Yet

[034-016] it was not a northerner who had united China but a Chinese though, owing

[034-017] to mixed marriages, he was certainly not entirely unrelated to the

[034-018] northern peoples. The rule, however, of the actual northern peoples was

[034-019] at an end. The start of the Sui dynasty, while the Chou still held the

[034-020] north, was evidence, just like the emergence in the north-east some

[034-021] thirty years earlier of the Northern Ch'i dynasty, that the Chinese

[034-022] gentry with their landowning basis had gained the upper hand over the

[034-023] warrior nomads.

[034-024] The Chinese gentry had not come unchanged out of that struggle.

[034-025] Culturally they had taken over many things from the foreigners,

[034-026] beginning with music and the style of their clothing, in which they had

[034-027] entirely adopted the northern pattern, and including other elements of

[034-028] daily life. Among the gentry were now many formerly alien families who

[034-029] had gradually become entirely Chinese. On the other hand, the

[034-030] foreigners' feudal outlook had influenced the gentry, so that a sense

[034-031] of distinctions of rank had developed among them. There were Chinese

[034-032] families who regarded themselves as superior to the rest, just as had

[034-033] been the case among the northern peoples, and who married only among

[034-034] themselves or with the ruling house and not with ordinary families of

[034-035] the gentry. They paid great attention to their genealogies, had the

[034-036] state keep records of them and insisted that the dynastic histories

[034-037] mentioned their families and their main family members. Lists of

[034-038] prominent gentry families were set up which mentioned the home of each

[034-039] clan, so that pretenders could easily be detected. The rules of giving

[034-040] personal names were changed so that it became possible to identify a

[034-041] person's genealogical position within the family. At the same time the

[034-042] contempt of the military underwent modification; the gentry were even

[034-043] ready to take over high military posts, and also to profit by them.

[034-044] The new Sui empire found itself faced with many difficulties. During the

[034-045] three and a half centuries of division, north and south had developed in

[034-046] different ways. They no longer spoke the same language in everyday life

[034-047] (we distinguish to this day between a Nanking and Peking "High Chinese",

[034-048] to say nothing of dialects). The social and economic structures were

[034-049] very different in the two parts of the country. How could unity be

[034-050] restored in these things?

[034-051] Then there was the problem of population. The north-eastern plain had

[034-052] always been thickly populated; it had early come under Toba rule and had

[034-053] been able to develop further. The region round the old northern capital

[034-054] Ch'ang-an, on the other hand, had suffered greatly from the struggles

[034-055] before the Toba period and had never entirely recovered. Meanwhile, in

[034-056] the south the population had greatly increased in the region north of

[034-057] Nanking, while the regions south of the Yangtze and the upper Yangtze

[034-058] valley were more thinly peopled. The real South, i.e. the modern

[034-059] provinces of Fukien, Kwangtung and Kwangsi, was still underdeveloped,

[034-060] mainly because of the malaria there. In the matter of population the

[034-061] north unquestionably remained prominent.

[034-062] The founder of the Sui dynasty, known by his reign name of Wen Ti

[034-063] (589-604), came from the west, close to Ch'ang-an. There he and his

[034-064] following had their extensive domains. Owing to the scanty population

[034-065] there and the resulting shortage of agricultural labourers, these

[034-066] properties were very much less productive than the small properties in

[034-067] the north-east. This state of things was well known in the south, and it

[034-068] was expected, with good reason, that the government would try to

[034-069] transfer parts of the population to the north-west, in order to settle a

[034-070] peasantry round the capital for the support of its greatly increasing

[034-071] staff of officials, and to satisfy the gentry of the region. This

[034-072] produced several revolts in the south.

[034-073] As an old soldier who had long been a subject of the Toba, Wen Ti had no

[034-074] great understanding of theory: he was a practical man. He was

[034-075] anti-intellectual and emotionally attached to Buddhism; he opposed

[034-076] Confucianism for emotional reasons and believed that it could give him

[034-077] no serviceable officials of the sort he wanted. He demanded from his

[034-078] officials the same obedience and sense of duty as from his soldiers; and

[034-079] he was above all thrifty, almost miserly, because he realized that the

[034-080] finances of his state could only be brought into order by the greatest

[034-081] exertions. The budget had to be drawn up for the vast territory of the

[034-082] empire without any possibility of saying in advance whether the revenues

[034-083] would come in and whether the transport of dues to the capital would

[034-084] function.

[034-085] This cautious calculation was entirely justified, but it aroused great

[034-086] opposition. Both east and south were used to a much better style of

[034-087] living; yet the gentry of both regions were now required to cut down

[034-088] their consumption. On top of this they were excluded from the conduct of

[034-089] political affairs. In the past, under the Northern Ch'i empire in the

[034-090] north-east and under the Ch'en empire in the south, there had been

[034-091] thousands of positions at court in which the whole of the gentry could

[034-092] find accommodation of some kind. Now the central government was far in

[034-093] the west, and other people were its administrators. In the past the

[034-094] gentry had a profitable and easily accessible market for their produce

[034-095] in the neighbouring capital; now the capital was far away, entailing

[034-096] long-distance transport at heavy risk with little profit.

[034-097] The dissatisfied circles of the gentry in the north-east and in the

[034-098] south incited Prince Kuang to rebellion. The prince and his followers

[034-099] murdered the emperor and set aside the heir-apparent; and Kuang came to

[034-100] the throne, assuming the name of Yang Ti. His first act was to transfer

[034-101] the capital back to the east, to Loyang, close to the grain-producing

[034-102] regions. His second achievement was to order the construction of great

[034-103] canals, to facilitate the transport of grain to the capital and to

[034-104] provide a valuable new market for the producers in the north-east and

[034-105] the south. It was at this time that the first forerunner of the famous

[034-106] "Imperial Canal" was constructed, the canal that connects the Yangtze

[034-107] with the Yellow River. Small canals, connecting various streams, had

[034-108] long been in existence, so that it was possible to travel from north to

[034-109] south by water, but these canals were not deep enough or broad enough to

[034-110] take large freight barges. There are records of lighters of 500 and even

[034-111] 800 tons capacity! These are dimensions unheard of in the West in those

[034-112] times. In addition to a serviceable canal to the south, Yang Ti made

[034-113] another that went north almost to the present Peking.

[034-114] Hand in hand with these successes of the north-eastern and southern

[034-115] gentry went strong support for Confucianism, and a reorganization of the

[034-116] Confucian examination system. As a rule, however, the examinations were

[034-117] circumvented as an unimportant formality; the various governors were

[034-118] ordered each to send annually to the capital three men with the required

[034-119] education, for whose quality they were held personally responsible;

[034-120] merchants and artisans were expressly excluded.

[034-121] 2 _Relations with Turks and with Korea_

[034-122] In foreign affairs an extraordinarily fortunate situation for the Sui

[034-123] dynasty had come into existence. The T'u-chüeh, the Turks, much the

[034-124] strongest people of the north, had given support now to one and now to

[034-125] another of the northern kingdoms, and this, together with their many

[034-126] armed incursions, had made them the dominant political factor in the

[034-127] north. But in the first year of the Sui period (581) they split into two

[034-128] sections, so that the Sui had hopes of gaining influence over them. At

[034-129] first both sections of the Turks had entered into alliance with China,

[034-130] but this was not a sufficient safeguard for the Sui, for one of the

[034-131] Turkish khans was surrounded by Toba who had fled from the vanished

[034-132] state of the Northern Chou, and who now tried to induce the Turks to

[034-133] undertake a campaign for the reconquest of North China. The leader of

[034-134] this agitation was a princess of the Yü-wen family, the ruling family of

[034-135] the Northern Chou. The Chinese fought the Turks several times; but much

[034-136] more effective results were gained by their diplomatic missions, which

[034-137] incited the eastern against the western Turks and vice versa, and also

[034-138] incited the Turks against the Toba clique. In the end one of the

[034-139] sections of Turks accepted Chinese overlordship, and some tribes of the

[034-140] other section were brought over to the Chinese side; also, fresh

[034-141] disunion was sown among the Turks.

[034-142] Under the emperor Yang Ti, P'ei Chü carried this policy further. He

[034-143] induced the Tölös tribes to attack the T'u-yü-hun, and then himself

[034-144] attacked the latter, so destroying their power. The T'u-yü-hun were a

[034-145] people living in the extreme north of Tibet, under a ruling class

[034-146] apparently of Hsien-pi origin; the people were largely Tibetan. The

[034-147] purpose of the conquest of the T'u-yü-hun was to safeguard access to

[034-148] Central Asia. An effective Turkestan policy was, however, impossible so

[034-149] long as the Turks were still a formidable power. Accordingly, the

[034-150] intrigues that aimed at keeping the two sections of Turks apart were

[034-151] continued. In 615 came a decisive counter-attack from the Turks. Their

[034-152] khan, Shih-pi, made a surprise assault on the emperor himself, with all

[034-153] his following, in the Ordos region, and succeeded in surrounding them.

[034-154] They were in just the same desperate situation as when, eight centuries

[034-155] earlier, the Chinese emperor had been beleaguered by Mao Tun. But the

[034-156] Chinese again saved themselves by a trick. The young Chinese commander,

[034-157] Li Shih-min, succeeded in giving the Turks the impression that large

[034-158] reinforcements were on the way; a Chinese princess who was with the

[034-159] Turks spread the rumour that the Turks were to be attacked by another

[034-160] tribe--and Shih-pi raised the siege, although the Chinese had been

[034-161] entirely defeated.

[034-162] In the Sui period the Chinese were faced with a further problem. Korea

[034-163] or, rather, the most important of the three states in Korea, had

[034-164] generally been on friendly terms with the southern state during the

[034-165] period of China's division, and for this reason had been more or less

[034-166] protected from its North Chinese neighbours. After the unification of

[034-167] China, Korea had reason for seeking an alliance with the Turks, in order

[034-168] to secure a new counterweight against China.

[034-169] A Turco-Korean alliance would have meant for China a sort of

[034-170] encirclement that might have grave consequences. The alliance might be

[034-171] extended to Japan, who had certain interests in Korea. Accordingly the

[034-172] Chinese determined to attack Korea, though at the same time negotiations

[034-173] were set on foot. The fighting, which lasted throughout the Sui period,

[034-174] involved technical difficulties, as it called for combined land and sea

[034-175] attacks; in general it brought little success.

[034-176] 3 _Reasons for collapse_

[034-177] The continual warfare entailed great expense, and so did the intrigues,

[034-178] because they depended for their success on bribery. Still more expensive

[034-179] were the great canal works. In addition to this, the emperor Yang Ti,

[034-180] unlike his father, was very extravagant. He built enormous palaces and

[034-181] undertook long journeys throughout the empire with an immense following.

[034-182] All this wrecked the prosperity which his father had built up and had

[034-183] tried to safeguard. The only productive expenditure was that on the

[034-184] canals, and they could not begin to pay in so short a period. The

[034-185] emperor's continual journeys were due, no doubt, in part simply to the

[034-186] pursuit of pleasure, though they were probably intended at the same time

[034-187] to hinder risings and to give the emperor direct control over every part

[034-188] of the country. But the empire was too large and too complex for its

[034-189] administration to be possible in the midst of journeying.

## c35.xhtml
