---
description: "Chapter 35 of A History of China"
id: ch35
label: "Section 35"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 35

[035-001] [Illustration: Map 5: The T'ang realm (_about A.D. 750_)]

[035-002] The whole of the chancellery had to accompany the emperor, and all the

[035-003] transport necessary for the feeding of the emperor and his government

[035-004] had continually to be diverted to wherever he happened to be staying.

[035-005] All this produced disorder and unrest. The gentry, who at first had so

[035-006] strongly supported the emperor and had been able to obtain anything they

[035-007] wanted from him, now began to desert him and set up pretenders. From 615

[035-008] onward, after the defeat at the hands of the Turks, risings broke out

[035-009] everywhere. The emperor had to establish his government in the south,

[035-010] where he felt safer. There, however, in 618, he was assassinated by

[035-011] conspirators led by Toba of the Yü-wen family. Everywhere now

[035-012] independent governments sprang up, and for five years China was split up

[035-013] into countless petty states.

[035-014] (B) The T'ang dynasty (A.D. 618-906)

[035-015] 1 _Reforms and decentralization_

[035-016] The hero of the Turkish siege, Li Shih-min, had allied himself with the

[035-017] Turks in 615-16. There were special reasons for his ability to do this.

[035-018] In his family it had been a regular custom to marry women belonging to

[035-019] Toba families, so that he naturally enjoyed the confidence of the Toba

[035-020] party among the Turks. There are various theories as to the origin of

[035-021] his family, the Li. The family itself claimed to be descended from the

[035-022] ruling family of the Western Liang. It is doubtful whether that family

[035-023] was purely Chinese, and in any case Li Shih-min's descent from it is a

[035-024] matter of doubt. It is possible that his family was a sinified Toba

[035-025] family, or at least came from a Toba region. However this may be, Li

[035-026] Shih-min continued the policy which had been pursued since the beginning

[035-027] of the Sui dynasty by the members of the deposed Toba ruling family of

[035-028] the Northern Chou--the policy of collaboration with the Turks in the

[035-029] effort to remove the Sui.

[035-030] The nominal leadership in the rising that now began lay in the hands of

[035-031] Li Shih-min's father, Li Yüan; in practice Li Shih-min saw to

[035-032] everything. At the end of 617 he was outside the first capital of the

[035-033] Sui, Ch'ang-an, with a Turkish army that had come to his aid on the

[035-034] strength of the treaty of alliance. After capturing Ch'ang-an he

[035-035] installed a puppet emperor there, a grandson of Yang Ti. In 618 the

[035-036] puppet was dethroned and Li Yüan, the father, was made emperor, in the

[035-037] T'ang dynasty. Internal fighting went on until 623, and only then was

[035-038] the whole empire brought under the rule of the T'ang.

[035-039] Great reforms then began. A new land law aimed at equalizing ownership,

[035-040] so that as far as possible all peasants should own the same amount of

[035-041] land and the formation of large estates be prevented. The law aimed also

[035-042] at protecting the peasants from the loss of their land. The law was,

[035-043] however, nothing but a modification of the Toba land law (_chün-t'ien_),

[035-044] and it was hoped that now it would provide a sound and solid economic

[035-045] foundation for the empire. From the first, however, members of the

[035-046] gentry who were connected with the imperial house were given a

[035-047] privileged position; then officials were excluded from the prohibition

[035-048] of leasing, so that there continued to be tenant farmers in addition to

[035-049] the independent peasants. Moreover, the temples enjoyed special

[035-050] treatment, and were also exempted from taxation. All these exceptions

[035-051] brought grist to the mills of the gentry, and so did the failure to

[035-052] carry into effect many of the provisions of the law. Before long a new

[035-053] gentry had been formed, consisting of the old gentry together with those

[035-054] who had directly aided the emperor's ascent to the throne. From the

[035-055] beginning of the eighth century there were repeated complaints that

[035-056] peasants were "disappearing". They were entering the service of the

[035-057] gentry as tenant farmers or farm workers, and owing to the privileged

[035-058] position of the gentry in regard to taxation, the revenue sank in

[035-059] proportion as the number of independent peasants decreased. One of the

[035-060] reasons for the flight of farmers may have been the corvée laws

[035-061] connected with the "equal land" system: small families were much less

[035-062] affected by the corvée obligation than larger families with many sons.

[035-063] It may be, therefore, that large families or at least sons of the sons

[035-064] in large families moved away in order to escape these obligations. In

[035-065] order to prevent irregularities, the T'ang renewed the old "_pao-chia_"

[035-066] system, as a part of a general reform of the administration in 624. In

[035-067] this system groups of five families were collectively responsible for

[035-068] the payment of taxes, the corvée, for crimes committed by individuals

[035-069] within one group, and for loans from state agencies. Such a system is

[035-070] attested for pre-Christian times already; it was re-activated in the

[035-071] eleventh century and again from time to time, down to the present.

[035-072] Yet the system of land equalization soon broke down and was abolished

[035-073] officially around A.D. 780. But the classification of citizens into

[035-074] different classes, first legalized under the Toba, was retained and even

[035-075] more refined.

[035-076] As early as in the Han period there had been a dual administration--the

[035-077] civil and, independent of it, the military administration. One and the

[035-078] same area would belong to a particular administrative prefecture

[035-079] (_chün_) and at the same time to a particular military prefecture

[035-080] (_chou_). This dual organization had persisted during the Toba period

[035-081] and, at first, remained unchanged in the beginning of the T'ang.

[035-082] The backbone of the military power in the seventh century was the

[035-083] militia, some six hundred units of an average of a thousand men,

[035-084] recruited from the general farming population for short-term service:

[035-085] one month in five in the areas close to the capital. These men formed a

[035-086] part of the emperor's guards and were under the command of members of

[035-087] the Shensi gentry. This system which had its direct parallels in the Han

[035-088] time and evolved out of a Toba system, broke down when short offensive

[035-089] wars were no longer fought. Other imperial guards were staffed with

[035-090] young sons of the gentry who were stationed in the most delicate parts

[035-091] of the palaces. The emperor T'ai-tsung had his personal bodyguard, a

[035-092] part of his own army of conquest, consisting of his former bondsmen

[035-093] (_pu-ch'ü_). The ranks of the Army of conquest were later filled by

[035-094] descendants of the original soldiers and by orphans.

[035-095] In the provinces, the armies of the military prefectures gradually lost

[035-096] their importance when wars became longer and militiamen proved

[035-097] insufficient. Many of the soldiers here were convicts and exiles. It is

[035-098] interesting to note that the title of the commander of these armies,

[035-099] _tu-tu_, in the fourth century meant a commander in the church-Taoist

[035-100] organization; it was used by the Toba and from the seventh century on

[035-101] became widely accepted as title among the Uighurs, Tibetans, Sogdians,

[035-102] Turks and Khotanese.

[035-103] When the prefectural armies and the militia forces weakened, special

[035-104] regional armies were created (from 678 on); this institution had existed

[035-105] among the Toba, but they had greatly reduced these armies after 500. The

[035-106] commanders of these new T'ang armies soon became more important than the

[035-107] civil administrators, because they commanded a number of districts

[035-108] making up a whole province. This assured a better functioning of the

[035-109] military machine, but put the governors-general in a position to pursue

[035-110] a policy of their own, even against the central government. In addition

[035-111] to this, the financial administration of their commands was put under

[035-112] them, whereas in the past it had been in the hands of the civil

[035-113] administration of the various provinces. The civil administration was

[035-114] also reorganized (see the table on pages 83-84).

[035-115] Towards the end of the T'ang period the state secretariat was set up in

[035-116] two parts: it was in possession of all information about the economic

[035-117] and political affairs of the empire, and it made the actual decisions.

[035-118] Moreover, a number of technical departments had been created--in all, a

[035-119] system that might compare favourably with European systems of the

[035-120] eighteenth century. At the end of the T'ang period there was added to

[035-121] this system a section for economic affairs, working quite independently

[035-122] of it and directly under the emperor; it was staffed entirely with

[035-123] economic or financial experts, while for the staffing of the other

[035-124] departments no special qualification was demanded besides the passing of

[035-125] the state examinations. In addition to these, at the end of the T'ang

[035-126] period a new department was in preparation, a sort of Privy Council, a

[035-127] mainly military organization, probably intended to control the generals

[035-128] (section 3 of the table on page 83), just as the state secretariat

[035-129] controlled the civil officials. The Privy Council became more and more

[035-130] important in the tenth century and especially in the Mongol epoch. Its

[035-131] absence in the early T'ang period gave the military governors much too

[035-132] great freedom, ultimately with baneful results.

[035-133] At first, however, the reforms of A.D. 624 worked well. The

[035-134] administration showed energy, and taxes flowed in. In the middle of the

[035-135] eighth century the annual budget of the state included the following

[035-136] items: over a million tons of grain for the consumption of the capital

[035-137] and the palace and for salaries of civil and military officials;

[035-138] twenty-seven million pieces of textiles, also for the consumption of

[035-139] capital and palace and army, and for supplementary purchases of grain;

[035-140] two million strings of money (a string nominally held a thousand copper

[035-141] coins) for salaries and for the army. This was much more than the state

[035-142] budget of the Han period. The population of the empire had also

[035-143] increased; it seems to have amounted to some fifty millions. In the

[035-144] capital a large staff of officials had been created to meet all

[035-145] administrative needs. The capital grew enormously, at times containing

[035-146] two million people. Great numbers of young members of the gentry

[035-147] streamed into the capital for the examinations held under the Confucian

[035-148] system.

[035-149] The crowding of people into the capital and the accumulation of

[035-150] resources there promoted a rich cultural life. We know of many poets of

[035-151] that period whose poems were real masterpieces; and artists whose works

[035-152] were admired centuries later. These poets and artists were the pioneers

[035-153] of the flourishing culture of the later T'ang period. Hand in hand with

[035-154] this went luxury and refinement of manners. For those who retired from

[035-155] the bustle of the capital to work on their estates and to enjoy the

[035-156] society of their friends, there was time to occupy themselves with

[035-157] Taoism and Buddhism, especially meditative Buddhism. Everyone, of

[035-158] course, was Confucian, as was fitting for a member of the gentry, but

[035-159] Confucianism was so taken for granted that it was not discussed. It was

[035-160] the basis of morality for the gentry, but held no problems. It no longer

[035-161] contained anything of interest.

[035-162] Conditions had been much the same once before, at the court of the Han

[035-163] emperors, but with one great difference: at that time everything of

[035-164] importance took place in the capital; now, in addition to the actual

[035-165] capital, Ch'ang-an, there was the second capital, Loyang, in no way

[035-166] inferior to the other in importance; and the great towns in the south

[035-167] also played their part as commercial and cultural centres that had

[035-168] developed in the 360 years of division between north and south. There

[035-169] the local gentry gathered to lead a cultivated life, though not quite in

[035-170] the grand style of the capital. If an official was transferred to the

[035-171] Yangtze, it no longer amounted to a punishment as in the past; he would

[035-172] not meet only uneducated people, but a society resembling that of the

[035-173] capital. The institution of governors-general further promoted this

[035-174] decentralization: the governor-general surrounded himself with a little

[035-175] court of his own, drawn from the local gentry and the local

[035-176] intelligentsia. This placed the whole edifice of the empire on a much

[035-177] broader foundation, with lasting results.

[035-178] 2 _Turkish policy_

## c36.xhtml
