---
description: "Chapter 36 of A History of China"
id: ch36
label: "Section 36"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 36

[036-001] The foreign policy of this first period of the T'ang, lasting until

[036-002] about 690, was mainly concerned with the Turks and Turkestan. There were

[036-003] still two Turkish realms in the Far East, both of considerable strength

[036-004] but in keen rivalry with each other. The T'ang had come into power with

[036-005] the aid of the eastern Turks, but they admitted the leader of the

[036-006] western Turks to their court; he had been at Ch'ang-an in the time of

[036-007] the Sui. He was murdered, however, by Chinese at the instigation of the

[036-008] eastern Turks. The next khan of the eastern Turks nevertheless turned

[036-009] against the T'ang, and gave his support to a still surviving pretender

[036-010] to the throne representing the Sui dynasty; the khan contended that the

[036-011] old alliance of the eastern Turks had been with the Sui and not with the

[036-012] T'ang. The T'ang therefore tried to come to terms once more with the

[036-013] western Turks, who had been affronted by the assassination; but the

[036-014] negotiations came to nothing in face of an approach made by the eastern

[036-015] Turks to the western, and of the distrust of the Chinese with which all

[036-016] the Turks were filled. About 624 there were strong Turkish invasions,

[036-017] carried right up to the capital. Suddenly, however, for reasons not

[036-018] disclosed by the Chinese sources, the Turks withdrew, and the T'ang were

[036-019] able to conclude a fairly honourable peace. This was the time of the

[036-020] maximum power of the eastern Turks. Shortly afterwards disturbances

[036-021] broke out (627), under the leadership of Turkish Uighurs and their

[036-022] allies. The Chinese took advantage of these disturbances, and in a great

[036-023] campaign in 629-30 succeeded in overthrowing the eastern Turks; the khan

[036-024] was taken to the imperial court in Ch'ang-an, and the Chinese emperor

[036-025] made himself "Heavenly Khan" of the Turks. In spite of the protest of

[036-026] many of the ministers, who pointed to the result of the settlement

[036-027] policy of the Later Han dynasty, the eastern Turks were settled in the

[036-028] bend of the upper Hwang-ho and placed more or less under the

[036-029] protectorate of two governors-general. Their leaders were admitted into

[036-030] the Chinese army, and the sons of their nobles lived at the imperial

[036-031] court. No doubt it was hoped in this way to turn the Turks into Chinese,

[036-032] as had been done with the Toba, though for entirely different reasons.

[036-033] More than a million Turks were settled in this way, and some of them

[036-034] actually became Chinese later and gained important posts.

[036-035] In general, however, this in no way broke the power of the Turks. The

[036-036] great Turkish empire, which extended as far as Byzantium, continued to

[036-037] exist. The Chinese success had done no more than safeguard the frontier

[036-038] from a direct menace and frustrate the efforts of the supporters of the

[036-039] Sui dynasty and the Toba dynasty, who had been living among the eastern

[036-040] Turks and had built on them. The power of the western Turks remained a

[036-041] lasting menace to China, especially if they should succeed in

[036-042] co-operating with the Tibetans. After the annihilation of the T'u-yü-hun

[036-043] by the Sui at the very beginning of the seventh century, a new political

[036-044] unit had formed in northern Tibet, the T'u-fan, who also seem to have

[036-045] had an upper class of Turks and Mongols and a Tibetan lower class. Just

[036-046] as in the Han period, Chinese policy was bound to be directed to

[036-047] preventing a union between Turks and Tibetans. This, together with

[036-048] commercial interests, seems to have been the political motive of the

[036-049] Chinese Turkestan policy under the T'ang.

[036-050] 3 _Conquest of Turkestan and Korea. Summit of power_

[036-051] The Turkestan wars began in 639 with an attack on the city-state of

[036-052] Kao-ch'ang (Khocho). This state had been on more or less friendly terms

[036-053] with North China since the Toba period, and it had succeeded again and

[036-054] again in preserving a certain independence from the Turks. Now, however,

[036-055] Kao-ch'ang had to submit to the western Turks, whose power was

[036-056] constantly increasing. China made that submission a pretext for war. By

[036-057] 640 the whole basin of Turkestan was brought under Chinese dominance.

[036-058] The whole campaign was really directed against the western Turks, to

[036-059] whom Turkestan had become subject. The western Turks had been crippled

[036-060] by two internal events, to the advantage of the Chinese: there had been

[036-061] a tribal rising, and then came the rebellion and the rise of the Uighurs

[036-062] (640-650). These events belong to Turkish history, and we shall confine

[036-063] ourselves here to their effects on Chinese history. The Chinese were

[036-064] able to rely on the Uighurs; above all, they were furnished by the Tölös

[036-065] Turks with a large army, with which they turned once more against

[036-066] Turkestan in 647-48, and now definitely established their rule there.

[036-067] The active spirit at the beginning of the T'ang rule had not been the

[036-068] emperor but his son Li Shih-min, who was not, however, named as heir to

[036-069] the throne because he was not the eldest son. The result of this was

[036-070] tension between Li Shih-min and his father and brothers, especially the

[036-071] heir to the throne. When the brothers learned that Li Shih-min was

[036-072] claiming the succession, they conspired against him, and in 626, at the

[036-073] very moment when the western Turks had made a rapid incursion and were

[036-074] once more threatening the Chinese capital, there came an armed collision

[036-075] between the brothers, in which Li Shih-min was the victor. The brothers

[036-076] and their families were exterminated, the father compelled to abdicate,

[036-077] and Li Shih-min became emperor, assuming the name T'ai Tsung (627-649).

[036-078] His reign marked the zenith of the power of China and of the T'ang

[036-079] dynasty. Their inner struggles and the Chinese penetration of Turkestan

[036-080] had weakened the position of the Turks; the reorganization of the

[036-081] administration and of the system of taxation, the improved transport

[036-082] resulting from the canals constructed under the Sui, and the useful

[036-083] results of the creation of great administrative areas under strong

[036-084] military control, had brought China inner stability and in consequence

[036-085] external power and prestige. The reputation which she then obtained as

[036-086] the most powerful state of the Far East endured when her inner stability

[036-087] had begun to deteriorate. Thus in 638 the Sassanid ruler Jedzgerd sent a

[036-088] mission to China asking for her help against the Arabs. Three further

[036-089] missions came at intervals of a good many years. The Chinese declined,

[036-090] however, to send a military expedition to such a distance; they merely

[036-091] conferred on the ruler the title of a Chinese governor; this was of

[036-092] little help against the Arabs, and in 675 the last ruler, Peruz, fled to

[036-093] the Chinese court.

[036-094] The last years of T'ai Tsung's reign were filled with a great war

[036-095] against Korea, which represented a continuation of the plans of the Sui

[036-096] emperor Yang Ti. This time Korea came firmly into Chinese possession. In

[036-097] 661, under T'ai Tsung's son, the Korean fighting was resumed, this time

[036-098] against Japanese who were defending their interests in Korea. This was

[036-099] the period of great Japanese enthusiasm for China. The Chinese system of

[036-100] administration was copied, and Buddhism was adopted, together with every

[036-101] possible element of Chinese culture. This meant increased trade with

[036-102] Japan, bringing in large profits to China, and so the Korean middleman

[036-103] was to be eliminated.

[036-104] T'ai Tsung's son, Kao Tsung (650-683), merely carried to a conclusion

[036-105] what had been begun. Externally China's prestige continued at its

[036-106] zenith. The caravans streamed into China from western and central Asia,

[036-107] bringing great quantities of luxury goods. At this time, however, the

[036-108] foreign colonies were not confined to the capital but were installed in

[036-109] all the important trading ports and inland trade centres. The whole

[036-110] country was covered by a commercial network; foreign merchants who had

[036-111] come overland to China met others who had come by sea. The foreigners

[036-112] set up their own counting-houses and warehouses; whole quarters of the

[036-113] capital were inhabited entirely by foreigners who lived as if they were

[036-114] in their own country. They brought with them their own religions:

[036-115] Manichaeism, Mazdaism, and Nestorian Christianity. The first Jews came

[036-116] into China, apparently as dealers in fabrics, and the first Arabian

[036-117] Mohammedans made their appearance. In China the foreigners bought

[036-118] silkstuffs and collected everything of value that they could find,

[036-119] especially precious metals. Culturally this influx of foreigners

[036-120] enriched China; economically, as in earlier periods, it did not; its

[036-121] disadvantages were only compensated for a time by the very beneficial

[036-122] results of the trade with Japan, and this benefit did not last long.

[036-123] 4 _The reign of the empress Wu: Buddhism and capitalism_

[036-124] The pressure of the western Turks had been greatly weakened in this

[036-125] period, especially as their attention had been diverted to the west,

[036-126] where the advance of Islam and of the Arabs was a new menace for them.

[036-127] On the other hand, from 650 onward the Tibetans gained immensely in

[036-128] power, and pushed from the south into the Tarim basin. In 678 they

[036-129] inflicted a heavy defeat on the Chinese, and it cost the T'ang decades

[036-130] of diplomatic effort before they attained, in 699, their aim of breaking

[036-131] up the Tibetans' realm and destroying their power. In the last year of

[036-132] Kao Tsung's reign, 683, came the first of the wars of liberation of the

[036-133] northern Turks, known until then as the western Turks, against the

[036-134] Chinese. And with the end of Kao Tsung's reign began the decline of the

[036-135] T'ang regime. Most of the historians attribute it to a woman, the later

[036-136] empress Wu. She had been a concubine of T'ai Tsung, and after his death

[036-137] had become a Buddhist nun--a frequent custom of the time--until Kao

[036-138] Tsung fell in love with her and made her a concubine of his own. In the

[036-139] end he actually divorced the empress and made the concubine empress

[036-140] (655). She gained more and more influence, being placed on a par with

[036-141] the emperor and soon entirely eliminating him in practice; in 680 she

[036-142] removed the rightful heir to the throne and put her own son in his

[036-143] place; after Kao Tsung's death in 683 she became regent for her son.

[036-144] Soon afterward she dethroned him in favour of his twenty-two-year-old

[036-145] brother; in 690 she deposed him too and made herself empress in the

[036-146] "Chou dynasty" (690-701). This officially ended the T'ang dynasty.

[036-147] Matters, however, were not so simple as this might suggest. For

[036-148] otherwise on the empress's deposition there would not have been a mass

[036-149] of supporters moving heaven and earth to treat the new empress Wei

[036-150] (705-712) in the same fashion. There is every reason to suppose that

[036-151] behind the empress Wu there was a group opposing the ruling clique. In

[036-152] spite of everything, the T'ang government clique was very pro-Turkish,

[036-153] and many Turks and members of Toba families had government posts and,

[036-154] above all, important military commands. No campaign of that period was

[036-155] undertaken without Turkish auxiliaries. The fear seems to have been felt

[036-156] in some quarters that this T'ang group might pursue a military policy

[036-157] hostile to the gentry. The T'ang group had its roots mainly in western

[036-158] China; thus the eastern Chinese gentry were inclined to be hostile to

[036-159] it. The first act of the empress Wu had been to transfer the capital to

[036-160] Loyang in the east. Thus, she tried to rely upon the co-operation of the

[036-161] eastern gentry which since the Northern Chou and Sui dynasties had been

[036-162] out of power. While the western gentry brought their children into

[036-163] government positions by claiming family privileges (a son of a high

[036-164] official had the right to a certain position without having passed the

[036-165] regular examinations), the sons of the eastern gentry had to pass

[036-166] through the examinations. Thus, there were differences in education and

[036-167] outlook between both groups which continued long after the death of the

[036-168] empress. In addition, the eastern gentry, who supported the empress Wu

[036-169] and later the empress Wei, were closely associated with the foreign

[036-170] merchants of western Asia and the Buddhist Church to which they adhered.

[036-171] In gratitude for help from the Buddhists, the empress Wu endowed them

[036-172] with enormous sums of money, and tried to make Buddhism a sort of state

[036-173] religion. A similar development had taken place in the Toba and also in

[036-174] the Sui period. Like these earlier rulers, the empress Wu seems to have

[036-175] aimed at combining spiritual leadership with her position as ruler of

[036-176] the empire.

## c37.xhtml
