---
description: "Chapter 38 of A History of China"
id: ch38
label: "Section 38"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 38

[038-001] In all this, two things seem interesting and important. To begin with,

[038-002] An Lu-shan had been a military governor. His rising showed that while

[038-003] this new office, with its great command of power, was of value in

[038-004] attacking external enemies, it became dangerous, especially if the

[038-005] central power was weak, the moment there were no external enemies of any

[038-006] importance. An Lu-shan's rising was the first of many similar ones in

[038-007] the later T'ang period. The gentry of eastern China had shown themselves

[038-008] entirely ready to support An Lu-shan against the government, because

[038-009] they had hoped to gain advantage as in the past from a realm with its

[038-010] centre once more in the east. In the second place, the important part

[038-011] played by aliens in events within China calls for notice: not only were

[038-012] the rebels An Lu-shan and Shih Ss[)u]-ming non-Chinese, but so also were

[038-013] most of the generals opposed to them. But they regarded themselves as

[038-014] Chinese, not as members of another national group. The Turkish Uighurs

[038-015] brought in to help against them were fighting actually against Turks,

[038-016] though they regarded those Turks as Chinese. We must not bring to the

[038-017] circumstances of those times the present-day notions with regard to

[038-018] national feeling.

[038-019] 7 _The role of the Uighurs. Confiscation of the capital of the

[038-020] monasteries_

[038-021] This rising and its sequels broke the power of the dynasty, and also of

[038-022] the empire. The extremely sanguinary wars had brought fearful suffering

[038-023] upon the population. During the years of the rising, no taxes came in

[038-024] from the greater part of the empire, but great sums had to be paid to

[038-025] the peoples who had lent aid to the empire. And the looting by

[038-026] government troops and by the auxiliaries injured the population as much

[038-027] as the war itself did.

[038-028] When the emperor Su Tsung died, in 762, Tengri, the khan of the Uighurs,

[038-029] decided to make himself ruler over China. The events of the preceding

[038-030] years had shown him that China alone was entirely defenceless. Part of

[038-031] the court clique supported him, and only by the intervention of P'u-ku

[038-032] Huai-en, who was related to Tengri by marriage, was his plan frustrated.

[038-033] Naturally there were countless intrigues against P'u-ku Huai-en. He

[038-034] entered into alliance with the Tibetan T'u-fan, and in this way the

[038-035] union of Turks and Tibetans, always feared by the Chinese, had come into

[038-036] existence. In 763 the Tibetans captured and burned down the western

[038-037] capital, while P'u-ku Huai-en with the Uighurs advanced from the north.

[038-038] Undoubtedly this campaign would have been successful, giving an entirely

[038-039] different turn to China's destiny, if P'u-ku Huai-en had not died in 765

[038-040] and the Chinese under Kuo Tz[)u]-i had not succeeded in breaking up the

[038-041] alliance. The Uighurs now came over into an alliance with the Chinese,

[038-042] and the two allies fell upon the Tibetans and robbed them of their

[038-043] booty. China was saved once more.

[038-044] Friendship with the Uighurs had to be paid for this time even more

[038-045] dearly. They crowded into the capital and compelled the Chinese to buy

[038-046] horses, in payment for which they demanded enormous quantities of

[038-047] silkstuffs. They behaved in the capital like lords, and expected to be

[038-048] maintained at the expense of the government. The system of military

[038-049] governors was adhered to in spite of the country's experience of them,

[038-050] while the difficult situation throughout the empire, and especially

[038-051] along the western and northern frontiers, facing the Tibetans and the

[038-052] more and more powerful Kitan, made it necessary to keep considerable

[038-053] numbers of soldiers permanently with the colours. This made the military

[038-054] governors stronger and stronger; ultimately they no longer remitted any

[038-055] taxes to the central government, but spent them mainly on their armies.

[038-056] Thus from 750 onward the empire consisted of an impotent central

[038-057] government and powerful military governors, who handed on their

[038-058] positions to their sons as a further proof of their independence. When

[038-059] in 781 the government proposed to interfere with the inheriting of the

[038-060] posts, there was a great new rising, which in 783 again extended as far

[038-061] as the capital; in 784 the T'ang government at last succeeded in

[038-062] overcoming it. A compromise was arrived at between the government and

[038-063] the governors, but it in no way improved the situation. Life became more

[038-064] and more difficult for the central government. In 780, the "equal land"

[038-065] system was finally officially given up and with it a tax system which

[038-066] was based upon the idea that every citizen had the same amount of land

[038-067] and, therefore, paid the same amount of taxes. The new system tried to

[038-068] equalize the tax burden and the corvée obligation, but not the land.

[038-069] This change may indicate a step towards greater freedom for private

[038-070] enterprise. Yet it did not benefit the government, as most of the tax

[038-071] income was retained by the governors and was used for their armies and

[038-072] their own court.

[038-073] In the capital, eunuchs ruled in the interests of various cliques.

[038-074] Several emperors fell victim to them or to the drinking of "elixirs of

[038-075] long life".

[038-076] Abroad, the Chinese lost their dominion over Turkestan, for which

[038-077] Uighurs and Tibetans competed. There is nothing to gain from any full

[038-078] description of events at court. The struggle between cliques soon became

[038-079] a struggle between eunuchs and literati, in much the same way as at the

[038-080] end of the second Han dynasty. Trade steadily diminished, and the state

[038-081] became impoverished because no taxes were coming in and great armies had

[038-082] to be maintained, though they did not even obey the government.

[038-083] Events that exerted on the internal situation an influence not to be

[038-084] belittled were the break-up of the Uighurs (from 832 onward) the

[038-085] appearance of the Turkish Sha-t'o, and almost at the same time, the

[038-086] dissolution of the Tibetan empire (from 842). Many other foreigners had

[038-087] placed themselves under the Uighurs living in China, in order to be able

[038-088] to do business under the political protection of the Uighur embassy, but

[038-089] the Uighurs no longer counted, and the T'ang government decided to seize

[038-090] the capital sums which these foreigners had accumulated. It was hoped in

[038-091] this way especially to remedy the financial troubles of the moment,

[038-092] which were partly due to a shortage of metal for minting. As the trading

[038-093] capital was still placed with the temples as banks, the government

[038-094] attacked the religion of the Uighurs, Manichaeism, and also the

[038-095] religions of the other foreigners, Mazdaism, Nestorianism, and

[038-096] apparently also Islam. In 843 alien religions were prohibited; aliens

[038-097] were also ordered to dress like Chinese. This gave them the status of

[038-098] Chinese citizens and no longer of foreigners, so that Chinese justice

[038-099] had a hold over them. That this law abolishing foreign religions was

[038-100] aimed solely at the foreigners' capital is shown by the proceedings at

[038-101] the same time against Buddhism which had long become a completely

[038-102] Chinese Church. Four thousand, six hundred Buddhist temples, 40,000

[038-103] shrines and monasteries were secularized, and all statues were required

[038-104] to be melted down and delivered to the government, even those in private

[038-105] possession. Two hundred and sixty thousand, five hundred monks were to

[038-106] become ordinary citizens once more. Until then monks had been free of

[038-107] taxation, as had millions of acres of land belonging to the temples and

[038-108] leased to tenants or some 150,000 temple slaves.

[038-109] Thus the edict of 843 must not be described as concerned with religion:

[038-110] it was a measure of compulsion aimed at filling the government coffers.

[038-111] All the property of foreigners and a large part of the property of the

[038-112] Buddhist Church came into the hands of the government. The law was not

[038-113] applied to Taoism, because the ruling gentry of the time were, as so

[038-114] often before, Confucianist and at the same time Taoist. As early as 846

[038-115] there came a reaction: with the new emperor, Confucians came into power

[038-116] who were at the same time Buddhists and who now evicted some of the

[038-117] Taoists. From this time one may observe closer co-operation between

[038-118] Confucianism and Buddhism; not only with meditative Buddhism (Dhyana) as

[038-119] at the beginning of the T'ang epoch and earlier, but with the main

[038-120] branch of Buddhism, monastery Buddhism (Vinaya). From now onward the

[038-121] Buddhist doctrines of transmigration and retribution, which had been

[038-122] really directed against the gentry and in favour of the common people,

[038-123] were turned into an instrument serving the gentry: everyone who was

[038-124] unfortunate in this life must show such amenability to the government

[038-125] and the gentry that he would have a chance of a better existence at

[038-126] least in the next life. Thus the revolutionary Buddhist doctrine of

[038-127] retribution became a reactionary doctrine that was of great service to

[038-128] the gentry. One of the Buddhist Confucians in whose works this revised

[038-129] version makes its appearance most clearly was Niu Seng-yu, who was at

[038-130] once summoned back to court in 846 by the new emperor. Three new large

[038-131] Buddhist sects came into existence in the T'ang period. One of them, the

[038-132] school of the Pure Land (_Ching-t'u tsung_, since 641) required of its

[038-133] mainly lower class adherents only the permanent invocation of the Buddha

[038-134] Amithabha who would secure them a place in the "Western Paradise"--a

[038-135] place without social classes and economic troubles. The cult of

[038-136] Maitreya, which was always more revolutionary, receded for a while.

[038-137] 8 _First successful peasant revolt. Collapse of the empire_

[038-138] The chief sufferers from the continual warfare of the military

[038-139] governors, the sanguinary struggles between the cliques, and the

[038-140] universal impoverishment which all this fighting produced, were, of

[038-141] course, the common people. The Chinese annals are filled with records of

[038-142] popular risings, but not one of these had attained any wide extent, for

[038-143] want of organization. In 860 began the first great popular rising, a

[038-144] revolt caused by famine in the province of Chekiang. Government troops

[038-145] suppressed it with bloodshed. Further popular risings followed. In 874

[038-146] began a great rising in the south of the present province of Hopei, the

[038-147] chief agrarian region.

[038-148] The rising was led by a peasant, Wang Hsien-chih, together with Huang

[038-149] Ch'ao, a salt merchant, who had fallen into poverty and had joined the

[038-150] hungry peasants, forming a fighting group of his own. It is important to

[038-151] note that Huang was well educated. It is said that he failed in the

[038-152] state examination. Huang is not the first merchant who became rebel. An

[038-153] Lu-shan, too, had been a businessman for a while. It was pointed out

[038-154] that trade had greatly developed in the T'ang period; of the lower

[038-155] Yangtze region people it was said that "they were so much interested in

[038-156] business that they paid no attention to agriculture". Yet merchants were

[038-157] subject to many humiliating conditions. They could not enter the

[038-158] examinations, except by illegal means. In various periods, from the Han

[038-159] time on, they had to wear special dress. Thus, a law from _c_. A.D. 300

[038-160] required them to wear a white turban on which name and type of business

[038-161] was written, and to wear one white and one black shoe. They were subject

[038-162] to various taxes, but were either not allowed to own land, or were

[038-163] allotted less land than ordinary citizens. Thus they could not easily

[038-164] invest in land, the safest investment at that time. Finally, the

[038-165] government occasionally resorted to the method which was often used in

[038-166] the Near East: when in 782 the emperor ran out of money, he requested

[038-167] the merchants of the capital to "loan" him a large sum--a request which

[038-168] in fact was a special tax.

[038-169] Wang and Huang both proved good organizers of the peasant masses, and in

[038-170] a short time they had captured the whole of eastern China, without the

[038-171] military governors being able to do anything against them, for the

[038-172] provincial troops were more inclined to show sympathy to the peasant

[038-173] armies than to fight them. The terrified government issued an order to

[038-174] arm the people of the other parts of the country against the rebels;

[038-175] naturally this helped the rebels more than the government, since the

[038-176] peasants thus armed went over to the rebels. Finally Wang was offered a

[038-177] high office. But Huang urged him not to betray his own people, and Wang

[038-178] declined the offer. In the end the government, with the aid of the

[038-179] troops of the Turkish Sha-t'o, defeated Wang and beheaded him (878).

[038-180] Huang Ch'ao now moved into the south-east and the south, where in 879 he

[038-181] captured and burned down Canton; according to an Arab source, over

[038-182] 120,000 foreign merchants lost their lives in addition to the Chinese.

[038-183] From Canton Huang Ch'ao returned to the north, laden with loot from that

[038-184] wealthy commercial city. His advance was held up again by the Sha-t'o

[038-185] troops; he turned away to the lower Yangtze, and from there marched

[038-186] north again. At the end of 880 he captured the eastern capital. The

[038-187] emperor fled from the western capital, Ch'ang-an, into Szechwan, and

[038-188] Huang Ch'ao now captured with ease the western capital as well, and

[038-189] removed every member of the ruling family on whom he could lay hands. He

[038-190] then made himself emperor, in a Ch'i dynasty. It was the first time that

[038-191] a peasant rising had succeeded against the gentry.

## c39.xhtml
