---
description: "Chapter 39 of A History of China"
id: ch39
label: "Section 39"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 39

[039-001] There was still, however, the greatest disorder in the empire. There

[039-002] were other peasant armies on the move, armies that had deserted their

[039-003] governors and were fighting for themselves; finally, there were still a

[039-004] few supporters of the imperial house and, above all, the Turkish

[039-005] Sha-t'o, who had a competent commander with the sinified name of Li

[039-006] K'o-yung. The Sha-t'o, who had remained loyal to the government,

[039-007] revolted the moment the government had been overthrown. They ran the

[039-008] risk, however, of defeat at the hands of an alien army of the Chinese

[039-009] government's, commanded by an Uighur, and they therefore fled to the

[039-010] Tatars. In spite of this, the Chinese entered again into relations with

[039-011] the Sha-t'o, as without them there could be no possibility of getting

[039-012] rid of Huang Ch'ao. At the end of 881 Li K'o-yung fell upon the capital;

[039-013] there was a fearful battle. Huang Ch'ao was able to hold out, but a

[039-014] further attack was made in 883 and he was defeated and forced to flee;

[039-015] in 884 he was killed by the Sha-t'o.

[039-016] This popular rising, which had only been overcome with the aid of

[039-017] foreign troops, brought the end of the T'ang dynasty. In 885 the T'ang

[039-018] emperor was able to return to the capital, but the only question now was

[039-019] whether China should be ruled by the Sha-t'o under Li K'o-yung or by

[039-020] some other military commander. In a short time Chu Ch'üan-chung, a

[039-021] former follower of Huang Ch'ao, proved to be the strongest of the

[039-022] commanders. In 890 open war began between the two leaders. Li K'o-yung

[039-023] was based on Shansi; Chu Ch'üan-chung had control of the plains in the

[039-024] east. Meanwhile the governors of Szechwan in the west and Chekiang in

[039-025] the south-east made themselves independent. Both declared themselves

[039-026] kings or emperors and set up dynasties of their own (from 895).

[039-027] Within the capital, the emperor was threatened several times by revolts,

[039-028] so that he had to flee and place himself in the hands of Li K'o-yung as

[039-029] the only leader on whose loyalty he could count. Soon after this,

[039-030] however, the emperor fell into the hands of Chu Ch'üan-chung, who killed

[039-031] the whole entourage of the emperor, particularly the eunuchs; after a

[039-032] time he had the emperor himself killed, set a puppet--as had become

[039-033] customary--on the throne, and at the beginning of 907 took over the rule

[039-034] from him, becoming emperor in the "Later Liang dynasty".

[039-035] That was the end of the T'ang dynasty, at the beginning of which China

[039-036] had risen to unprecedented power. Its downfall had been brought about by

[039-037] the military governors, who had built up their power and had become

[039-038] independent hereditary satraps, exploiting the people for their own

[039-039] purposes, and by their continual mutual struggles undermining the

[039-040] economic structure of the empire. In addition to this, the empire had

[039-041] been weakened first by its foreign trade and then by the dependence on

[039-042] foreigners, especially Turks, into which it had fallen owing to internal

[039-043] conditions. A large part of the national income had gone abroad. Such is

[039-044] the explanation of the great popular risings which ultimately brought

[039-045] the dynasty to its end.

[039-046] MODERN TIMES

[039-047] Chapter Nine

[039-048] THE EPOCH OF THE SECOND DIVISION OF CHINA

[039-049] (A) The period of transition: the Five Dynasties (A.D. 906-960)

[039-050] 1 _Beginning of a new epoch_

[039-051] The rebellion of Huang Ch'ao in fact meant the end of the T'ang dynasty

[039-052] and the division of China into a number of independent states. Only for

[039-053] reasons of convenience we keep the traditional division into dynasties

[039-054] and have our new period begin with the official end of the T'ang dynasty

[039-055] in 906. We decided to call the new thousand years of Chinese history

[039-056] "Modern Times" in order to indicate that from _c_. 860 on changes in

[039-057] China's social structure came about which set this epoch off from the

[039-058] earlier thousand years which we called "The Middle Ages". Any division

[039-059] into periods is arbitrary as changes do not happen from one year to the

[039-060] next. The first beginnings of the changes which lead to the "Modern

[039-061] Times" actually can be seen from the end of An Lu-shan's rebellion on,

[039-062] from _c_. A.D. 780 on, and the transformation was more or less completed

[039-063] only in the middle of the eleventh century.

[039-064] If we want to characterize the "Modern Times" by one concept, we would

[039-065] have to call this epoch the time of the emergence of a middle class, and

[039-066] it will be remembered that the growth of the middle class in Europe was

[039-067] also the decisive change between the Middle Ages and Modern Times in

[039-068] Europe. The parallelism should, however, not be overdone. The gentry

[039-069] continued to play a role in China during the Modern Times, much more

[039-070] than the aristocracy did in Europe. The middle class did not ever really

[039-071] get into power during the whole period.

[039-072] While we will discuss the individual developments later in some detail,

[039-073] a few words about the changes in general might be given already here.

[039-074] The wars which followed Huang Ch'ao's rebellion greatly affected the

[039-075] ruling gentry. A number of families were so strongly affected that they

[039-076] lost their importance and disappeared. Commoners from the followers of

[039-077] Huang Ch'ao or other armies succeeded to get into power, to acquire

[039-078] property and to enter the ranks of the gentry. At about A.D. 1000 almost

[039-079] half of the gentry families were new families of low origin. The state,

[039-080] often ruled by men who had just moved up, was no more interested in the

[039-081] aristocratic manners of the old gentry families, especially no more

[039-082] interested in their genealogies. When conditions began to improve after

[039-083] A.D. 1000, and when the new families felt themselves as real gentry

[039-084] families, they tried to set up a mechanism to protect the status of

[039-085] their families. In the eleventh century private genealogies began to be

[039-086] kept, so that any claim against the clan could be checked. Clans set up

[039-087] rules of behaviour and procedure to regulate all affairs of the clan

[039-088] without the necessity of asking the state to interfere in case of

[039-089] conflict. Many such "clan rules" exist in China and also in Japan which

[039-090] took over this innovation. Clans set apart special pieces of land as

[039-091] clan land; the income of this land was to be used to secure a minimum of

[039-092] support for every clan member and his own family, so that no member ever

[039-093] could fall into utter poverty. Clan schools which were run by income

[039-094] from special pieces of clan land were established to guarantee an

[039-095] education for the members of the clan, again in order to make sure that

[039-096] the clan would remain a part of the _élite_. Many clans set up special

[039-097] marriage rules for clan members, and after some time cross-cousin

[039-098] marriages between two or three families were legally allowed; such

[039-099] marriages tended to fasten bonds between clans and to prevent the loss

[039-100] of property by marriage. While on the one hand, a new "clan

[039-101] consciousness" grew up among the gentry families in order to secure

[039-102] their power, tax and corvée legislation especially in the eleventh

[039-103] century induced many families to split up into small families.

[039-104] It can be shown that over the next centuries, the power of the family

[039-105] head increased. He was now regarded as owner of the property, not only

[039-106] mere administrator of family property. He got power over life and death

[039-107] of his children. This increase of power went together with a change of

[039-108] the position of the ruler. The period transition (until _c_. A.D. 1000)

[039-109] was followed by a period of "moderate absolutism" (until 1278) in which

[039-110] emperors as persons played a greater role than before, and some

[039-111] emperors, such as Shen Tsung (in 1071), even declared that they regarded

[039-112] the welfare of the masses as more important than the profit of the

[039-113] gentry. After 1278, however, the personal influence of the emperors grew

[039-114] further towards absolutism and in times became pure despotism.

[039-115] Individuals, especially family heads, gained more freedom in "Modern

[039-116] Times". Not only the period of transition, but also the following period

[039-117] was a time of much greater social mobility than existed in the Middle

[039-118] Ages. By various legal and/or illegal means people could move up into

[039-119] positions of power and wealth: we know of many merchants who succeeded

[039-120] in being allowed to enter the state examinations and thus got access to

[039-121] jobs in the administration. Large, influential gentry families in the

[039-122] capital protected sons from less important families and thus gave them a

[039-123] chance to move into the gentry. Thus, these families built up a

[039-124] clientele of lesser gentry families which assisted them and upon the

[039-125] loyalty of which they could count. The gentry can from now on be divided

[039-126] into two parts. First, there was a "big gentry" which consisted of much

[039-127] fewer families than in earlier times and which directed the policy in

[039-128] the capital; and secondly, there was a "small gentry" which was

[039-129] operating mainly in the provincial cities, directing local affairs and

[039-130] bound by ties of loyalty to big gentry families. Gentry cliques now

[039-131] extended into the provinces and it often became possible to identify a

[039-132] clique with a geographical area, which, however, usually did not

[039-133] indicate particularistic tendencies.

[039-134] Individual freedom did not show itself only in greater social mobility.

[039-135] The restrictions which, for instance, had made the craftsmen and

[039-136] artisans almost into serfs, were gradually lifted. From the early

[039-137] sixteenth century on, craftsmen were free and no more subject to forced

[039-138] labour services for the state. Most craftsmen in this epoch still had

[039-139] their shops in one lane or street and lived above their shops, as they

[039-140] had done in the earlier period. But from now on, they began to organize

[039-141] in guilds of an essentially religious character, as similar guilds in

[039-142] other parts of Asia at the same time also did. They provided welfare

[039-143] services for their members, made some attempts towards standardization

[039-144] of products and prices, imposed taxes upon their members, kept their

[039-145] streets clean and tried to regulate salaries. Apprentices were initiated

[039-146] in a kind of semi-religious ceremony, and often meetings took place in

[039-147] temples. No guild, however, connected people of the same craft living in

[039-148] different cities. Thus, they did not achieve political power.

[039-149] Furthermore, each trade had its own guild; in Peking in the nineteenth

[039-150] century there existed over 420 different guilds. Thus, guilds failed to

[039-151] achieve political influence even within individual cities.

[039-152] Probably at the same time, regional associations, the so-called

[039-153] "_hui-kuan"_ originated. Such associations united people from one city

[039-154] or one area who lived in another city. People of different trades, but

[039-155] mainly businessmen, came together under elected chiefs and councillors.

[039-156] Sometimes, such regional associations could function as pressure groups,

[039-157] especially as they were usually financially stronger than the guilds.

[039-158] They often owned city property or farm land. Not all merchants, however,

[039-159] were so organized. Although merchants remained under humiliating

[039-160] restrictions as to the colour and material of their dress and the

[039-161] prohibition to ride a horse, they could more often circumvent such

[039-162] restrictions and in general had much more freedom in this epoch.

[039-163] Trade, including overseas trade, developed greatly from now on. Soon we

[039-164] find in the coastal ports a special office which handled custom and

[039-165] registration affairs, supplied interpreters for foreigners, received

[039-166] them officially and gave good-bye dinners when they left. Down to the

[039-167] thirteenth century, most of this overseas trade was still in the hands

[039-168] of foreigners, mainly Indians. Entrepreneurs hired ships, if they were

[039-169] not ship-owners, hired trained merchants who in turn hired sailors

[039-170] mainly from the South-East Asian countries, and sold their own

[039-171] merchandise as well as took goods on commission. Wealthy Chinese gentry

[039-172] families invested money in such foreign enterprises and in some cases

[039-173] even gave their daughters in marriage to foreigners in order to profit

[039-174] from this business.

[039-175] We also see an emergence of industry from the eleventh century on. We

[039-176] find men who were running almost monopolistic enterprises, such as

[039-177] preparing charcoal for iron production and producing iron and steel at

[039-178] the same time; some of these men had several factories, operating under

[039-179] hired and qualified managers with more than 500 labourers. We find

[039-180] beginnings of a labour legislation and the first strikes (A.D. 782 the

[039-181] first strike of merchants in the capital; 1601 first strike of textile

[039-182] workers).

## c40.xhtml
