---
description: "Chapter 40 of A History of China"
id: ch40
label: "Section 40"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 40

[040-001] Some of these labourers were so-called "vagrants", farmers who had

[040-002] secretly left their land or their landlord's land for various reasons,

[040-003] and had shifted to other regions where they did not register and thus

[040-004] did not pay taxes. Entrepreneurs liked to hire them for industries

[040-005] outside the towns where supervision by the government was not so strong;

[040-006] naturally, these "vagrants" were completely at the mercy of their

[040-007] employers.

[040-008] Since _c_. 780 the economy can again be called a money economy; more and

[040-009] more taxes were imposed in form of money instead of in kind. This

[040-010] pressure forced farmers out of the land and into the cities in order to

[040-011] earn there the cash they needed for their tax payments. These men

[040-012] provided the labour force for industries, and this in turn led to the

[040-013] strong growth of the cities, especially in Central China where trade and

[040-014] industries developed most.

[040-015] Wealthy people not only invested in industrial enterprises, but also

[040-016] began to make heavy investments in agriculture in the vicinity of

[040-017] cities in order to increase production and thus income. We find men who

[040-018] drained lakes in order to create fields below the water level for easy

[040-019] irrigation; others made floating fields on lakes and avoided land tax

[040-020] payments; still others combined pig and fish breeding in one operation.

[040-021] The introduction of money economy and money taxes led to a need for more

[040-022] coinage. As metal was scarce and minting very expensive, iron coins were

[040-023] introduced, silver became more and more common as means of exchange, and

[040-024] paper money was issued. As the relative value of these moneys changed

[040-025] with supply and demand, speculation became a flourishing business which

[040-026] led to further enrichment of people in business. Even the government

[040-027] became more money-minded: costs of operations and even of wars were

[040-028] carefully calculated in order to achieve savings; financial specialists

[040-029] were appointed by the government, just as clans appointed such men for

[040-030] the efficient administration of their clan properties.

[040-031] Yet no real capitalism or industrialism developed until towards the end

[040-032] of this epoch, although at the end of the twelfth century almost all

[040-033] conditions for such a development seemed to be given.

[040-034] 2 _Political situation in the tenth century_

[040-035] The Chinese call the period from 906 to 960 the "period of the Five

[040-036] Dynasties" (_Wu Tai_). This is not quite accurate. It is true that there

[040-037] were five dynasties in rapid succession in North China; but at the same

[040-038] time there were ten other dynasties in South China. The ten southern

[040-039] dynasties, however, are regarded as not legitimate. The south was much

[040-040] better off with its illegitimate dynasties than the north with the

[040-041] legitimate ones. The dynasties in the south (we may dispense with giving

[040-042] their names) were the realms of some of the military governors so often

[040-043] mentioned above. These governors had already become independent at the

[040-044] end of the T'ang epoch; they declared themselves kings or emperors and

[040-045] ruled particular provinces in the south, the chief of which covered the

[040-046] territory of the present provinces of Szechwan, Kwangtung and Chekiang.

[040-047] In these territories there was comparative peace and economic

[040-048] prosperity, since they were able to control their own affairs and were

[040-049] no longer dependent on a corrupt central government. They also made

[040-050] great cultural progress, and they did not lose their importance later

[040-051] when they were annexed in the period of the Sung dynasty.

[040-052] As an example of these states one may mention the small state of Ch'u in

[040-053] the present province of Hunan. Here, Ma Yin, a former carpenter (died

[040-054] 931), had made himself a king. He controlled some of the main trade

[040-055] routes, set up a clean administration, bought up all merchandise which

[040-056] the merchants brought, but allowed them to export only local products,

[040-057] mainly tea, iron and lead. This regulation gave him a personal income of

[040-058] several millions every year, and in addition fostered the exploitation

[040-059] of the natural resources of this hitherto retarded area.

[040-060] 3 _Monopolistic trade in South China. Printing and paper money in the

[040-061] north_

[040-062] The prosperity of the small states of South China was largely due to the

[040-063] growth of trade, especially the tea trade. The habit of drinking tea

[040-064] seems to have been an ancient Tibetan custom, which spread to

[040-065] south-eastern China in the third century A.D. Since then there had been

[040-066] two main centres of production, Szechwan and south-eastern China. Until

[040-067] the eleventh century Szechwan had remained the leading producer, and tea

[040-068] had been drunk in the Tibetan fashion, mixed with flour, salt, and

[040-069] ginger. It then began to be drunk without admixture. In the T'ang epoch

[040-070] tea drinking spread all over China, and there sprang up a class of

[040-071] wholesalers who bought the tea from the peasants, accumulated stocks,

[040-072] and distributed them. From 783 date the first attempts of the state to

[040-073] monopolize the tea trade and to make it a source of revenue; but it

[040-074] failed in an attempt to make the cultivation a state monopoly. A tea

[040-075] commissariat was accordingly set up to buy the tea from the producers

[040-076] and supply it to traders in possession of a state licence. There

[040-077] naturally developed then a pernicious collaboration between state

[040-078] officials and the wholesalers. The latter soon eliminated the small

[040-079] traders, so that they themselves secured all the profit; official

[040-080] support was secured by bribery. The state and the wholesalers alike were

[040-081] keenly interested in the prevention of tea smuggling, which was strictly

[040-082] prohibited.

[040-083] The position was much the same with regard to salt. We have here for the

[040-084] first time the association of officials with wholesalers or even with a

[040-085] monopoly trade. This was of the utmost importance in all later times.

[040-086] Monopoly progressed most rapidly in Szechwan, where there had always

[040-087] been a numerous commercial community. In the period of political

[040-088] fragmentation Szechwan, as the principal tea-producing region and at the

[040-089] same time an important producer of salt, was much better off than any

[040-090] other part of China. Salt in Szechwan was largely produced by,

[040-091] technically, very interesting salt wells which existed there since _c_.

[040-092] the first century B.C. The importance of salt will be understood if we

[040-093] remember that a grown-up person in China uses an average of twelve

[040-094] pounds of salt per year. The salt tax was the top budget item around

[040-095] A.D. 900.

[040-096] South-eastern China was also the chief centre of porcelain production,

[040-097] although china clay is found also in North China. The use of porcelain

[040-098] spread more and more widely. The first translucent porcelain made its

[040-099] appearance, and porcelain became an important article of commerce both

[040-100] within the country and for export. Already the Muslim rulers of Baghdad

[040-101] around 800 used imported Chinese porcelain, and by the end of the

[040-102] fourteenth century porcelain was known in Eastern Africa. Exports to

[040-103] South-East Asia and Indonesia, and also to Japan gained more and more

[040-104] importance in later centuries. Manufacture of high quality porcelain

[040-105] calls for considerable amounts of capital investment and working

[040-106] capital; small manufacturers produce too many second-rate pieces; thus

[040-107] we have here the first beginnings of an industry that developed

[040-108] industrial towns such as Ching-tê, in which the majority of the

[040-109] population were workers and merchants, with some 10,000 families alone

[040-110] producing porcelain. Yet, for many centuries to come, the state

[040-111] controlled the production and even the design of porcelain and

[040-112] appropriated most of the production for use at court or as gifts.

[040-113] The third important new development to be mentioned was that of

[040-114] printing, which since _c_. 770 was known in the form of wood-block

[040-115] printing. The first reference to a printed book dated from 835, and the

[040-116] most important event in this field was the first printing of the

[040-117] Classics by the orders of Feng Tao (882-954) around 940. The first

[040-118] attempts to use movable type in China occurred around 1045, although

[040-119] this invention did not get general acceptance in China. It was more

[040-120] commonly used in Korea from the thirteenth century on and revolutionized

[040-121] Europe from 1538 on. It seems to me that from the middle of the

[040-122] twentieth century on, the West, too, shows a tendency to come back to

[040-123] the printing of whole pages, but replacing the wood blocks by

[040-124] photographic plates or other means. In the Far East, just as in Europe,

[040-125] the invention of printing had far-reaching consequences. Books, which

[040-126] until then had been very dear, because they had to be produced by

[040-127] copyists, could now be produced cheaply and in quantity. It became

[040-128] possible for a scholar to accumulate a library of his own and to work in

[040-129] a wide field, where earlier he had been confined to a few books or even

[040-130] a single text. The results were the spread of education, beginning with

[040-131] reading and writing, among wider groups, and the broadening of

[040-132] education: a large number of texts were read and compared, and no longer

[040-133] only a few. Private libraries came into existence, so that the imperial

[040-134] libraries were no longer the only ones. Publishing soon grew in extent,

[040-135] and in private enterprise works were printed that were not so serious

[040-136] and politically important as the classic books of the past. Thus a new

[040-137] type of literature, the literature of entertainment, could come into

[040-138] existence. Not all these consequences showed themselves at once; some

[040-139] made their first appearance later, in the Sung period.

[040-140] A fourth important innovation, this time in North China, was the

[040-141] introduction of prototypes of paper money. The Chinese copper "cash" was

[040-142] difficult or expensive to transport, simply because of its weight. It

[040-143] thus presented great obstacles to trade. Occasionally a region with an

[040-144] adverse balance of trade would lose all its copper money, with the

[040-145] result of a local deflation. From time to time, iron money was

[040-146] introduced in such deficit areas; it had for the first time been used in

[040-147] Szechwan in the first century B.C., and was there extensively used in

[040-148] the tenth century when after the conquest of the local state all copper

[040-149] was taken to the east by the conquerors. So long as there was an orderly

[040-150] administration, the government could send it money, though at

[040-151] considerable cost; but if the administration was not functioning well,

[040-152] the deflation continued. For this reason some provinces prohibited the

[040-153] export of copper money from their territory at the end of the eighth

[040-154] century. As the provinces were in the hands of military governors, the

[040-155] central government could do next to nothing to prevent this. On the

[040-156] other hand, the prohibition automatically made an end of all external

[040-157] trade. The merchants accordingly began to prepare deposit certificates,

[040-158] and in this way to set up a sort of transfer system. Soon these deposit

[040-159] certificates entered into circulation as a sort of medium of payment at

[040-160] first again in Szechwan, and gradually this led to a banking system and

[040-161] the linking of wholesale trade with it. This made possible a much

[040-162] greater volume of trade. Towards the end of the T'ang period the

[040-163] government began to issue deposit certificates of its own: the merchant

[040-164] deposited his copper money with a government agency, receiving in

[040-165] exchange a certificate which he could put into circulation like money.

[040-166] Meanwhile the government could put out the deposited money at interest,

[040-167] or throw it into general circulation. The government's deposit

[040-168] certificates were now printed. They were the predecessors of the paper

[040-169] money used from the time of the Sung.

[040-170] 4 _Political history of the Five Dynasties_

[040-171] The southern states were a factor not to be ignored in the calculations

[040-172] of the northern dynasties. Although the southern kingdoms were involved

[040-173] in a confusion of mutual hostilities, any one of them might come to the

[040-174] fore as the ally of Turks or other northern powers. The capital of the

[040-175] first of the five northern dynasties (once more a Liang dynasty, but not

[040-176] to be confused with the Liang dynasty of the south in the sixth century)

[040-177] was, moreover, quite close to the territories of the southern dynasties,

[040-178] close to the site of the present K'ai-feng, in the fertile plain of

[040-179] eastern China with its good means of transport. Militarily the town

[040-180] could not be held, for its one and only defence was the Yellow River.

[040-181] The founder of this Later Liang dynasty, Chu Ch'üan-chung (906), was

[040-182] himself an eastern Chinese and, as will be remembered, a past supporter

[040-183] of the revolutionary Huang Ch'ao, but he had then gone over to the T'ang

[040-184] and had gained high military rank.

## c41.xhtml
