---
description: "Chapter 47 of A History of China"
id: ch47
label: "Section 47"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 47

[047-001] In the Mongol legislation the South Chinese had the lowest status, and

[047-002] virtually no rights. Intermarriage with them was prohibited. The Chinese

[047-003] were not allowed to carry arms. For a time they were forbidden even to

[047-004] learn the Mongol or other foreign languages. In this way they were to be

[047-005] prevented from gaining official positions and playing any political

[047-006] part. Their ignorance of the languages of northern, central, and western

[047-007] Asia also prevented them from engaging in commerce like the foreign

[047-008] merchants, and every possible difficulty was put in the way of their

[047-009] travelling for commercial purposes. On the other hand, foreigners were,

[047-010] of course, able to learn Chinese, and so to gain a footing in Chinese

[047-011] internal trade.

[047-012] Through legislation of this type the Mongols tried to build up and to

[047-013] safeguard their domination over China. Yet their success did not last a

[047-014] hundred years.

[047-015] 3 _Military position_

[047-016] In foreign affairs the Mongol epoch was for China something of a

[047-017] breathing space, for the great wars of the Mongols took place at a

[047-018] remote distance from China and without any Chinese participation. Only a

[047-019] few concluding wars were fought under Kublai in the Far East. The first

[047-020] was his war against Japan (1281): it ended in complete failure, the

[047-021] fleet being destroyed by a storm. In this campaign the Chinese furnished

[047-022] ships and also soldiers. The subjection of Japan would have been in the

[047-023] interest of the Chinese, as it would have opened a market which had been

[047-024] almost closed against them in the Sung period. Mongol wars followed in

[047-025] the south. In 1282 began the war against Burma; in 1284 Annam and

[047-026] Cambodia were conquered; in 1292 a campaign was started against Java. It

[047-027] proved impossible to hold Java, but almost the whole of Indo-China came

[047-028] under Mongol rule, to the satisfaction of the Chinese, for Indo-China

[047-029] had already been one of the principal export markets in the Sung period.

[047-030] After that, however, there was virtually no more warfare, apart from

[047-031] small campaigns against rebellious tribes. The Mongol soldiers now lived

[047-032] on their pay in their garrisons, with nothing to do. The old campaigners

[047-033] died and were followed by their sons, brought up also as soldiers; but

[047-034] these young Mongols were born in China, had seen nothing of war, and

[047-035] learned of the soldiers' trade either nothing or very little; so that

[047-036] after about 1320 serious things happened. An army nominally 1,000 strong

[047-037] was sent against a group of barely fifty bandits and failed to defeat

[047-038] them. Most of the 1,000 soldiers no longer knew how to use their

[047-039] weapons, and many did not even join the force. Such incidents occurred

[047-040] again and again.

[047-041] 4 _Social situation_

[047-042] The results, however, of conditions within the country were of much more

[047-043] importance than events abroad. The Mongols made Peking their capital as

[047-044] was entirely natural, for Peking was near their homeland Mongolia. The

[047-045] emperor and his entourage could return to Mongolia in the summer, when

[047-046] China became too hot or too humid for them; and from Peking they were

[047-047] able to maintain contact with the rest of the Mongol empire. But as the

[047-048] city had become the capital of a vast empire, an enormous staff of

[047-049] officials had to be housed there, consisting of persons of many

[047-050] different nationalities. The emperor naturally wanted to have a

[047-051] magnificent capital, a city really worthy of so vast an empire. As the

[047-052] many wars had brought in vast booty, there was money for the building of

[047-053] great palaces, of a size and magnificence never before seen in China.

[047-054] They were built by Chinese forced labour, and to this end men had to be

[047-055] brought from all over the empire--poor peasants, whose fields went out

[047-056] of cultivation while they were held in bondage far away. If they ever

[047-057] returned home, they were destitute and had lost their land. The rich

[047-058] gentry, on the other hand, were able to buy immunity from forced labour.

[047-059] The immense increase in the population of Peking (the huge court with

[047-060] its enormous expenditure, the mass of officials, the great merchant

[047-061] community, largely foreigners, and the many servile labourers),

[047-062] necessitated vast supplies of food. Now, as mentioned in earlier

[047-063] chapters, since the time of the Later T'ang the region round Nanking had

[047-064] become the main centre of production in China, and the Chinese

[047-065] population had gone over more and more to the consumption of rice

[047-066] instead of pulse or wheat. As rice could not be grown in the north,

[047-067] practically the whole of the food supplies for the capital had to be

[047-068] brought from the south. The transport system taken over by the Mongols

[047-069] had not been created for long-distance traffic of this sort. The capital

[047-070] of the Sung had lain in the main centre of production. Consequently, a

[047-071] great fleet had suddenly to be built, canals and rivers had to be

[047-072] regulated, and some new canals excavated. This again called for a vast

[047-073] quantity of forced labour, often brought from afar to the points at

[047-074] which it was needed. The Chinese peasants had suffered in the Sung

[047-075] period. They had been exploited by the large landowners. The Mongols had

[047-076] not removed these landowners, as the Chinese gentry had gone over to

[047-077] their side. The Mongols had deprived them of their political power, but

[047-078] had left them their estates, the basis of their power. In past changes

[047-079] of dynasty the gentry had either maintained their position or been

[047-080] replaced by a new gentry: the total number of their class had remained

[047-081] virtually unchanged. Now, however, in addition to the original gentry

[047-082] there were about a million Mongols, for whose maintenance the peasants

[047-083] had also to provide, and their standard of maintenance was high. This

[047-084] was an enormous increase in the burdens of the peasantry.

[047-085] Two other elements further pressed on the peasants in the Mongol

[047-086] epoch--organized religion and the traders. The upper classes among the

[047-087] Chinese had in general little interest in religion, but the Mongols,

[047-088] owing to their historical development, were very religious. Some of them

[047-089] and some of their allies were Buddhists, some were still shamanists. The

[047-090] Chinese Buddhists and the representatives of popular Taoism approached

[047-091] the Mongols and the foreign Buddhist monks trying to enlist the interest

[047-092] of the Mongols and their allies. The old shamanism was unable to compete

[047-093] with the higher religions, and the Mongols in China became Buddhist or

[047-094] interested themselves in popular Taoism. They showed their interest

[047-095] especially by the endowment of temples and monasteries. The temples were

[047-096] given great estates, and the peasants on those estates became temple

[047-097] servants. The land belonging to the temples was free from taxation.

[047-098] We have as yet no exact statistics of the Mongol epoch, only

[047-099] approximations. These set the total area under cultivation at some six

[047-100] million _ch'ing_ (a _ch'ing_ is the ideal size of the farm worked by a

[047-101] peasant family, but it was rarely held in practice); the population

[047-102] amounted to fourteen or fifteen million families. Of this total tillage

[047-103] some 170,000 _ch'ing_ were allotted to the temples; that is to say, the

[047-104] farms for some 400,000 peasant families were taken from the peasants and

[047-105] no longer paid taxes to the state. The peasants, however, had to make

[047-106] payments to the temples. Some 200,000 _ch'ing_ with some 450,000 peasant

[047-107] families were turned into military settlements; that is to say, these

[047-108] peasants had to work for the needs of the army. Their taxes went not to

[047-109] the state but to the army. Moreover, in the event of war they had to

[047-110] render service to the army. In addition to this, all higher officials

[047-111] received official properties, the yield of which represented part

[047-112] payment of their salaries. Then, Mongol nobles and dignitaries received

[047-113] considerable grants of land, which was taken away from the free

[047-114] peasants; the peasants had then to work their farms as tenants and to

[047-115] pay dues to their landlords, no longer to the state. Finally, especially

[047-116] in North China, many peasants were entirely dispossessed, and their land

[047-117] was turned into pasturage for the Mongols' horses; the peasants

[047-118] themselves were put to forced labour. On top of this came the

[047-119] exploitation of the peasants by the great landowners of the past. All

[047-120] this meant an enormous diminution in the number of free peasants and

[047-121] thus of taxpayers. As the state was involved in more expenditure than in

[047-122] the past owing to the large number of Mongols who were its virtual

[047-123] pensioners, the taxes had to be continually increased. Meanwhile the

[047-124] many peasants working as tenants of the great landlords, the temples,

[047-125] and the Mongol nobles were entirely at their mercy. In this period, a

[047-126] second migration of farmers into the southern provinces, mainly Fukien

[047-127] and Kwangtung, took place; it had its main source in the lower Yangtze

[047-128] valley. A few gentry families whose relatives had accompanied the Sung

[047-129] emperor on their flight to the south, also settled with their followers

[047-130] in the Canton basin.

[047-131] The many merchants from abroad, especially those belonging to the

[047-132] peoples allied to the Mongols, also had in every respect a privileged

[047-133] position in China. They were free of taxation, free to travel all over

[047-134] the country, and received privileged treatment in the use of means of

[047-135] transport. They were thus able to accumulate great wealth, most of which

[047-136] went out of China to their own country. This produced a general

[047-137] impoverishment of China. Chinese merchants fell more and more into

[047-138] dependence on the foreign merchants; the only field of action really

[047-139] remaining to them was the local trade within China and the trade with

[047-140] Indo-China, where the Chinese had the advantage of knowing the language.

[047-141] The impoverishment of China began with the flow abroad of her metallic

[047-142] currency. To make up for this loss, the government was compelled to

[047-143] issue great quantities of paper money, which very quickly depreciated,

[047-144] because after a few years the government would no longer accept the

[047-145] money at its face value, so that the population could place no faith in

[047-146] it. The depreciation further impoverished the people.

[047-147] Thus we have in the Mongol epoch in China the imposing picture of a

[047-148] commerce made possible with every country from Europe to the Pacific;

[047-149] this, however, led to the impoverishment of China. We also see the

[047-150] rising of mighty temples and monumental buildings, but this again only

[047-151] contributed to the denudation of the country. The Mongol epoch was thus

[047-152] one of continual and rapid impoverishment in China, simultaneously with

[047-153] a great display of magnificence. The enthusiastic descriptions of the

[047-154] Mongol empire in China offered by travellers from the Near East or from

[047-155] Europe, such as Marco Polo, give an entirely false picture: as

[047-156] foreigners they had a privileged position, living in the cities and

[047-157] seeing nothing of the situation of the general population.

[047-158] 5 _Popular risings: National rising_

[047-159] It took time for the effects of all these factors to become evident. The

[047-160] first popular rising came in 1325. Statistics of 1329 show that there

[047-161] were then some 7,600,000 persons in the empire who were starving; as

[047-162] this was only the figure of the officially admitted sufferers, the

[047-163] figure may have been higher. In any case, seven-and-a-half millions were

[047-164] a substantial percentage of the total population, estimated at

[047-165] 45,000,000. The risings that now came incessantly were led by men of the

[047-166] lower orders--a cloth-seller, a fisherman, a peasant, a salt smuggler,

[047-167] the son of a soldier serving a sentence, an office messenger, and so on.

[047-168] They never attacked the Mongols as aliens, but always the rich in

[047-169] general, whether Chinese or foreign. Wherever they came, they killed all

[047-170] the rich and distributed their money and possessions.

[047-171] As already mentioned, the Mongol garrisons were unable to cope with

[047-172] these risings. But how was it that the Mongol rule did not collapse

[047-173] until some forty years later? The Mongols parried the risings by raising

[047-174] loans from the rich and using the money to recruit volunteers to fight

[047-175] the rebels. The state revenues would not have sufficed for these

[047-176] payments, and the item was not one that could be included in the

[047-177] military budget. What was of much more importance was that the gentry

[047-178] themselves recruited volunteers and fought the rebels on their own

[047-179] account, without the authority or the support of the government. Thus it

[047-180] was the Chinese gentry, in their fear of being killed by the insurgents,

[047-181] who fought them and so bolstered up the Mongol rule.

## c48.xhtml
