---
description: "Chapter 48 of A History of China"
id: ch48
label: "Section 48"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 48

[048-001] In 1351 the dykes along the Yellow River burst. The dykes had to be

[048-002] reconstructed and further measures of conservancy undertaken. To this

[048-003] end the government impressed 170,000 men. Following this action, great

[048-004] new revolts broke out. Everywhere in Honan, Kiangsu, and Shantung, the

[048-005] regions from which the labourers were summoned, revolutionary groups

[048-006] were formed, some of them amounting to 100,000 men. Some groups had a

[048-007] religious tinge; others declared their intention to restore the emperors

[048-008] of the Sung dynasty. Before long great parts of central China were

[048-009] wrested from the hands of the government. The government recognized the

[048-010] menace to its existence, but resorted to contradictory measures. In 1352

[048-011] southern Chinese were permitted to take over certain official positions.

[048-012] In this way it was hoped to gain the full support of the gentry, who had

[048-013] a certain interest in combating the rebel movements. On the other hand,

[048-014] the government tightened up its nationality laws. All the old

[048-015] segregation laws were brought back into force, with the result that in a

[048-016] few years the aim of the rebels became no longer merely the expulsion of

[048-017] the rich but also the expulsion of the Mongols: a social movement thus

[048-018] became a national one. A second element contributed to the change in the

[048-019] character of the popular rising. The rebels captured many towns. Some of

[048-020] these towns refused to fight and negotiated terms of submission. In

[048-021] these cases the rebels did not murder the whole of the gentry, but took

[048-022] some of them into their service. The gentry did not agree to this out of

[048-023] sympathy with the rebels, but simply in order to save their own lives.

[048-024] Once they had taken the step, however, they could not go back; they had

[048-025] no alternative but to remain on the side of the rebels.

[048-026] In 1352 Kuo Tz[)u]-hsing rose in southern Honan. Kuo was the son of a

[048-027] wandering soothsayer and a blind beggar-woman. He had success; his group

[048-028] gained control of a considerable region round his home. There was no

[048-029] longer any serious resistance from the Mongols, for at this time the

[048-030] whole of eastern China was in full revolt. In 1353 Kuo was joined by a

[048-031] man named Chu Yüan-chang, the son of a small peasant, probably a tenant

[048-032] farmer. Chu's parents and all his relatives had died from a plague,

[048-033] leaving him destitute. He had first entered a monastery and become a

[048-034] monk. This was a favourite resource--and has been almost to the present

[048-035] day--for poor sons of peasants who were threatened with starvation. As a

[048-036] monk he had gone about begging, until in 1353 he returned to his home

[048-037] and collected a group, mostly men from his own village, sons of peasants

[048-038] and young fellows who had already been peasant leaders. Monks were often

[048-039] peasant leaders. They were trusted because they promised divine aid, and

[048-040] because they were usually rather better educated than the rest of the

[048-041] peasants. Chu at first also had contacts with a secret society, a branch

[048-042] of the White Lotus Society which several times in the course of Chinese

[048-043] history has been the nucleus of rebellious movements. Chu took his small

[048-044] group which identified itself by a red turban and a red banner to Kuo,

[048-045] who received him gladly, entered into alliance with him, and in sign of

[048-046] friendship gave him his daughter in marriage. In 1355 Kuo died, and Chu

[048-047] took over his army, now many thousands strong. In his campaigns against

[048-048] towns in eastern China, Chu succeeded in winning over some capable

[048-049] members of the gentry. One was the chairman of a committee that yielded

[048-050] a town to Chu; another was a scholar whose family had always been

[048-051] opposed to the Mongols, and who had himself suffered injustice several

[048-052] times in his official career, so that he was glad to join Chu out of

[048-053] hatred of the Mongols.

[048-054] These men gained great influence over Chu, and persuaded him to give up

[048-055] attacking rich individuals, and instead to establish an assured control

[048-056] over large parts of the country. He would then, they pointed out, be

[048-057] permanently enriched, while otherwise he would only be in funds at the

[048-058] moment of the plundering of a town. They set before him strategic plans

[048-059] with that aim. Through their counsel Chu changed from the leader of a

[048-060] popular rising into a fighter against the dynasty. Of all the peasant

[048-061] leaders he was now the only one pursuing a definite aim. He marched

[048-062] first against Nanking, the great city of central China, and captured it

[048-063] with ease. He then crossed the Yangtze, and conquered the rich provinces

[048-064] of the south-east. He was a rebel who no longer slaughtered the rich or

[048-065] plundered the towns, and the whole of the gentry with all their

[048-066] followers came over to him _en masse_. The armies of volunteers went

[048-067] over to Chu, and the whole edifice of the dynasty collapsed.

[048-068] The years 1355-1368 were full of small battles. After his conquest of

[048-069] the whole of the south, Chu went north. In 1368 his generals captured

[048-070] Peking almost without a blow. The Mongol ruler fled on horseback with

[048-071] his immediate entourage into the north of China, and soon after into

[048-072] Mongolia. The Mongol dynasty had been brought down, almost without

[048-073] resistance. The Mongols in the isolated garrisons marched northward

[048-074] wherever they could. A few surrendered to the Chinese and were used in

[048-075] southern China as professional soldiers, though they were always

[048-076] regarded with suspicion. The only serious resistance offered came from

[048-077] the regions in which other Chinese popular leaders had established

[048-078] themselves, especially the remote provinces in the west and south-west,

[048-079] which had a different social structure and had been relatively little

[048-080] affected by the Mongol regime.

[048-081] Thus the collapse of the Mongols came for the following reasons: (1)

[048-082] They had not succeeded in maintaining their armed strength or that of

[048-083] their allies during the period of peace that followed Kublai's conquest.

[048-084] The Mongol soldiers had become effeminate through their life of idleness

[048-085] in the towns. (2) The attempt to rule the empire through Mongols or

[048-086] other aliens, and to exclude the Chinese gentry entirely from the

[048-087] administration, failed through insufficient knowledge of the sources of

[048-088] revenue and through the abuses due to the favoured treatment of aliens.

[048-089] The whole country, and especially the peasantry, was completely

[048-090] impoverished and so driven into revolt. (3) There was also a

[048-091] psychological reason. In the middle of the fourteenth century it was

[048-092] obvious to the Mongols that their hold over China was growing more and

[048-093] more precarious, and that there was little to be got out of the

[048-094] impoverished country: they seem in consequence to have lost interest in

[048-095] the troublesome task of maintaining their rule, preferring, in so far as

[048-096] they had not already entirely degenerated, to return to their old home

[048-097] in the north. It is important to bear in mind these reasons for the

[048-098] collapse of the Mongols, so that we may compare them later with the

[048-099] reasons for the collapse of the Manchus.

[048-100] No mention need be made here of the names of the Mongol rulers in China

[048-101] after Kublai. After his death in 1294, grandsons and great-grandsons of

[048-102] his followed each other in rapid succession on the throne; not one of

[048-103] them was of any personal significance. They had no influence on the

[048-104] government of China. Their life was spent in intriguing against one

[048-105] another. There were seven Mongol emperors after Kublai.

[048-106] 6 _Cultural_

[048-107] During the Mongol epoch a large number of the Chinese scholars withdrew

[048-108] from official life. They lived in retirement among their friends, and

[048-109] devoted themselves mainly to the pursuit of the art of poetry, which had

[048-110] been elaborated in the Later Sung epoch, without themselves arriving at

[048-111] any important innovations in form. Their poems were built up

[048-112] meticulously on the rules laid down by the various schools; they were

[048-113] routine productions rather than the outcome of any true poetic

[048-114] inspiration. In the realm of prose the best achievements were the

[048-115] "miscellaneous notes" already mentioned, collections of learned essays.

[048-116] The foreigners who wrote in Chinese during this epoch are credited with

[048-117] no better achievements by the Chinese historians of literature. Chief of

[048-118] them were a statesman named Yeh-lü Ch'u-ts'ai, a Kitan in the service of

[048-119] the Mongols; and a Mongol named T'o-t'o (Tokto). The former accompanied

[048-120] Genghiz Khan in his great campaign against Turkestan, and left a very

[048-121] interesting account of his journeys, together with many poems about

[048-122] Samarkand and Turkestan. His other works were mainly letters and poems

[048-123] addressed to friends. They differ in no way in style from the Chinese

[048-124] literary works of the time, and are neither better nor worse than those

[048-125] works. He shows strong traces of Taoist influence, as do other

[048-126] contemporary writers. We know that Genghiz Khan was more or less

[048-127] inclined to Taoism, and admitted a Taoist monk to his camp (1221-1224).

[048-128] This man's account of his travels has also been preserved, and with the

[048-129] numerous European accounts of Central Asia written at this time it forms

[048-130] an important source. The Mongol Tokto was the head of an historical

[048-131] commission that issued the annals of the Sung dynasty, the Kitan, and

[048-132] the Juchên dynasty. The annals of the Sung dynasty became the largest of

[048-133] all the historical works, but they were fiercely attacked from the first

[048-134] by Chinese critics on account of their style and their hasty

[048-135] composition, and, together with the annals of the Mongol dynasty, they

[048-136] are regarded as the worst of the annals preserved. Tokto himself is less

[048-137] to blame for this than the circumstance that he was compelled to work in

[048-138] great haste, and had not time to put into order the overwhelming mass of

[048-139] his material.

[048-140] The greatest literary achievements, however, of the Mongol period belong

[048-141] beyond question to the theatre (or, rather, opera). The emperors were

[048-142] great theatre-goers, and the wealthy private families were also

[048-143] enthusiasts, so that gradually people of education devoted themselves to

[048-144] writing librettos for the operas, where in the past this work had been

[048-145] left to others. Most of the authors of these librettos remained unknown:

[048-146] they used pseudonyms, partly because playwriting was not an occupation

[048-147] that befitted a scholar, and partly because in these works they

[048-148] criticized the conditions of their day. These works are divided in

[048-149] regard to style into two groups, those of the "southern" and the

[048-150] "northern" drama; these are distinguished from each other in musical

[048-151] construction and in their intellectual attitude: in general the northern

[048-152] works are more heroic and the southern more sentimental, though there

[048-153] are exceptions. The most famous northern works of the Mongol epoch are

[048-154] _P'i-p'a-chi_ ("The Story of a Lute"), written about 1356, probably by

[048-155] Kao Ming, and _Chao-shih ku-erh-chi_ ("The Story of the Orphan of Chao

[048-156] "), a work that enthralled Voltaire, who made a paraphrase of it; its

[048-157] author was the otherwise unknown Chi Chün-hsiang. One of the most famous

[048-158] of the southern dramas is _Hsi-hsiang-chi_ ("The Romance of the Western

[048-159] Chamber"), by Wang Shih-fu and Kuan Han-ch'ing. Kuan lived under the

[048-160] Juchên dynasty as a physician, and then among the Mongols. He is said to

[048-161] have written fifty-eight dramas, many of which became famous.

[048-162] In the fine arts, foreign influence made itself felt during the Mongol

[048-163] epoch much more than in literature. This was due in part to the Mongol

[048-164] rulers' predilection for the Lamaism that was widespread in their

[048-165] homeland. Lamaism is a special form of Buddhism which developed in

[048-166] Tibet, where remnants of the old national Tibetan cult (_Bon_) were

[048-167] fused with Buddhism into a distinctive religion. During the rise of the

[048-168] Mongols this religion, which closely resembled the shamanism of the

[048-169] ancient Mongols, spread in Mongolia, and through the Mongols it made

[048-170] great progress in China, where it had been insignificant until their

[048-171] time. Religious sculpture especially came entirely under Tibetan

[048-172] influence (particularly that of the sculptor Aniko, who came from Nepal,

[048-173] where he was born in 1244). This influence was noticeable in the Chinese

[048-174] sculptor Liu Yüan; after him it became stronger and stronger, lasting

[048-175] until the Manchu epoch.

## c49.xhtml
