---
description: "Chapter 50 of A History of China"
id: ch50
label: "Section 50"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 50

[050-001] The laws against the merchants and the restrictions under which the

[050-002] craftsmen worked, remained essentially as they had been under the Sung,

[050-003] but now the remaining foreign merchants of Mongol time also fell under

[050-004] these laws, and their influence quickly diminished. All craftsmen, a

[050-005] total of some 300,000 men with families, were still registered and had

[050-006] to serve the government in the capital for three months once every three

[050-007] years; others had to serve ten days per month, if they lived close by.

[050-008] They were a hereditary caste as were the professional soldiers, and not

[050-009] allowed to change their occupation except by special imperial

[050-010] permission. When a craftsman or soldier died, another family member had

[050-011] to replace him; therefore, families of craftsmen were not allowed to

[050-012] separate into small nuclear families, in which there might not always be

[050-013] a suitable male. Yet, in an empire as large as that of the Ming, this

[050-014] system did not work too well: craftsmen lost too much time in travelling

[050-015] and often succeeded in running away while travelling. Therefore, from

[050-016] 1505 on, they had to pay a tax instead of working for the government,

[050-017] and from then on the craftsmen became relatively free.

[050-018] 4 _Colonization and agricultural developments_

[050-019] As already mentioned, the Ming had to keep a large army along the

[050-020] northern frontiers. But they also had to keep armies in south China,

[050-021] especially in Yünnan. Here, the Mongol invasions of Burma and Thailand

[050-022] had brought unrest among the tribes, especially the Shan. The Ming did

[050-023] not hold Burma but kept it in a loose dependency as "tributary nation".

[050-024] In order to supply armies so far away from all agricultural surplus

[050-025] centres, the Ming resorted to the old system of "military colonies"

[050-026] which seems to have been invented in the second century B.C. and is

[050-027] still used even today (in Sinkiang). Soldiers were settled in camps

[050-028] called _ying_, and therefore there are so many place names ending with

[050-029] _ying_ in the outlying areas of China. They worked as state farmers and

[050-030] accumulated surplusses which were used in case of war in which these

[050-031] same farmers turned soldiers again. Many criminals were sent to these

[050-032] state farms, too. This system, especially in south China, transformed

[050-033] territories formerly inhabited by native tribes or uninhabited, into

[050-034] solidly Chinese areas. In addition to these military colonies, a steady

[050-035] stream of settlers from Central China and the coast continued to move

[050-036] into Kwangtung and Hunan provinces. They felt protected by the army

[050-037] against attacks by natives. Yet Ming texts are full of reports on major

[050-038] and minor clashes with the natives, from Kiangsi and Fukien to Kwangtung

[050-039] and Kwangsi.

[050-040] But the production of military colonies was still not enough to feed the

[050-041] armies, and the government in Chu's time resorted to a new design. It

[050-042] promised to give merchants who transported grain from Central China to

[050-043] the borders, government salt certificates. Upon the receipt, the

[050-044] merchants could acquire a certain amount of salt and sell it with high

[050-045] profits. Soon, these merchants began to invest some of their capital in

[050-046] local land which was naturally cheap. They then attracted farmers from

[050-047] their home countries as tenants. The rent of the tenants, paid in form

[050-048] of grain, was then sold to the army, and the merchant's gains

[050-049] increased. Tenants could easily be found: the density of population in

[050-050] the Yangtze plains had further increased since the Sung time. This

[050-051] system of merchant colonization did not last long, because soon, in

[050-052] order to curb the profits of the merchants, money was given instead of

[050-053] salt certificates, and the merchants lost interest in grain transports.

[050-054] Thus, grain prices along the frontiers rose and the effectiveness of the

[050-055] armies was diminished.

[050-056] Although the history of Chinese agriculture is as yet only partially

[050-057] known, a number of changes in this field, which began to show up from

[050-058] Sung time on, seem to have produced an "agricultural revolution" in Ming

[050-059] time. We have already mentioned the Sung attempts to increase production

[050-060] near the big cities by deep-lying fields, cultivation on and in lakes.

[050-061] At the same time, there was an increase in cultivation of mountain

[050-062] slopes by terracing and by distributing water over the terraces in

[050-063] balanced systems. New irrigation machines, especially the so-called

[050-064] Persian wheel, were introduced in the Ming time. Perhaps the most

[050-065] important innovation, however, was the introduction of rice from

[050-066] Indo-China's kingdom Champa in 1012 into Fukien from where it soon

[050-067] spread. This rice had three advantages over ordinary Chinese rice: it

[050-068] was drought-resistant and could, therefore, be planted in areas with

[050-069] poor or even no irrigation. It had a great productivity, and it could be

[050-070] sown very early in the year. At first it had the disadvantage that it

[050-071] had a vegetation period of a hundred days. But soon, the Chinese

[050-072] developed a quick-growing Champa rice, and the speediest varieties took

[050-073] only sixty days from transplantation into the fields to the harvest.

[050-074] This made it possible to grow two rice harvests instead of only one and

[050-075] more than doubled the production. Rice varieties which grew again after

[050-076] being cut and produced a second, but very much smaller harvest,

[050-077] disappeared from now on. Furthermore, fish were kept in the ricefields

[050-078] and produced not only food for the farmers but also fertilized the

[050-079] fields, so that continuous cultivation of ricefields without any

[050-080] decrease in fertility became possible. Incidentally, fish control the

[050-081] malaria mosquitoes; although the Chinese did not know this fact, large

[050-082] areas in South China which had formerly been avoided by Chinese because

[050-083] of malaria, gradually became inhabitable.

[050-084] The importance of alternating crops was also discovered and from now on,

[050-085] the old system of fallow cultivation was given up and continuous

[050-086] cultivation with, in some areas, even more than one harvest per field

[050-087] per year, was introduced even in wheat-growing areas. Considering that

[050-088] under the fallow system from one half to one third of all fields

[050-089] remained uncultivated each year, the increase in production under the

[050-090] new system must have been tremendous. We believe that the population

[050-091] revolution which in China started about 1550, was the result of this

[050-092] earlier agrarian revolution. From the eighteenth century on we get

[050-093] reports on depletion of fields due to wrong application of the new

[050-094] system.

[050-095] Another plant deeply affected Chinese agriculture: cotton. It is often

[050-096] forgotten that, from very early times, the Chinese in the south had used

[050-097] kapok and similar fibres, and that the cocoons of different kinds of

[050-098] worms had been used for silk. Real cotton probably came from Bengal over

[050-099] South-East Asia first to the coastal provinces of China and spread

[050-100] quickly into Fukien and Kwangtung in Sung time.

[050-101] On the other side, cotton reached China through Central Asia, and

[050-102] already in the thirteenth century we find it in Shensi in north-western

[050-103] China. Farmers in the north could in many places grow cotton in summer

[050-104] and wheat in winter, and cotton was a high-priced product. They ginned

[050-105] the cotton with iron rods; a mechanical cotton gin was introduced not

[050-106] until later. The raw cotton was sold to merchants who transported it

[050-107] into the industrial centre of the time, the Yangtze valley, and who

[050-108] re-exported cotton cloth to the north. Raw cotton, loosened by the

[050-109] string of the bow (a method which was known since Sung), could now in

[050-110] the north also be used for quilts and padded winter garments.

[050-111] 5 _Commercial and industrial developments_

[050-112] Intensivation and modernization of agriculture led to strong population

[050-113] increases especially in the Yangtze valley from Sung time on. Thus, in

[050-114] this area commerce and industry also developed most quickly.

[050-115] Urbanization was greatest here. Nanking, the new Ming capital, grew

[050-116] tremendously because of the presence of the court and administration,

[050-117] and even when later the capital was moved, Nanking continued to remain

[050-118] the cultural capital of China. The urban population needed textiles and

[050-119] food. From Ming time on, fashions changed quickly as soon as government

[050-120] regulations which determined colour and material of the dress of each

[050-121] social class were relaxed or as soon as they could be circumvented by

[050-122] bribery or ingenious devices. Now, only factories could produce the

[050-123] amounts which the consumers wanted. We hear of many men who started out

[050-124] with one loom and later ended up with over forty looms, employing many

[050-125] weavers. Shanghai began to emerge as a centre of cotton cloth

[050-126] production. A system of middle-men developed who bought raw cotton and

[050-127] raw silk from the producers and sold it to factories.

[050-128] Consumption in the Yangtze cities raised the value of the land around

[050-129] the cities. The small farmers who were squeezed out, migrated to the

[050-130] south. Absentee landlords in cities relied partly on migratory, seasonal

[050-131] labour supplied by small farmers from Chekiang who came to the Yangtze

[050-132] area after they had finished their own harvest. More and more,

[050-133] vegetables and mulberries or cotton were planted in the vicinity of the

[050-134] cities. As rice prices went up quickly a large organization of rice

[050-135] merchants grew up. They ran large ships up to Hankow where they bought

[050-136] rice which was brought down from Hunan in river boats by smaller

[050-137] merchants. The small merchants again made contracts with the local

[050-138] gentry who bought as much rice from the producers as they could and sold

[050-139] it to these grain merchants. Thus, local grain prices went up and we

[050-140] hear of cases where the local population attacked the grain boats in

[050-141] order to prevent the depletion of local markets.

[050-142] Next to these grain merchants, the above-mentioned salt merchants have

[050-143] to be mentioned again. Their centre soon became the city of Hsin-an, a

[050-144] city on the border of Chekiang and Anhui, or in more general terms, the

[050-145] cities in the district of Hui-chou. When the grain transportation to the

[050-146] frontiers came to an end in early Ming time, the Hsin-an merchants

[050-147] specialized first in silver trade. Later in Ming time, they spread their

[050-148] activities all over China and often monopolized the salt, silver, rice,

[050-149] cotton, silk or tea businesses. In the sixteenth century they had

[050-150] well-established contacts with smugglers on the Fukien coast and brought

[050-151] foreign goods into the interior. Their home was also close to the main

[050-152] centres of porcelain production in Kiangsi which was exported to

[050-153] overseas and to the urban centres. The demand for porcelain had

[050-154] increased so much that state factories could not fulfil it. The state

[050-155] factories seem often to have suffered from a lack of labour: indented

[050-156] artisans were imported from other provinces and later sent back on state

[050-157] expenses or were taken away from other state industries. Thus, private

[050-158] porcelain factories began to develop, and in connection with quickly

[050-159] changing fashions a great diversification of porcelain occurred.

[050-160] One other industry should also be mentioned. With the development of

[050-161] printing, which will be discussed below, the paper industry was greatly

[050-162] stimulated. The state also needed special types of paper for the paper

[050-163] currency. Printing and book selling became a profitable business, and

[050-164] with the application of block print to textiles (probably first used in

[050-165] Sung time) another new field of commercial activity was opened.

[050-166] As already mentioned, silver in form of bars had been increasingly used

[050-167] as currency in Sung time. The yearly government production of silver was

[050-168] _c_. 10,000 kg. Mongol currency was actually based upon silver. The

[050-169] Ming, however, reverted to copper as basic unit, in addition to the use

[050-170] of paper money. This encouraged the use of silver for speculative

[050-171] purposes.

[050-172] The development of business changed the face of cities. From Sung time

[050-173] on, the division of cities into wards with gates which were closed

[050-174] during the night, began to break down. Ming cities had no more wards.

[050-175] Business was no more restricted to official markets but grew up in all

[050-176] parts of the cities. The individual trades were no more necessarily all

[050-177] in one street. Shops did not have to close at sunset. The guilds

[050-178] developed and in some cases were able to exercise locally some influence

[050-179] upon the officials.

[050-180] 6 _Growth of the small gentry_

[050-181] With the spread of book printing, all kinds of books became easily

[050-182] accessible, including reprints of examination papers. Even businessmen

[050-183] and farmers increasingly learned to read and to write, and many people

[050-184] now could prepare themselves for the examinations. Attendance, however,

[050-185] at the examinations cost a good deal. The candidate had to travel to the

[050-186] local or provincial capital, and for the higher examinations to the

[050-187] capital of the country; he had to live there for several months and, as

[050-188] a rule, had to bribe the examiners or at least to gain the favour of

[050-189] influential people. There were many cases of candidates becoming

[050-190] destitute. Most of them were heavily in debt when at last they gained a

[050-191] position. They naturally set to work at once to pay their debts out of

[050-192] their salary, and to accumulate fresh capital to meet future

[050-193] emergencies. The salaries of officials were, however, so small that it

[050-194] was impossible to make ends meet; and at the same time every official

[050-195] was liable with his own capital for the receipt in full of the taxes for

[050-196] the collection of which he was responsible. Consequently every official

[050-197] began at once to collect more taxes than were really due, so as to be

[050-198] able to cover any deficits, and also to cover his own cost of

[050-199] living--including not only the repayment of his debts but the

[050-200] acquisition of capital or land so as to rise in the social scale. The

[050-201] old gentry had been rich landowners, and had no need to exploit the

[050-202] peasants on such a scale.

## c51.xhtml
