---
description: "Chapter 61 of A History of China"
id: ch61
label: "Section 61"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 61

[061-001] Yüan's excellent troops were loyal to his person, and he could have made

[061-002] use of them in fighting on behalf of the dynasty. But a victory would

[061-003] have brought no personal gain to him; for his personal plans he

[061-004] considered that the anti-Manchu side provided the springboard he needed.

[061-005] The revolutionaries, for their part, had no choice but to win over Yüan

[061-006] Shih-k'ai for the sake of his troops, since they were not themselves

[061-007] strong enough to get rid of the Manchus, or even to wrest concessions

[061-008] from them, so long as the Manchus were defended by Yüan's army. Thus

[061-009] Yüan and the revolutionaries were forced into each other's arms. He then

[061-010] began negotiations with them, explaining to the imperial house that the

[061-011] dynasty could only be saved by concessions. The revolutionaries--apart

[061-012] from their desire to neutralize the prime minister and general, if not

[061-013] to bring him over to their side--were also readier than ever to

[061-014] negotiate, because they were short of money and unable to obtain loans

[061-015] from abroad, and because they could not themselves gain control of the

[061-016] individual governors. The negotiations, which had been carried on at

[061-017] Shanghai, were broken off on December 18th, 1911, because the

[061-018] revolutionaries demanded a republic, but the imperial house was only

[061-019] ready to grant a constitutional monarchy.

[061-020] Meanwhile the revolutionaries set up a provisional government at

[061-021] Nanking (December 29th, 1911), with Sun Yat-sen as president and Li

[061-022] Yüan-hung as vice-president. Yüan Shih-k'ai now declared to the imperial

[061-023] house that the monarchy could no longer be defended, as his troops were

[061-024] too unreliable, and he induced the Manchu government to issue an edict

[061-025] on February 12th, 1912, in which they renounced the throne of China and

[061-026] declared the Republic to be the constitutional form of state. The young

[061-027] emperor of the Hsüan-t'ung period, after the Japanese conquest of

[061-028] Manchuria in 1931, was installed there. He was, however, entirely

[061-029] without power during the melancholy years of his nominal rule, which

[061-030] lasted until 1945.

[061-031] In 1912 the Manchu dynasty came in reality to its end. On the news of

[061-032] the abdication of the imperial house, Sun Yat-sen resigned in Nanking,

[061-033] and recommended Yüan Shih-k'ai as president.

[061-034] Chapter Eleven

[061-035] THE REPUBLIC (1912-1948)

[061-036] 1 _Social and intellectual position_

[061-037] In order to understand the period that now followed, let us first

[061-038] consider the social and intellectual position in China in the period

[061-039] between 1911 and 1927. The Manchu dynasty was no longer there, nor were

[061-040] there any remaining real supporters of the old dynasty. The gentry,

[061-041] however, still existed. Alongside it was a still numerically small

[061-042] middle class, with little political education or enlightenment.

[061-043] The political interests of these two groups were obviously in conflict.

[061-044] But after 1912 there had been big changes. The gentry were largely in a

[061-045] process of decomposition. They still possessed the basis of their

[061-046] existence, their land, but the land was falling in value, as there were

[061-047] now other opportunities of capital investment, such as export-import,

[061-048] shareholding in foreign enterprises, or industrial undertakings. It is

[061-049] important to note, however, that there was not much fluid capital at

[061-050] their disposal. In addition to this, cheaper rice and other foodstuffs

[061-051] were streaming from abroad into China, bringing the prices for Chinese

[061-052] foodstuffs down to the world market prices, another painful business

[061-053] blow to the gentry. Silk had to meet the competition of Japanese silk

[061-054] and especially of rayon; the Chinese silk was of very unequal quality

[061-055] and sold with difficulty. On the other hand, through the influence of

[061-056] the Western capitalistic system, which was penetrating more and more

[061-057] into China, land itself became "capital", an object of speculation for

[061-058] people with capital; its value no longer depended entirely on the rents

[061-059] it could yield but, under certain circumstances, on quite other

[061-060] things--the construction of railways or public buildings, and so on.

[061-061] These changes impoverished and demoralized the gentry, who in the course

[061-062] of the past century had grown fewer in number. The gentry were not in a

[061-063] position to take part fully in the capitalist manipulations, because

[061-064] they had never possessed much capital; their wealth had lain entirely

[061-065] in their land, and the income from their rents was consumed quite

[061-066] unproductively in luxurious living.

[061-067] Moreover, the class solidarity of the gentry was dissolving. In the

[061-068] past, politics had been carried on by cliques of gentry families, with

[061-069] the emperor at their head as an unchangeable institution. This edifice

[061-070] had now lost its summit; the struggles between cliques still went on,

[061-071] but entirely without the control which the emperor's power had after all

[061-072] exercised, as a sort of regulative element in the play of forces among

[061-073] the gentry. The arena for this competition had been the court. After the

[061-074] destruction of the arena, the field of play lost its boundaries: the

[061-075] struggles between cliques no longer had a definite objective; the only

[061-076] objective left was the maintenance or securing of any and every hold on

[061-077] power. Under the new conditions cliques or individuals among the gentry

[061-078] could only ally themselves with the possessors of military power, the

[061-079] generals or governors. In this last stage the struggle between rival

[061-080] groups turned into a rivalry between individuals. Family ties began to

[061-081] weaken and other ties, such as between school mates, or origin from the

[061-082] same village or town, became more important than they had been before.

[061-083] For the securing of the aim in view any means were considered

[061-084] justifiable. Never was there such bribery and corruption among the

[061-085] officials as in the years after 1912. This period, until 1927, may

[061-086] therefore be described as a period of dissolution and destruction of the

[061-087] social system of the gentry.

[061-088] Over against this dying class of the gentry stood, broadly speaking, a

[061-089] tripartite opposition. To begin with, there was the new middle class,

[061-090] divided and without clear political ideas; anti-dynastic of course, but

[061-091] undecided especially as to the attitude it should adopt towards the

[061-092] peasants who, to this day, form over 80 per cent of the Chinese

[061-093] population. The middle class consisted mainly of traders and bankers,

[061-094] whose aim was the introduction of Western capitalism in association with

[061-095] foreign powers. There were also young students who were often the sons

[061-096] of old gentry families and had been sent abroad for study with grants

[061-097] given them by their friends and relatives in the government; or sons of

[061-098] businessmen sent away by their fathers. These students not always

[061-099] accepted the ideas of their fathers; they were influenced by the

[061-100] ideologies of the West, Marxist or non-Marxist, and often created clubs

[061-101] or groups in the University cities of Europe or the United States. Such

[061-102] groups of people who had studied together or passed the exams together,

[061-103] had already begun to play a role in politics in the nineteenth century.

[061-104] Now, the influence of such organizations of usually informal character

[061-105] increased. Against the returned students who often had difficulties in

[061-106] adjustment, stood the students at Chinese Universities, especially the

[061-107] National University in Peking (Peita). They represented people of the

[061-108] same origin, but of the lower strata of the gentry or of business; they

[061-109] were more nationalistic and politically active and often less influenced

[061-110] by Western ideologies.

[061-111] In the second place, there was a relatively very small genuine

[061-112] proletariat, the product of the first activities of big capitalists in

[061-113] China, found mainly in Shanghai. Thirdly and finally, there was a

[061-114] gigantic peasantry, uninterested in politics and uneducated, but ready

[061-115] to give unthinking allegiance to anyone who promised to make an end of

[061-116] the intolerable conditions in the matter of rents and taxes, conditions

[061-117] that were growing steadily worse with the decay of the gentry. These

[061-118] peasants were thinking of popular risings on the pattern of all the

[061-119] risings in the history of China--attacks on the towns and the killing of

[061-120] the hated landowners, officials, and moneylenders, that is to say of the

[061-121] gentry.

[061-122] Such was the picture of the middle class and those who were ready to

[061-123] support it, a group with widely divergent interests, held together only

[061-124] by its opposition to the gentry system and the monarchy. It could not

[061-125] but be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to achieve political

[061-126] success with such a group. Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925), the "Father of the

[061-127] Republic", accordingly laid down three stages of progress in his many

[061-128] works, of which the best-known are _San-min chu-i_, ("The Three

[061-129] Principles of the People"), and _Chien-kuo fang-lüeh_ ("Plans for the

[061-130] Building up of the Realm"). The three phases of development through

[061-131] which republican China was to pass were: the phase of struggle against

[061-132] the old system, the phase of educative rule, and the phase of truly

[061-133] democratic government. The phase of educative rule was to be a sort of

[061-134] authoritarian system with a democratic content, under which the people

[061-135] should be familiarized with democracy and enabled to grow politically

[061-136] ripe for true democracy.

[061-137] Difficult as was the internal situation from the social point of view,

[061-138] it was no less difficult in economic respects. China had recognized that

[061-139] she must at least adopt Western technical and industrial progress in

[061-140] order to continue to exist as an independent state. But the building up

[061-141] of industry demanded large sums of money. The existing Chinese banks

[061-142] were quite incapable of providing the capital needed; but the acceptance

[061-143] of capital from abroad led at once, every time, to further political

[061-144] capitulations. The gentry, who had no cash worth mention, were violently

[061-145] opposed to the capitalization of their properties, and were in favour of

[061-146] continuing as far as possible to work the soil in the old style. Quite

[061-147] apart from all this, all over the country there were generals who had

[061-148] come from the ranks of the gentry, and who collected the whole of the

[061-149] financial resources of their region for the support of their private

[061-150] armies. Investors had little confidence in the republican government so

[061-151] long as they could not tell whether the government would decide in

[061-152] favour of its right or of its left wing.

[061-153] No less complicated was the intellectual situation at this time.

[061-154] Confucianism, and the whole of the old culture and morality bound up

[061-155] with it, was unacceptable to the middle-class element. In the first

[061-156] place, Confucianism rejected the principle, required at least in theory

[061-157] by the middle class, of the equality of all people; secondly, the

[061-158] Confucian great-family system was irreconcilable with middle-class

[061-159] individualism, quite apart from the fact that the Confucian form of

[061-160] state could only be a monarchy. Every attempt to bolster up Confucianism

[061-161] in practice or theory was bound to fail and did fail. Even the gentry

[061-162] could scarcely offer any real defence of the Confucian system any

[061-163] longer. With Confucianism went the moral standards especially of the

[061-164] upper classes of society. Taoism was out of the question as a

[061-165] substitute, because of its anarchistic and egocentric character.

[061-166] Consequently, in these years, part of the gentry turned to Buddhism and

[061-167] part to Christianity. Some of the middle class who had come under

[061-168] European influence also turned to Christianity, regarding it as a part

[061-169] of the European civilization they had to adopt. Others adhered to modern

[061-170] philosophic systems such as pragmatism and positivism. Marxist doctrines

[061-171] spread rapidly.

[061-172] Education was secularized. Great efforts were made to develop modern

[061-173] schools, though the work of development was continually hindered by the

[061-174] incessant political unrest. Only at the universities, which became foci

[061-175] of republican and progressive opinion, was any positive achievement

[061-176] possible. Many students and professors were active in politics,

[061-177] organizing demonstrations and strikes. They pursued a strong national

[061-178] policy, often also socialistic. At the same time real scientific work

[061-179] was done; many young scholars of outstanding ability were trained at the

[061-180] Chinese universities, often better than the students who went abroad.

[061-181] There is a permanent disagreement between these two groups of young men

[061-182] with a modern education: the students who return from abroad claim to be

[061-183] better educated, but in reality they often have only a very superficial

[061-184] knowledge of things modern and none at all of China, her history, and

[061-185] her special circumstances. The students of the Chinese universities have

[061-186] been much better instructed in all the things that concern China, and

[061-187] most of them are in no way behind the returned students in the modern

[061-188] sciences. They are therefore a much more serviceable element.

## c62.xhtml
