---
description: "Chapter 62 of A History of China"
id: ch62
label: "Section 62"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 62

[062-001] The intellectual modernization of China goes under the name of the

[062-002] "Movement of May Fourth", because on May 4th, 1919, students of the

[062-003] National University in Peking demonstrated against the government and

[062-004] their pro-Japanese adherents. When the police attacked the students and

[062-005] jailed some, more demonstrations and student strikes and finally a

[062-006] general boycott of Japanese imports were the consequence. In these

[062-007] protest actions, professors such as Ts'ai Yüan-p'ei, later president of

[062-008] the Academia Sinica (died 1940), took an active part. The forces which

[062-009] had now been mobilized, rallied around the journal "New Youth" (_Hsin

[062-010] Ch'ing-nien_), created in 1915 by Ch'en Tu-hsiu. The journal was

[062-011] progressive, against the monarchy, Confucius, and the old traditions.

[062-012] Ch'en Tu-hsiu who put himself strongly behind the students, was more

[062-013] radical than other contributors but at first favoured Western democracy

[062-014] and Western science; he was influenced mainly by John Dewey who was

[062-015] guest professor in Peking in 1919-20. Similarly tending towards

[062-016] liberalism in politics and Dewey's ideas in the field of philosophy were

[062-017] others, mainly Hu Shih. Finally, some reformers criticized

[062-018] conservatism purely on the basis of Chinese thought. Hu Shih (born

[062-019] 1892) gained greatest acclaim by his proposal for a "literary

[062-020] revolution", published in the "New Youth" in 1917. This revolution was

[062-021] the logically necessary application of the political revolution to the

[062-022] field of education. The new "vernacular" took place of the old

[062-023] "classical" literary language. The language of the classical works is so

[062-024] remote from the language of daily life that no uneducated person can

[062-025] understand it. A command of it requires a full knowledge of all the

[062-026] ancient literature, entailing decades of study. The gentry had

[062-027] elaborated this style of speech for themselves and their dependants; it

[062-028] was their monopoly; nobody who did not belong to the gentry and had not

[062-029] attended its schools could take part in literary or in administrative

[062-030] life. The literary revolution introduced the language of daily life, the

[062-031] language of the people, into literature: newspapers, novels, scientific

[062-032] treatises, translations, appeared in the vernacular, and could thus be

[062-033] understood by anyone who could read and write, even if he had no

[062-034] Confucianist education.

[062-035] It may be said that the literary revolution has achieved its main

[062-036] objects. As a consequence of it, a great quantity of new literature has

[062-037] been published. Not only is every important new book that appears in the

[062-038] West published in translation within a few months, but modern novels and

[062-039] short stories and poems have been written, some of them of high literary

[062-040] value.

[062-041] At the same time as this revolution there took place another fundamental

[062-042] change in the language. It was necessary to take over a vast number of

[062-043] new scientific and technical terms. As Chinese, owing to the character

[062-044] of its script, is unable to write foreign words accurately and can do no

[062-045] more than provide a rather rough paraphrase, the practice was started of

[062-046] expressing new ideas by newly formed native words. Thus modern Chinese

[062-047] has very few foreign words, and yet it has all the new ideas. For

[062-048] example, a telegram is a "lightning-letter"; a wireless telegram is a

[062-049] "not-have-wire-lightning-communication"; a fountain-pen is a

[062-050] "self-flow-ink-water-brush"; a typewriter is a "strike-letter-machine".

[062-051] Most of these neologisms are similar in the modern languages of China

[062-052] and Japan.

[062-053] There had been several proposals in recent decades to do away with the

[062-054] Chinese characters and to introduce an alphabet in their place. They

[062-055] have all proved to be unsatisfactory so far, because the character of

[062-056] the Chinese language, as it is at this moment, is unsuited to an

[062-057] alphabetical script. They would also destroy China's cultural unity:

[062-058] there are many dialects in China that differ so greatly from each other

[062-059] that, for instance, a man from Canton cannot understand a man from

[062-060] Shanghai. If Chinese were written with letters, the result would be a

[062-061] Canton literature and another literature confined to Shanghai, and China

[062-062] would break up into a number of areas with different languages. The old

[062-063] Chinese writing is independent of pronunciation. A Cantonese and a

[062-064] Pekinger can read each other's newspapers without difficulty. They

[062-065] pronounce the words quite differently, but the meaning is unaltered.

[062-066] Even a Japanese can understand a Chinese newspaper without special study

[062-067] of Chinese, and a Chinese with a little preparation can read a Japanese

[062-068] newspaper without understanding a single word of Japanese.

[062-069] The aim of modern education in China is to work towards the

[062-070] establishment of "High Chinese", the former official (Mandarin)

[062-071] language, throughout the country, and to set limits to the use of the

[062-072] various dialects. Once this has been done, it will be possible to

[062-073] proceed to a radical reform of the script without running the risk of

[062-074] political separatist movements, which are always liable to spring up,

[062-075] and also without leading, through the adoption of various dialects as

[062-076] the basis of separate literatures, to the break-up of China's cultural

[062-077] unity. In the last years, the unification of the spoken language has

[062-078] made great progress. Yet, alphabetic script is used only in cases in

[062-079] which illiterate adults have to be enabled in a short time to read very

[062-080] simple informations. More attention is given to a simplification of the

[062-081] script as it is; Japanese had started this some forty years earlier.

[062-082] Unfortunately, the new Chinese abbreviated forms of characters are not

[062-083] always identical with long-established Japanese forms, and are not

[062-084] developed in such a systematic form as would make learning of Chinese

[062-085] characters easier.

[062-086] 2 _First period of the Republic: The warlords_

[062-087] The situation of the Republic after its foundation was far from hopeful.

[062-088] Republican feeling existed only among the very small groups of students

[062-089] who had modern education, and a few traders, in other words, among the

[062-090] "middle class". And even in the revolutionary party to which these

[062-091] groups belonged there were the most various conceptions of the form of

[062-092] republican state to be aimed at. The left wing of the party, mainly

[062-093] intellectuals and manual workers, had in view more or less vague

[062-094] socialistic institutions; the liberals, for instance the traders,

[062-095] thought of a liberal democracy, more or less on the American pattern;

[062-096] and the nationalists merely wanted the removal of the alien Manchu rule.

[062-097] The three groups had come together for the practical reason that only so

[062-098] could they get rid of the dynasty. They gave unreserved allegiance to

[062-099] Sun Yat-sen as their leader. He succeeded in mobilizing the enthusiasm

[062-100] of continually widening circles for action, not only by the integrity of

[062-101] his aims but also because he was able to present the new socialistic

[062-102] ideology in an alluring form. The anti-republican gentry, however, whose

[062-103] power was not yet entirely broken, took a stand against the party. The

[062-104] generals who had gone over to the republicans had not the slightest

[062-105] intention of founding a republic, but only wanted to get rid of the rule

[062-106] of the Manchus and to step into their place. This was true also of Yüan

[062-107] Shih-k'ai, who in his heart was entirely on the side of the gentry,

[062-108] although the European press especially had always energetically defended

[062-109] him. In character and capacity he stood far above the other generals,

[062-110] but he was no republican.

[062-111] Thus the first period of the Republic, until 1927, was marked by

[062-112] incessant attempts by individual generals to make themselves

[062-113] independent. The Government could not depend on its soldiers, and so was

[062-114] impotent. The first risings of military units began at the outset of

[062-115] 1912\. The governors and generals who wanted to make themselves

[062-116] independent sabotaged every decree of the central government; especially

[062-117] they sent it no money from the provinces and also refused to give their

[062-118] assent to foreign loans. The province of Canton, the actual birthplace

[062-119] of the republican movement and the focus of radicalism, declared itself

[062-120] in 1912 an independent republic.

[062-121] Within the Peking government matters soon came to a climax. Yüan

[062-122] Shih-k'ai and his supporters represented the conservative view, with the

[062-123] unexpressed but obvious aim of setting up a new imperial house and

[062-124] continuing the old gentry system. Most of the members of the parliament

[062-125] came, however, from the middle class and were opposed to any reaction of

[062-126] this sort. One of their leaders was murdered, and the blame was thrown

[062-127] upon Yüan Shih-k'ai; there then came, in the middle of 1912, a new

[062-128] revolution, in which the radicals made themselves independent and tried

[062-129] to gain control of South China. But Yüan Shih-k'ai commanded better

[062-130] troops and won the day. At the end of October 1912 he was elected,

[062-131] against the opposition, as president of China, and the new state was

[062-132] recognized by foreign countries.

[062-133] China's internal difficulties reacted on the border states, in which the

[062-134] European powers were keenly interested. The powers considered that the

[062-135] time had come to begin the definitive partition of China. Thus there

[062-136] were long negotiations and also hostilities between China and Tibet,

[062-137] which was supported by Great Britain. The British demanded the complete

[062-138] separation of Tibet from China, but the Chinese rejected this (1912);

[062-139] the rejection was supported by a boycott of British goods. In the end

[062-140] the Tibet question was left undecided. Tibet remained until recent years

[062-141] a Chinese dependency with a good deal of internal freedom. The Second

[062-142] World War and the Chinese retreat into the interior brought many Chinese

[062-143] settlers into Eastern Tibet which was then separated from Tibet proper

[062-144] and made a Chinese province (Hsi-k'ang) in which the native Khamba will

[062-145] soon be a minority. The communist regime soon after its establishment

[062-146] conquered Tibet (1950) and has tried to change the character of its

[062-147] society and its system of government which lead to the unsuccessful

[062-148] attempt of the Tibetans to throw off Chinese rule (1959) and the flight

[062-149] of the Dalai Lama to India. The construction of highways, air and

[062-150] missile bases and military occupation have thus tied Tibet closer to

[062-151] China than ever since early Manchu times.

[062-152] In Outer Mongolia Russian interests predominated. In 1911 there were

[062-153] diplomatic incidents in connection with the Mongolian question. At the

[062-154] end of 1911 the Hutuktu of Urga declared himself independent, and the

[062-155] Chinese were expelled from the country. A secret treaty was concluded in

[062-156] 1912 with Russia, under which Russia recognized the independence of

[062-157] Outer Mongolia, but was accorded an important part as adviser and helper

[062-158] in the development of the country. In 1913 a Russo-Chinese treaty was

[062-159] concluded, under which the autonomy of Outer Mongolia was recognized,

[062-160] but Mongolia became a part of the Chinese realm. After the Russian

[062-161] revolution had begun, revolution was carried also into Mongolia. The

[062-162] country suffered all the horrors of the struggles between White Russians

[062-163] (General Ungern-Sternberg) and the Reds; there were also Chinese

[062-164] attempts at intervention, though without success, until in the end

[062-165] Mongolia became a Soviet Republic. As such she is closely associated

[062-166] with Soviet Russia. China, however, did not quickly recognize Mongolia's

[062-167] independence, and in his work _China's Destiny_ (1944) Chiang Kai-shek

[062-168] insisted that China's aim remained the recovery of the frontiers of

[062-169] 1840, which means among other things the recovery of Outer Mongolia. In

[062-170] spite of this, after the Second World War Chiang Kai-shek had to

[062-171] renounce _de jure_ all rights in Outer Mongolia. Inner Mongolia was

[062-172] always united to China much more closely; only for a time during the war

[062-173] with Japan did the Japanese maintain there a puppet government. The

[062-174] disappearance of this government went almost unnoticed.

[062-175] At the time when Russian penetration into Mongolia began, Japan had

[062-176] entered upon a similar course in Manchuria, which she regarded as her

[062-177] "sphere of influence". On the outbreak of the first world war Japan

[062-178] occupied the former German-leased territory of Tsingtao, at the

[062-179] extremity of the province of Shantung, and from that point she occupied

[062-180] the railways of the province. Her plan was to make the whole province a

[062-181] protectorate; Shantung is rich in coal and especially in metals. Japan's

[062-182] plans were revealed in the notorious "Twenty-one Demands" (1915).

[062-183] Against the furious opposition especially of the students of Peking,

[062-184] Yüan Shih-k'ai's government accepted the greater part of these demands.

[062-185] In negotiations with Great Britain, in which Japan took advantage of the

[062-186] British commitments in Europe, Japan had to be conceded the predominant

[062-187] position in the Far East.

## c63.xhtml
