---
description: "Chapter 65 of A History of China"
id: ch65
label: "Section 65"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 65

[065-001] In the meantime, Mao Tse-tung had given up his studies in Peking and had

[065-002] returned to his home in Hunan. Here, he organized his countrymen, the

[065-003] farmers of Hunan. It is said that at the verge of the northern

[065-004] expedition of Chiang Kai-shek, Mao's adherents in Hunan already numbered

[065-005] in the millions; this made the quick and smooth advance of the

[065-006] communist-advised armies of Chiang Kai-shek possible. Mao developed his

[065-007] ideas in written form in 1927; he showed that communism in China could

[065-008] be successful only if it was based upon farmers. Because of this

[065-009] unorthodox attitude, he was for years severely attacked as a

[065-010] deviationist.

[065-011] When Chiang Kai-shek separated from the KMT in 1927, the main body of

[065-012] the KMT remained in Hankow as the legal government. But now, while

[065-013] Chiang Kai-shek executed all leftists, union leaders, and communists who

[065-014] fell into his hands, tensions in Hankow increased between the Chinese

[065-015] Communist Party and the rest of the KMT. Finally, the KMT turned against

[065-016] the communists and reunited with Chiang Kai-shek. The remaining

[065-017] communists retreated to the Hunan-Kiangsi border area, the centre of

[065-018] Mao's activities; even the orthodox communist wing, which had condemned

[065-019] Mao, now had to come to him for protection from the KMT. A small

[065-020] communist state began to develop in Kiangsi, in spite of pressure and,

[065-021] later, attacks of the KMT against them. By 1934, this pressure became so

[065-022] strong that Kiangsi had to be abandoned, and in the epic "Long March"

[065-023] the rest of the communists and their army fought their way through all

[065-024] of western and north-western China into the sparsely inhabited,

[065-025] underdeveloped northern part of Shensi, where a new socialistic state

[065-026] was created with Yen-an as its capital.

[065-027] After the fall of the communist enclave in Kiangsi, the prospects for

[065-028] the Nationalist regime were bright; indeed, the unification of China was

[065-029] almost achieved. At this moment a new Japanese invasion threatened and

[065-030] demanded the full attention of the regime. Thus, in spite of talk about

[065-031] land reform and other reforms which might have led to a liberalization

[065-032] of the government, no attention was given to internal and social

[065-033] problems except to the suppression of communist thought. Although all

[065-034] leftist publications were prohibited, most historians and sociologists

[065-035] succeeded in writing Marxist books without using Marxist terminology, so

[065-036] that they escaped Chiang's censors. These publications contributed

[065-037] greatly to preparing China's intellectuals and youth for communism.

[065-038] When the Japanese War began, the communists in Yen-an and the

[065-039] Nationalists under Chiang Kai-shek agreed to co-operate against the

[065-040] invaders. Yet, each side remembered its experiences in 1927 and

[065-041] distrusted the other. Chiang's resistance against the invaders became

[065-042] less effective after the Japanese occupied all of China's ports;

[065-043] supplies could reach China only in small quantities by airlift or via

[065-044] the Burma Road. There was also the belief that Japan could be defeated

[065-045] only by an attack on Japan itself and that this would have to be

[065-046] undertaken by the Western powers, not by China. The communists, on their

[065-047] side, set up a guerrilla organization behind the Japanese lines, so

[065-048] that, although the Japanese controlled the cities and the lines of

[065-049] communication, they had little control over the countryside. The

[065-050] communists also attempted to infiltrate the area held by the

[065-051] Nationalists, who in turn were interested in preventing the communists

[065-052] from becoming too strong; so, Nationalist troops guarded also the

[065-053] borders of communist territory.

[065-054] American politicians and military advisers were divided in their

[065-055] opinions. Although they recognized the internal weakness of the

[065-056] Nationalist government, the fighting between cliques within the

[065-057] government, and the ever-increasing corruption, some advocated more help

[065-058] to the Nationalists and a firm attitude against the communists. Others,

[065-059] influenced by impressions gained during visits to Yen-an, and believing

[065-060] in the possibility of honest co-operation between a communist regime and

[065-061] any other, as Roosevelt did, attempted to effect a coalition of the

[065-062] Nationalists with the communists.

[065-063] At the end of the war, when the Nationalist government took over the

[065-064] administration, it lacked popular support in the areas liberated from

[065-065] the Japanese. Farmers who had been given land by the communists, or who

[065-066] had been promised it, were afraid that their former landlords, whether

[065-067] they had remained to collaborate with the Japanese or had fled to West

[065-068] China, would regain control of the land. Workers hoped for new social

[065-069] legislation and rights. Businessmen and industrialists were faced with

[065-070] destroyed factories, worn-out or antiquated equipment, and an unchecked

[065-071] inflation which induced them to shift their accounts into foreign banks

[065-072] or to favour short-term gains rather than long-term investments. As in

[065-073] all countries which have suffered from a long war and an occupation,

[065-074] the youth believed that the old regime had been to blame, and saw

[065-075] promise and hope on the political left. And, finally, the Nationalist

[065-076] soldiers, most of whom had been separated for years from their homes and

[065-077] families, were not willing to fight other Chinese in the civil war now

[065-078] well under way; they wanted to go home and start a new life. The

[065-079] communists, however, were now well organized militarily and well

[065-080] equipped with arms surrendered by the Japanese to the Soviet armies as

[065-081] well as with arms and ammunition sold to them by KMT soldiers; moreover,

[065-082] they were constantly strengthened by deserters from the KMT. The civil

[065-083] war witnessed a steady retreat by the KMT armies, which resisted only

[065-084] sporadically. By the end of 1948, most of mainland China was in the

[065-085] hands of the communists, who established their new capital in Peking.

[065-086] 2 _Nationalist China in Taiwan_

[065-087] The Nationalist government retreated to Taiwan with those soldiers who

[065-088] remained loyal. This island was returned to China after the defeat of

[065-089] Japan, though final disposition of its status had not yet been

[065-090] determined.

[065-091] Taiwan's original population had been made up of more than a dozen

[065-092] tribes who are probably distant relatives of tribes in the Philippines.

[065-093] These are Taiwan's "aborigines," altogether about 200,000 people in

[065-094] 1948.

[065-095] At about the time of the Sung dynasty, Chinese began to establish

[065-096] outposts on the island; these developed into regular agricultural

[065-097] settlements toward the end of the Ming dynasty. Immigration increased in

[065-098] the eighteenth and especially the nineteenth centuries. These Chinese

[065-099] immigrants and their descendants are the "Taiwanese," Taiwan's main

[065-100] population of about eight million people as of 1948.

[065-101] Taiwan was at first a part of the province of Fukien, whence most of its

[065-102] Chinese settlers came; there was also a minority of Hakka, Chinese from

[065-103] Kuangtung province. When Taiwan was ceded to Japan, it was still a

[065-104] colonial area with much lawlessness and disorder, but with a number of

[065-105] flourishing towns and a growing population. The Japanese, who sent

[065-106] administrators but no settlers, established law and order, protected the

[065-107] aborigines from land-hungry Chinese settlers, and attempted to abolish

[065-108] headhunting by the aborigines and to raise the cultural level in

[065-109] general. They built a road and railway system and strongly stressed the

[065-110] production of sugar cane and rice. During the Second World War, the

[065-111] island suffered from air attacks and from the inability of the Japanese

[065-112] to protect its industries.

[065-113] After Chiang Kai-shek and the remainder of his army and of his

[065-114] government officials arrived in Taiwan, they were followed by others

[065-115] fleeing from the communist regime, mainly from Chekiang, Kiangsu, and

[065-116] the northern provinces of the mainland. Eventually, there were on Taiwan

[065-117] about two million of these "mainlanders," as they have sometimes been

[065-118] called.

[065-119] When the Chinese Nationalists took over from the Japanese, they assumed

[065-120] all the leading positions in the government. The Taiwanese nationals who

[065-121] had opposed the Japanese were disappointed; for their part, the

[065-122] Nationalists felt threatened because of their minority position. The

[065-123] next years, especially up to 1952, were characterized by terror and

[065-124] bloodshed. Tensions persisted for many years, but have lessened since

[065-125] about 1960.

[065-126] The new government of Taiwan resembled China's pre-war government under

[065-127] Chiang Kai-shek. First, to maintain his claim to the legitimate rule of

[065-128] all of China, Chiang retained--and controlled through his party, the

[065-129] KMT--his former government organization, complete with cabinet

[065-130] ministers, administrators, and elected parliament, under the name

[065-131] "Central Government of China." Secondly, the actual government of

[065-132] Taiwan, which he considered one of China's provinces, was organized as

[065-133] the "Provincial Government of Taiwan," whose leading positions were at

[065-134] first in the hands of KMT mainlanders. There have since been elections

[065-135] for the provincial assembly, for local government councils and boards,

[065-136] and for various provincial and local positions. Thirdly, the military

[065-137] forces were organized under the leadership and command of mainlanders.

[065-138] And finally, the education system was set up in accordance with former

[065-139] mainland practices by mainland specialists. However, evolutionary

[065-140] changes soon occurred.

[065-141] The government's aim was to make Mandarin Chinese the language of all

[065-142] Chinese in Taiwan, as it had been in mainland China long before the War,

[065-143] and to weaken the Taiwanese dialects. Soon almost every child had a

[065-144] minimum of six years of education (increased in 1968 to nine years),

[065-145] with Mandarin Chinese as the medium of instruction. In the beginning few

[065-146] Taiwanese qualified as teachers because, under Japanese rule, Japanese

[065-147] had been the medium of instruction. As the children of Taiwanese and

[065-148] mainland families went to school together, the Taiwanese children

[065-149] quickly learned Mandarin, while most mainland children became familiar

[065-150] with the Taiwan dialect. For the generation in school today, the

[065-151] difference between mainlander and Taiwanese has lost its importance. At

[065-152] the same time, more teachers of Taiwanese origin, but with modern

[065-153] training, have begun to fill first the ranks of elementary, later of

[065-154] high-school, and now even of university instructors, so that the end of

[065-155] mainland predominance in the educational system is foreseeable.

[065-156] The country is still ruled by the KMT, but although at first hardly any

[065-157] Taiwanese belonged to the Party, many of the elective jobs and almost

[065-158] all positions in the provincial government are at present (1969) in the

[065-159] hands of Taiwanese independents, or KMT members, more of whom are

[065-160] entering the central government as well. Because military service is

[065-161] compulsory, the majority of common soldiers are Taiwanese: as career

[065-162] officers grow older and their sons show little interest in an army

[065-163] career, more Taiwan-Chinese are occupying higher army positions. Foreign

[065-164] policy and major political decisions still lie in the hands of mainland

[065-165] Chinese, but economic power, once monopolized by them, is now held by

[065-166] Taiwan-Chinese.

[065-167] This shift gained impetus with the end of American economic aid, which

[065-168] had tied local businessmen to American industry and thus worked to the

[065-169] advantage of mainland Chinese, for these had contacts in the United

[065-170] States, whereas the Taiwan-Chinese had contacts only in Japan. After the

[065-171] termination of American economic aid, Taiwanese trade with Japan, the

[065-172] Philippines, and Korea grew in importance and with it the economic

[065-173] strength of Taiwan-Chinese businessmen. After 1964, Taiwan became a

[065-174] strong competitor of Hong Kong and Japan in some export industries, such

[065-175] as electronics and textiles. We can regard Taiwan from 1964 on as

[065-176] occupying the "takeoff" stage, to use Rostow's terminology--a stage of

[065-177] rapid development of new, principally light and consumer, industries.

[065-178] There has been a rapid rise of industrial towns around the major cities,

[065-179] and there are already many factories in the countryside, even in some

[065-180] villages. Electrification is essentially completed, and heavy

[065-181] industries, such as fertilizer and assembly plants and oil refineries,

[065-182] now exist.

[065-183] This rapid industrialization was accompanied by an unusually fast

[065-184] development of agriculture. A land-reform program limited land

[065-185] ownership, reduced rents, and redistributed formerly Japanese-owned

[065-186] land. This was the program that the Nationalist government had attempted

[065-187] unsuccessfully to enforce in liberated China after the Pacific War. It

[065-188] is well known that the abolition of landlordism and the distribution of

[065-189] land to small farmers do not in themselves improve or enlarge

[065-190] production. The Joint Council on Rural Reconstruction, on which American

[065-191] advisers worked with Chinese specialists to devise a system comparable

[065-192] to American agricultural extension services but possessing added

[065-193] elements of community development, introduced better seeds, more and

[065-194] better fertilizers, and numerous other innovations which the farmers

[065-195] quickly adopted, with the result that the island became

[065-196] self-supporting, in spite of a steadily growing population (thirteen

[065-197] million in 1968).

## c66.xhtml
