---
description: "Chapter 66 of A History of China"
id: ch66
label: "Section 66"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 66

[066-001] At the same time, the government succeeded in stabilizing the currency

[066-002] and in eliminating corruption, thus re-establishing public confidence

[066-003] and security. Good incomes from farming as well as from industries were

[066-004] invested on the island instead of flowing into foreign banks. In

[066-005] addition, the population had enough surplus money to buy the products of

[066-006] the new domestic industries as these appeared. Thus, the

[066-007] industrialization of Taiwan may be called "industrialization without

[066-008] tears," without the suffering, that is, of proletarian masses who

[066-009] produce objects which they cannot afford for themselves. Today, even

[066-010] lower middle-class families have television consoles which cost the

[066-011] equivalent of US $200; they own electric fans and radios; they are

[066-012] buying Taiwan-produced refrigerators and air conditioners; and more and

[066-013] more think of buying Taiwan-assembled cars. They encourage their

[066-014] children to finish high school and to attend college if at all possible;

[066-015] competition for admission is very strong in spite of the continuous

[066-016] building of new schools and universities. Education to the level of the

[066-017] B.A. is of good quality, but for most graduate study students are still

[066-018] sent abroad. Taiwan complains about the "brain drain," as about 93 per

[066-019] cent of its students who go overseas do not return, but in many fields

[066-020] it has sufficient trained manpower to continue its development, and in

[066-021] any case there would not be enough jobs available if all the students

[066-022] returned. Most of these expatriates would be available to develop

[066-023] mainland China, if conditions there were to change in a way that would

[066-024] make them compatible with the values with which these expatriates grew

[066-025] up on Taiwan, or with the Western democratic values which they absorbed

[066-026] abroad.

[066-027] Chiang Kai-shek's government still hopes that one day its people will

[066-028] return to the mainland. This hope has changed from hope of victory in a

[066-029] civil war to hope of revolutionary developments within Communist China

[066-030] which might lead to the creation of a more liberal government in which

[066-031] men with KMT loyalties could find a place. Because they are Chinese, the

[066-032] present government and, it is believed, the majority of the people,

[066-033] consider themselves a part of China from which they are temporarily

[066-034] separated. Therefore they reject the idea, proposed by some American

[066-035] politicians, that Taiwan should become an independent state. There are,

[066-036] mainly in the United States and Japan, groups of Taiwan-Chinese who

[066-037] favour an independent Taiwan, which naturally would be close to Japan

[066-038] politically and economically. One may agree with their belief that

[066-039] Taiwan, now larger than many European countries, could exist and

[066-040] flourish as an independent country; yet few Chinese will wish to divorce

[066-041] themselves from the world's largest society.

[066-042] 3 _Communist China_

[066-043] Both Taiwan and mainland China have developed extremely quickly. The

[066-044] reasons do not seem to lie solely in the form of government, for the

[066-045] pre-conditions for a "takeoff" existed in China as early as the 1920's,

[066-046] if not earlier. That is, the quick development of China could have

[066-047] started forty years ago but was prevented, primarily for political

[066-048] reasons. One of the main pre-conditions for quick development is that a

[066-049] large part of the population is inured to hard and repetitive work. The

[066-050] Chinese farmer was accustomed to such work; he put more time and energy

[066-051] into his land than any other farmer. He and his fellows were the

[066-052] industrial workers of the future: reliable, hard-working, tractable,

[066-053] intelligent. To train them was easy, and absenteeism was never a serious

[066-054] problem, as it is in other developing nations. Another pre-condition is

[066-055] the existence of sufficient trained people to manage industry. Forty

[066-056] years ago China had enough such men to start modernization; foreign

[066-057] assistance would have been necessary in some fields, but only briefly.

[066-058] Another requirement (at least in the period before radio and television)

[066-059] is general literacy. Meaningful statistical data on literacy in China

[066-060] before 1937 are lacking. Some authors remark that before 1800 probably

[066-061] all upper-class sons and most daughters were educated, and that men in

[066-062] the middle and even in the lower classes often had some degree of

[066-063] literacy. In this context "educated" means that these persons could read

[066-064] classical poetry and essays written in literary Chinese, which was not

[066-065] the language of daily conversation. "Literacy," however, might mean only

[066-066] that a person could read and write some 600 characters, enough to

[066-067] conduct a business and to read simple stories. Although newspapers today

[066-068] have a stock of about 6,000 characters, only some 600 characters are

[066-069] commonly used, and a farmer or worker can manage well with a knowledge

[066-070] of about 100 characters. Statements to the effect that in 1935 some 70

[066-071] per cent of all men and 95 per cent of all women were illiterate must

[066-072] include the last category in these figures. In any case, the literacy

[066-073] program of the Nationalist government had penetrated the countryside and

[066-074] had reached even outlying villages before the Pacific War.

[066-075] The transportation system in China before the war was not highly

[066-076] developed, but numerous railroads connecting the main industrial centers

[066-077] did exist, and bus and truck services connected small towns with the

[066-078] larger centers. What were missing in the pre-war years were laws to

[066-079] protect the investor, efficient credit facilities, an insurance system

[066-080] supported by law, and a modern tax structure. In addition, the monetary

[066-081] system was inflation-prone. Although sufficient capital probably could

[066-082] have been mobilized within the country, the available resources either

[066-083] went into foreign banks or were invested in enterprises providing a

[066-084] quick return.

[066-085] The failure to capitalize on existing means of development before the

[066-086] War resulted from the chronic unrest caused by warlordism,

[066-087] revolutionaries and foreign invaders, which occupied the energies of the

[066-088] Nationalist government from its establishment to its fall. Once a stable

[066-089] government free from internal troubles arose, national development,

[066-090] whether private or socialist, could proceed at a rapid pace.

[066-091] Thus, the development of Communist China is not a miracle, possible only

[066-092] because of its form of government. What is unusual about Communist China

[066-093] is the fact that it is the only nation possessing a highly developed

[066-094] culture of its own to have jettisoned it in favour of a foreign one. What

[066-095] missionaries had dreamed of for centuries and knew they would never

[066-096] accomplish, Mao Tse-tung achieved; he imposed an ideology created by

[066-097] Europeans and understandable only in the context of Central Europe in

[066-098] the nineteenth century. How long his success will last is uncertain. One

[066-099] school of analysts believes that the friction between Soviet Russia and

[066-100] Communist China indicates that China's communism has become Chinese.

[066-101] These men point out that Communist Chinese practices are often direct

[066-102] continuations of earlier Chinese practices, customs, and attitudes. And

[066-103] they predict that this trend will continue, resulting in a form of

[066-104] socialism or communism distinctly different from that found in any other

[066-105] country. Another school, however, believes that communism precedes

[066-106] "Sinism," and that the regime will slowly eliminate traits which once

[066-107] were typical of China and replace them with institutions developed out

[066-108] of Marxist thinking. In any case, for the present, although the

[066-109] Communist government's aim is to impose communist thought and

[066-110] institutions in the country, typically Chinese traits are still

[066-111] omnipresent.

[066-112] Soon after the establishment of the Peking regime, a pact of friendship

[066-113] and alliance with the Soviet Union was concluded (February 1950), and

[066-114] Soviet specialists and civil and military products poured into China to

[066-115] speed its development. China had to pay for this assistance as well as

[066-116] for the loans it received from Russia, but the application of Russian

[066-117] experience, often involving the duplication of whole factories, was

[066-118] successful. In a few years, China developed its heavy industry, just as

[066-119] Russia had done. It should not be forgotten that Manchuria, as well as

[066-120] other parts of China, had modern heavy industries long before 1949. The

[066-121] Manchurian factories ceased production because, when the Russians

[066-122] invaded Manchuria at the end of the war, they removed the machinery to

[066-123] Russia.

[066-124] Russian aid to Communist China continued to 1960. Its termination slowed

[066-125] development briefly but was not disastrous. Russian assistance was a

[066-126] "shot in the arm," as stimulating and about as lasting as American aid

[066-127] to Taiwan or to European countries. The stress laid upon heavy industry,

[066-128] in imitation of Russia, increased China's military strength quickly, but

[066-129] the consumer had to wait for goods which would make his life more

[066-130] enjoyable. One cause of friction in China today concerns the relative

[066-131] desirability of heavy industry versus consumer industry, a problem which

[066-132] arose in Russia after the death of Stalin.

[066-133] China's military strength was first demonstrated in the Korean War when

[066-134] Chinese armies entered Korea (October 1950). Their successes contributed

[066-135] to the prestige of the Peking regime at home and abroad, but they also

[066-136] foreshadowed a conflict with Soviet Russia, which regarded North Korea

[066-137] as lying within its own sphere of influence.

[066-138] In the same year, China invaded and conquered Tibet. Tibet, under Manchu

[066-139] rule until 1911, had achieved a certain degree of independence

[066-140] thereafter: no republican Chinese regime ever ruled Lhasa. The military

[066-141] conquest of Tibet is regarded by many as an act of Chinese imperialism,

[066-142] or colonialism, as the Tibetans certainly did not want to belong to

[066-143] China or be forced to change their traditional form of government.

[066-144] Having regarded themselves as subjects of the Manchu but not of the

[066-145] Chinese, they rose against the communist rulers in March 1959, but

[066-146] without success.

[066-147] Chinese control of Tibet, involving the construction of numerous roads,

[066-148] airstrips, and military installations, as well as differences concerning

[066-149] the international border, led in 1959 to conflicts with India, a country

[066-150] which had previously sided with the new China in international affairs.

[066-151] Indeed, the borders were uncertain and looked different depending on

[066-152] whether one used Manchu or Indian maps. China's other border problem was

[066-153] with Burma. Early in 1960 the two countries concluded a border agreement

[066-154] which ended disputes dating from British colonial times.

[066-155] Very early in its existence Communist China assumed control of Sinkiang,

[066-156] Chinese Central Asia, a large area originally inhabited by Turkish and

[066-157] Mongolian tribes and states, later conquered by the Manchu, and then

[066-158] integrated into China in the early nineteenth century. The communist

[066-159] action was to be expected, although after the Revolution of 1911 Chinese

[066-160] rule over this area had been spotty, and during the Pacific War some

[066-161] Soviet-inspired hope had existed that Sinkiang might gain independence,

[066-162] following the example of Outer Mongolia, another country which had been

[066-163] attached to the Manchu until 1911 and which, with Russian assistance,

[066-164] had gained its independence from China. Sinkiang is of great importance

[066-165] to Communist China as the site of large sources of oil and of atomic

[066-166] industries and testing grounds. The government has stimulated and often

[066-167] forced Chinese immigration into Sinkiang, so that the erstwhile Turkish

[066-168] and Mongolian majorities have become minorities, envious of their ethnic

[066-169] brothers in Soviet Central Asia who enjoy a much higher standard of

[066-170] living and more freedom.

[066-171] Inner Mongolia had a brief dream of independence under Japanese

[066-172] protection during the war. But the majority of the population were

[066-173] Chinese, and already before the Pacific War, the country had been

[066-174] divided into three Chinese provinces, of which the Chinese Communists

[066-175] gained control without delay.

[066-176] In general, when the Chinese Communists discuss territorial claims, they

[066-177] appear to seek the restoration of borders that China claimed in the

[066-178] eighteenth century. Thus, they make occasional remarks about the Hi area

[066-179] and parts of Eastern Siberia, which the Manchu either lost to the

[066-180] Russians or claimed as their territory. North Vietnam is probably aware

[066-181] that Imperial China exercised political rights over Tongking and Annam

[066-182] (the present-day North and part of South Vietnam). And, treaty or no,

[066-183] the Sino-Burmese question may be reopened one day, for Burma was

[066-184] semi-dependent on China under the Manchu.

[066-185] The build-up of heavy industry enabled China to conduct an aggressive

[066-186] policy towards the countries surrounding her, but industrialization had

[066-187] to be paid for, and, as in other countries, it was basically agriculture

[066-188] that had to create the necessary capital. Therefore, in June 1950 a

[066-189] land-reform law was promulgated. By October 1952 it had been implemented

[066-190] at an estimated cost of two million human lives: the landlords. The next

[066-191] step, socialization of the land, began in 1953.

## c67.xhtml
