---
description: "Chapter 67 of A History of China"
id: ch67
label: "Section 67"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 67

[067-001] The co-operative farms were supposed to achieve higher production than

[067-002] small individual farms. It may be that any farmer, but particularly the

[067-003] Chinese, is emotionally involved in his crop, in contrast to the

[067-004] industrial worker, who often is alienated from the product he makes.

[067-005] Thus the farmer is unwilling to put unlimited energy and time into

[067-006] working on a farm that does not belong to him. But it may also be that

[067-007] the application of principles of industrial operation to agriculture

[067-008] fails because emergencies often occur in farming and are followed by

[067-009] periods of leisure, whereas in industry steady work is possible.

[067-010] In any case, in 1956 strains began to appear in China's economy. In

[067-011] early 1958 the "Great Leap Forward" was promoted in an attempt to speed

[067-012] production in all sectors. Soon after, the first communes were created,

[067-013] against the advise of Russian specialists. The objective of the communes

[067-014] seems to have been not only the creation of a new organizational form

[067-015] which would allow the government to exercise more pressure upon farmers

[067-016] to increase production, but also the correlation of labor and other

[067-017] needs of industry with agriculture. The communes may have represented an

[067-018] attempt to set up an organization which could function independently,

[067-019] even in the event of a governmental breakdown in wartime. At the same

[067-020] time, the decentralization of industries began and a people's militia

[067-021] was created. The "back-yard furnaces," which produced high-cost iron of

[067-022] low quality, seem to have had a similar purpose: to teach citizens how

[067-023] to produce iron for armaments in case of war and enemy occupation, when

[067-024] only guerrilla resistance would be possible. In the same year,

[067-025] aggressive actions against offshore, Nationalist-held islands increased.

[067-026] China may have believed that war with the United States was imminent.

[067-027] Perhaps as a result of Russian talks with China, a detente followed in

[067-028] 1959, but so too did increased tension between Russia and China, while

[067-029] the results of the Great Leap and its policies proved catastrophic. The

[067-030] years 1961-64 provided a needed respite from the failures of the Great

[067-031] Leap. Farmers regained limited rights to income from private efforts,

[067-032] and improved farm techniques such as better seed and the use of

[067-033] fertilizer began to produce results. China can now feed her population

[067-034] in normal years.

[067-035] Chinese leaders realize that an improved level of living is difficult to

[067-036] attain while the birth rate remains high. They have hesitated to adopt a

[067-037] family-planning policy, which would fly in the face of Marxist doctrine,

[067-038] although for a short period family planning was openly recommended.

[067-039] Their most efficient method of limiting the birth rate has been to

[067-040] recommend postponement of marriage.

[067-041] First the limitation of private enterprise and business and then the

[067-042] nationalization of all important businesses following the completion of

[067-043] land reform deprived many employers as well as small shopkeepers of an

[067-044] occupation. But the new industries could not absorb all of the labor

[067-045] that suddenly became available. When rural youth inundated the cities in

[067-046] search of employment, the government returned the excess urban

[067-047] population to die countryside and recruited students and other urban

[067-048] youth to work on farms. Reeducation camps in outlying areas also

[067-049] provided cheap farm labor.

[067-050] The problem facing China or any nation that modernizes and

[067-051] industrializes in the twentieth century can be simply stated.

[067-052] Nineteenth-century industry needed large masses of workers which only

[067-053] the rural areas could supply; and, with the development of farming

[067-054] methods, the countryside could afford to send its youth to the cities.

[067-055] Twentieth-century industry, on the other hand, needs technicians and

[067-056] highly qualified personnel, often with college degrees, but few

[067-057] unskilled workers. China has traditionally employed human labor where

[067-058] machines would have been cheaper and more efficient, simply because

[067-059] labor was available and capital was not. But since, with the growth of

[067-060] modern industry and modern farming, the problem will arise again, the

[067-061] policy of employing urban youth on farms is shortsighted.

[067-062] The labor force also increased as a result of the "liberation" of women,

[067-063] in which the marriage law of April 1950 was the first step. Nationalist

[067-064] China had earlier created a modern and liberal marriage law; moreover,

[067-065] women were never the slaves that they have sometimes been painted. In

[067-066] many parts of China, long before the Pacific War, women worked in the

[067-067] fields with their husbands. Elsewhere they worked in secondary

[067-068] agricultural industries (weaving, preparation of food conserves, home

[067-069] industries, and even textile factories) and provided supplementary

[067-070] income for their families. All that "liberation" in 1950 really meant

[067-071] was that women had to work a full day as their husbands did, and had, in

[067-072] addition, to do house work and care for their children much as before.

[067-073] The new marriage law did, indeed, make both partners equal; it also made

[067-074] it easier for men to divorce their wives, political incompatibility

[067-075] becoming a ground for divorce.

[067-076] The ideological justification for a new marriage law was the

[067-077] desirability of destroying the traditional Chinese family and its

[067-078] economic basis because a close family, and all the more an extended

[067-079] family or a clan, could obviously serve as a center of resistance. Land

[067-080] collectivization and the nationalization of business destroyed the

[067-081] economic basis of families. The "liberation" of women brought them out

[067-082] of the house and made it possible for the government to exploit

[067-083] dissension between husband and wife, thereby increasing its control over

[067-084] the family. Finally, the new education system, which indoctrinated all

[067-085] children from nursery to the end of college, separated children from

[067-086] parents, thus undermining parental control and enabling the state to

[067-087] intimidate parents by encouraging their children to denounce their

[067-088] "deviations." Sporadic efforts to dissolve the family completely by

[067-089] separating women from men in communes--recalling an attempt made almost

[067-090] a century earlier by the T'ai-p'ing--were unsuccessful.

[067-091] The best formula for a revolution seems to involve turning youth against

[067-092] its elders, rather than turning one class against another. Not all

[067-093] societies have a class system so clear-cut that class antagonism is

[067-094] effective. On the other hand, Chinese youth, in its opposition to the

[067-095] "establishment," to conservatism, to traditional religion, to blind

[067-096] emulation of Western customs and institutions, to the traditional family

[067-097] structure and the position of women, had hopes that communism would

[067-098] eradicate the specific "evil" which each individual wanted abolished.

[067-099] Mao and his followers had once been such rebellious youths, but by the

[067-100] 1960's they were mostly old men and a new youth had appeared, a

[067-101] generation of revolutionaries for whom the "old regime" was dim history,

[067-102] not reality. In the struggle between Mao and Liu Shao-ch'i, which became

[067-103] increasingly apparent in 1966, Mao tried to retain his power by

[067-104] mobilizing young people as "Red Guards" and by inciting them to make the

[067-105] "Great Proletarian Revolution." The motives behind the struggle are

[067-106] diverse. It is on the one hand a conflict of persons contending for

[067-107] power, but there are also disagreements over theory: for example, should

[067-108] China's present generation toil to make possible a better life only for

[067-109] the next generation, or should it enjoy the fruits of its labor, after

[067-110] its many years of suffering? Mao opposes such "weakening" and favours a

[067-111] new generation willing to endure hardships, as he did in his youth.

[067-112] There is also a question whether the Chinese Communist Party under the

[067-113] banner of Maoism should replace the Russian party, establish Mao as the

[067-114] fourth founder after Marx, Lenin, and Stalin, and become the leader of

[067-115] world communism, or whether it should collaborate with the Russian

[067-116] party, at least temporarily, and thus ensure China Russian support.

[067-117] When, however, Chinese youth was summoned to take up the fight for Mao

[067-118] and his group, forces were loosed which could not be controlled.

[067-119] Following independent action by youth groups similar in nature to youth

[067-120] revolts in Western countries, the power and prestige of older leaders

[067-121] suffered. Even now (1969) it is impossible to re-establish unity and

[067-122] order; the Mao and Liu groups still oppose each other, and local

[067-123] factions have arisen. Violent confrontations, often resulting in

[067-124] hundreds of deaths, occur in many provinces. The regime is no longer so

[067-125] strong and unified as it was before 1966, although its end is not in

[067-126] sight. Quite possibly far-reaching changes may occur in the future.

[067-127] Three factors will probably influence the future of China. First, the

[067-128] emergence of neo-communism, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968, in an attempt

[067-129] to soften traditional communist practice. Second, the outcome of the war

[067-130] in Vietnam. Will China be able to continue its eighteenth-century dream

[067-131] of direct or indirect domination of South-east Asia? Will North Vietnam

[067-132] detach itself from China and attach itself more closely to Russia? Will

[067-133] Russia and China continue to create separate spheres of influence in

[067-134] Asia, Africa, and South America? The first factor depends on

[067-135] developments inside China, the second on events outside, and at least in

[067-136] part on decisions in the United States, Japan, and Europe.

[067-137] The third factor has to do with human nature. One may justifiably ask

[067-138] whether the change in human personality which Chinese communism has

[067-139] attempted to achieve is possible, let alone desirable. Studies of

[067-140] animals and of human beings have demonstrated a tendency to identify

[067-141] with a territory, with property, and with kin. Can the Chinese eradicate

[067-142] this tendency? The Chinese have been family-centered and accustomed to

[067-143] subordinating their individual inclinations to the requirements of

[067-144] family and neighborhood. But beyond these established frameworks they

[067-145] have been individualistic and highly idiosyncratic at all times. Under

[067-146] the communist regime, however, the government is omnipresent, and people

[067-147] must toe the official line. One senses the tragedy that affects

[067-148] well-known scholars, writers and poets, who must degrade themselves,

[067-149] their work, their past and their families in order to survive. They may

[067-150] hope for comprehension of their actions, but nonetheless they must

[067-151] suffer shame. Will the present government change the minds of these men

[067-152] and eradicate their feelings?

[067-153] Communist China has made great progress, no doubt. Soon it may equal

[067-154] other developed nations. But its progress has been achieved at an

[067-155] unnecessary cost in human lives and happiness.

[067-156] That the regime is no longer so strong and unified as it was before 1966

[067-157] does not mean that its end is in sight. Far-reaching changes may occur

[067-158] in the near future. Public opinion is impressed with mainland China's

[067-159] progress, as the world usually is with strong nations. And public

[067-160] opinion is still unimpressed by the achievements of Taiwan and has

[067-161] hardly begun to change its attitude toward the government of the

[067-162] "Republic of China." To the historian and the sociologist, the

[067-163] experience of Taiwan indicates that China, if left alone and freed from

[067-164] ideological pressures, could industrialize more quickly than any other

[067-165] presently underdeveloped nation. Taiwan offers a model with which to

[067-166] compare mainland China.

[067-167] NOTES AND REFERENCES

[067-168] The following notes and references are intended to help the interested

[067-169] reader. They draw his attention to some more specialized literature in

[067-170] English, and occasionally in French and German. They also indicate for

[067-171] the more advanced reader the sources for some of the interpretations of

[067-172] historical events. As such sources are most often written in Chinese or

[067-173] Japanese and, therefore, inaccessible to most readers, only brief hints

[067-174] and not full bibliographical data are given. The specialists know the

[067-175] names and can easily find details in the standard bibliographies. The

[067-176] general reader will profit most from the bibliography on Chinese history

[067-177] published each year in the _Journal of Asian Studies_. These Notes do

[067-178] not mention the original Chinese sources which are the factual basis of

[067-179] this book.

[067-180] _Chapter One_

[067-181] p. 7: Reference is made here to the _T'ung-chien kang-mu_ and its

[067-182] translation by de Mailla (1777-85). Criticism by O. Franke, Ku

[067-183] Chieh-kang and his school, also by G. Haloun.

[067-184] p. 8: For the chronology, I rely here upon Ijima Tadao and my own

[067-185] research. Excavations at Chou-k'ou-tien still continue and my account

[067-186] should be taken as very preliminary. An earlier analysis is given by E.

[067-187] von Eickstedt (_Rassendynamik von Ostasien_, Berlin 1944). For the

[067-188] following periods, the best general study is still J.G. Andersson,

[067-189] _Researches into the Prehistory of the Chinese_, Stockholm 1943. A great

[067-190] number of new findings has been made recently, but no comprehensive

[067-191] analysis in a Western language is available.

## c68.xhtml
