---
description: "Colonel Melchett is a dapper little man with a habit of snorting suddenly and unexpectedly."
id: ch07
label: "Chapter 7"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[007-001][[colonel-melchett|Colonel Melchett]] is a dapper little man with a habit of snorting suddenly and unexpectedly. He has red hair and rather keen bright blue eyes.

[007-002]“Good morning, vicar,” he said. “Nasty business, eh? Poor old [[colonel-protheroe|Protheroe]]. Not that I liked him. I didn’t. Nobody did, for that matter. Nasty bit of work for you, too. Hope it hasn’t upset your missus?”

[007-003]I said [[griselda-clement|Griselda]] had taken it very well.

[007-004]“That’s lucky. Rotten thing to happen in one’s house. I must say I’m surprised at young [[lawrence-redding|Redding]]—doing it the way he did. No sort of consideration for anyone’s feelings.”

[007-005]A wild desire to laugh came over me, but Colonel Melchett evidently saw nothing odd in the idea of a murderer being considerate, so I held my peace.

[007-006]“I must say I was rather taken aback when I heard the fellow had marched in and given himself up,” continued Colonel Melchett, dropping on to a chair.

[007-007]“How did it happen exactly?”

[007-008]“Last night. [[About]] ten o’clock. Fellow rolls in, throws down a pistol and says: ‘Here I am. I did it.’ Just like that.”

[007-009]“What account does he give of the business?”

[007-010]“Precious little. He was warned, of course, about making a statement. But he merely laughed. Said he came here to see you—found Protheroe here. They had words and he shot him. Won’t say what the quarrel was about. Look here, Clement—just between you and me, do you know anything about it? I’ve heard rumours—about his being forbidden the house and all that. What was it—did he seduce the daughter, or what? We don’t want to bring the girl into it more than we can help for everybody’s sake. Was that the trouble?”

[007-011]“No,” I said. “You can take it from me that it was something quite different, but I can’t say more at the present juncture.”

[007-012]He nodded and rose.

[007-013]“I’m glad to know. There’s a lot of [[gossip|talk]]. Too many women in this part of the world. Well, I must get along. I’ve got to see [[dr-haydock|Haydock]]. He was called out to some case or other, but he ought to be back by now. I don’t mind telling you I’m sorry about Redding. He always struck me as a decent young chap. Perhaps they’ll think out some kind of defence for him. Aftereffects of war, shell shock, or something. Especially if no very adequate motive turns up. I must be off. Like to come along?”

[007-014]I said I would like to very much, and we went out together.

[007-015]Haydock’s house is next door to mine. His servant said the doctor had just come in and showed us into the dining-room, where Haydock was sitting down to a steaming plate of eggs and bacon.

[007-016]He greeted me with an amiable nod.

[007-017]“Sorry I had to go out. Confinement case. I’ve been up most of the night, over your business. I’ve got the bullet for you.”

[007-018]He shoved a little box along the table. Melchett examined it.

[007-019]“Point two five?”

[007-020]Haydock nodded.

[007-021]“I’ll keep the technical details for the [[the-inquest|inquest]],” he said. “All you want to know is that death was practically instantaneous. Silly young fool, what did he want to do it for? Amazing, by the way, that nobody heard the shot.”

[007-022]“Yes,” said Melchett, “that surprises me.”

[007-023]“The kitchen window gives on the other side of the house,” I said. “With the study door, the pantry door, and the kitchen door all shut, I doubt if you would hear anything, and there was no one but the maid in the house.”

[007-024]“H’m,” said Melchett. “It’s odd, all the same. I wonder the old lady—what’s her name—Marple, didn’t hear it. The study window was open.”

[007-025]“Perhaps she did,” said Haydock.

[007-026]“I don’t think she did,” said I. “She was over at the [[the-vicarage|Vicarage]] just now and she didn’t mention anything of the kind which I’m certain she would have done if there had been anything to tell.”

[007-027]“May have heard it and paid no attention to it—thought it was a car backfiring.”

[007-028]It struck me that Haydock was looking much more jovial and good-humoured this morning. He seemed like a man who was decorously trying to subdue unusually good spirits.

[007-029]“Or what about a silencer?” he added. “That’s quite likely. Nobody would hear anything then.”

[007-030]Melchett shook his head.

[007-031]“[[inspector-slack|Slack]] didn’t find anything of the kind, and he asked Redding, and Redding didn’t seem to know what he was talking about at first and then denied point blank using anything of the kind. And I suppose one can take his word for it.”

[007-032]“Yes, indeed, poor devil.”

[007-033]“Damned young fool,” said Colonel Melchett. “Sorry, Clement. But he really is! Somehow one can’t get used to thinking of him as a murderer.”

[007-034]“Any motive?” asked Haydock, taking a final draught of coffee and pushing back his chair.

[007-035]“He says they quarrelled and he lost his temper and shot him.”

[007-036]“Hoping for manslaughter, eh?” The doctor shook his head. “That story doesn’t hold water. He stole up behind him as he was writing and shot him through the head. Precious little ‘quarrel’ about that.”

[007-037]“Anyway, there wouldn’t have been time for a quarrel,” I said, remembering [[miss-marple|Miss Marple]]’s words. “To creep up, shoot him, alter the clock hands back to 6:20, and leave again would have taken him all his time. I shall never forget his face when I met him outside the gate, or the way he said, ‘You want to see Protheroe—oh, you’ll see him all right!’ That in itself ought to have made me suspicious of what had just taken place a few minutes before.”

[007-038]Haydock stared at me.

[007-039]“What do you mean—what had just taken place? When do you think Redding shot him?”

[007-040]“A few minutes before I got to the house.”

[007-041]The doctor shook his head.

[007-042]“Impossible. Plumb impossible. He’d been dead much longer than that.”

[007-043]“But, my dear man,” cried Colonel Melchett, “you said yourself that half an hour was only an approximate estimate.”

[007-044]“Half an hour, thirty-five minutes, twenty-five minutes, twenty minutes—possibly, but less, no. Why, the body would have been warm when I got to it.”

[007-045]We stared at each other. Haydock’s face had changed. It had gone suddenly grey and old. I wondered at the change in him.

[007-046]“But, look here, Haydock.” The colonel found his voice. “If Redding admits shooting him at a quarter to seven—”

[007-047]Haydock sprang to his feet.

[007-048]“I tell you it’s impossible,” he roared. “If Redding says he killed Protheroe at a quarter to seven, then Redding lies. Hang it all, I tell you I’m a doctor, and I know. The blood had begun to congeal.”

[007-049]“If Redding is lying,” began Melchett. He stopped, shook his head.

[007-050]“We’d better go down to [[much-benham-police|the police]] station and see him,” he said.
