---
description: "I hurried down the village street."
id: ch28
label: "Chapter 28"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[028-001]I hurried down [[st-mary-mead|the village]] street. It was eleven o’clock, and at eleven o’clock on a Sunday night the whole village of St. [[mary|Mary]] Mead might be dead. I saw, however, a light in a first floor window as I passed, and, realizing that [[hawes|Hawes]] was still up, I stopped and rang the door bell.

[028-002]After what seemed a long time, Hawes’s landlady, Mrs. [[mrs-sadler|Sadler]], laboriously unfastened two bolts, a chain, and turned a key and peered out at me suspiciously.

[028-003]“Why, it’s [[mr-clement|Vicar]]!” she exclaimed.

[028-004]“Good evening.” I said. “I want to see Mr. Hawes. I see there’s a light in the window, so he’s up still.”

[028-005]“That may be. I’ve not seen him since I took up his supper. He’s had a [[silence|quiet]] evening—no one to see him, and he’s not been out.”

[028-006]I nodded, and passing her, went quickly up the stairs. Hawes has a bedroom and sitting-room on the first floor.

[028-007]I passed into the latter. Hawes was lying back in a long chair asleep. My entrance did not wake him. An empty cachet box and a glass of water, half-full, stood beside him.

[028-008]On the floor, by his left foot, was a crumpled sheet of paper with writing on it. I picked it up and straightened it out.

[028-009]It began: “My dear Clement—”

[028-010]I read it through, uttered an exclamation and shoved it into my pocket. Then I bent over Hawes and studied him attentively.

[028-011]Next, reaching for the telephone which stood by his elbow, I gave the number of the [[the-vicarage|Vicarage]]. [[colonel-melchett|Melchett]] must have been still trying to trace the call, for I was told that the number was engaged. Asking them to call me, I put the instrument down again.

[028-012]I put my hand into my pocket to look at the paper I had picked up once more. With it, I drew out the note that I had found in the letter box and which was still unopened.

[028-013]Its appearance was horribly familiar. It was the same handwriting as the [[letter|anonymous letter]] that had come that afternoon.

[028-014]I tore it open.

[028-015]I read it once—twice—unable to realize its contents.

[028-016]I was beginning to read it a third time when the telephone rang. Like a man in a dream I picked up the receiver and spoke.

[028-017]“Hullo?”

[028-018]“Hullo.”

[028-019]“Is that you, Melchett?”

[028-020]“Yes, where are you? I’ve traced that call. The number is—”

[028-021]“I know the number.”

[028-022]“Oh, good! Is that where you are speaking from?”

[028-023]“Yes.”

[028-024]“What about that confession?”

[028-025]“I’ve got [[the-confession-event|the confession]] all right.”

[028-026]“You mean you’ve got the murderer?”

[028-027]I had then the strongest temptation of my life. I looked at Hawes. I looked at the crumpled letter. I looked at the anonymous scrawl. I looked at the empty cachet box with the name of Cherubim on it. I remembered a certain casual conversation.

[028-028]I made an immense effort.

[028-029]“I—don’t know,” I said. “You’d better come round.”

[028-030]And I gave him the address.

[028-031]Then I sat down in the chair opposite Hawes to think.

[028-032]I had two clear minutes to do so.

[028-033]In two minutes’ times, Melchett would have arrived.

[028-034]I took up the anonymous letter and read it through again for the third time.

[028-035]Then I closed my eyes and thought. …
