---
description: "Colonel Melchett and I both stared at…"
id: ch31
label: "Chapter 31"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[031-001][[colonel-melchett|Colonel Melchett]] and I both stared at her.

[031-002]“A trap? What kind of a trap?”

[031-003][[miss-marple|Miss Marple]] was a little diffident, but it was clear that she had a plan fully outlined.

[031-004]“Supposing Mr. [[lawrence-redding|Redding]] were to be rung up on the telephone and warned.”

[031-005]Colonel Melchett smiled.

[031-006]“ ‘All is discovered. Fly!’ That’s an old wheeze, Miss Marple. Not that it isn’t often successful! But I think in this case young Redding is too downy a bird to be caught that way.”

[031-007]“It would have to be something specific. I quite realize that,” said Miss Marple. “I would suggest—this is just a mere suggestion—that the warning should come from somebody who is known to have rather unusual views on these matters. Dr. [[dr-haydock|Haydock]]’s conversation would lead anyone to suppose that he might view such a thing as murder from an unusual angle. If he were to hint that somebody—Mrs. [[mrs-sadler|Sadler]]—or one of her children—had actually happened to see the transposing of the cachets—well, of course, if Mr. Redding is an innocent man, that statement [[the-will|will]] mean nothing to him, but if he isn’t—”

[031-008]“Well, he might just possibly do something foolish.”

[031-009]“And deliver himself into our hands. It’s possible. Very ingenious, Miss Marple. But will Haydock stand for it? As you say, his views—”

[031-010]Miss Marple interrupted him brightly.

[031-011]“Oh, but that’s theory! So very different from practice, isn’t it? But anyway, here he is, so we can ask him.”

[031-012]Haydock was, I think, rather astonished to find Miss Marple with us. He looked tired and haggard.

[031-013]“It’s been a near thing,” he said. “A very near thing. But he’s going to pull through. It’s a doctor’s business to save his patient and I saved him, but I’d have been just as glad if I hadn’t pulled it off.”

[031-014]“You may think differently,” said Melchett, “when you have heard what we have to tell you.”

[031-015]And briefly and succinctly, he put Miss Marple’s theory of the crime before the doctor, ending up with her final suggestion.

[031-016]We were then privileged to see exactly what Miss Marple meant by the difference between theory and practice.

[031-017]Haydock’s views appeared to have undergone a complete transformation. He would, I think, have liked Lawrence Redding’s head on a charger. It was not, I imagine, [[the-murder|the murder]] of [[colonel-protheroe|Colonel Protheroe]] that so stirred his rancour.

[031-018]It was the assault on the unlucky [[hawes|Hawes]].

[031-019]“The damned scoundrel,” said Haydock. “The damned scoundrel! That poor devil Hawes. He’s got a mother and a sister too. The stigma of being the mother and sister of a murderer would have rested on them for life, and think of their mental anguish. Of all the cowardly dastardly tricks!”

[031-020]For sheer primitive rage, commend me to a thoroughgoing humanitarian when you get him well roused.

[031-021]“If this thing’s true,” he said, “you can count on me. The fellow’s not fit to live. A defenceless chap like Hawes.”

[031-022]A lame dog of any kind can always count on Haydock’s sympathy.

[031-023]He was eagerly arranging details with Melchett when Miss Marple rose and I insisted on seeing her home.

[031-024]“It is most kind of you, Mr. Clement,” said Miss Marple, as we walked down the deserted street. “Dear me, past twelve o’clock. I hope [[raymond-west|Raymond]] has gone to bed and not waited up.”

[031-025]“He should have accompanied you,” I said.

[031-026]“I didn’t let him know I was going,” said Miss Marple.

[031-027]I smiled suddenly as I remembered Raymond West’s subtle psychological analysis of the crime.

[031-028]“If your theory turns out to be the truth—which I for one do not doubt for a minute,” I said, “you will have a very good score over your nephew.”

[031-029]Miss Marple smiled also—an indulgent smile.

[031-030]“I remember a saying of my Great Aunt Fanny’s. I was sixteen at the time and thought it particularly foolish.”

[031-031]“Yes?” I inquired.

[031-032]“She used to say: ‘The young people think the old people are fools; but the old people *know* the young people are fools!’ ”
