---
description: "There is little more to be told."
id: ch32
label: "Chapter 32"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[032-001]There is little more to be told. [[miss-marple|Miss Marple]]’s plan succeeded. [[lawrence-redding|Lawrence Redding]] was not an innocent man, and the hint of a witness of the change of capsule did indeed cause him to do “something foolish.” Such is the power of an evil conscience.

[032-002]He was, of course, peculiarly placed. His first impulse, I imagine, must have been to cut and run. But there was his accomplice to consider. He could not leave without getting word to her, and he dared not wait till morning. So he went up to [[old-hall|Old Hall]] that night—and two of [[colonel-melchett|Colonel Melchett]]’s most efficient officers followed him. He threw gravel at [[anne-protheroe|Anne Protheroe]]’s window, aroused her, and an urgent whisper brought her down to speak with him. Doubtless they felt safer outside than in—with the possibility of [[lettice-protheroe|Lettice]] waking. But as it happened, the two police officers were able to overhear the conversation in full. It left the matter in no doubt. Miss Marple had been right on every count.

[032-003]The [[the-trial|trial]] of Lawrence Redding and Anne [[colonel-protheroe|Protheroe]] is a matter of public knowledge. I do not propose to go into it. I [[the-will|will]] only mention that great credit was reflected upon [[inspector-slack|Inspector Slack]], whose zeal and intelligence had resulted in the criminals being brought to justice. Naturally, nothing was said of Miss Marple’s share in the business. She herself would have been horrified at the thought of such a thing.

[032-004]Lettice came to see me just before the trial took place. She drifted through my study window, wraithlike as ever. She told me then that she had all along been convinced of her stepmother’s complicity. The loss of the yellow beret had been a mere excuse for searching the study. She hoped against hope that she might find something [[much-benham-police|the police]] had overlooked.

[032-005]“You see,” she said in her dreamy voice, “they didn’t hate her like I did. And hate makes things easier for you.”

[032-006]Disappointed in the result of her search, she had deliberately dropped Anne’s earring by the desk.

[032-007]“Since I *knew* she had done it, what did it matter? One way was as good as another. She *had* killed him.”

[032-008]I sighed a little. There are always some things that Lettice will never see. In some respects she is morally colour blind.

[032-009]“What are you going to do, Lettice?” I asked.

[032-010]“When—when it’s all over, I am going abroad.” She hesitated and then went on. “I am going abroad with my mother.”

[032-011]I looked up, startled.

[032-012]She nodded.

[032-013]“Didn’t you ever guess? Mrs. [[mrs-lestrange|Lestrange]] is my mother. She is—is dying, you know. She wanted to see me and so she came down here under an assumed name. Dr. [[dr-haydock|Haydock]] helped her. He’s a very old friend of hers—he was keen about her once—you can see that! In a way, he still is. Men always went batty about mother, I believe. She’s awfully attractive even now. Anyway, Dr. Haydock did everything he could to help her. She didn’t come down here under her own name because of the disgusting way people [[gossip|talk]] and gossip. She went to see father that night and told him she was dying and had a great longing to see something of me. Father was a beast. He said she’d forfeited all claim, and that I thought she was dead—as though I had ever swallowed that story! Men like father never see an inch before their noses!

[032-014]“But mother is not the sort to give in. She thought it only decent to go to father first, but when he turned her down so brutally she sent a note to me, and I arranged to leave the tennis party early and meet her at the end of the footpath at a quarter past six. We just had a hurried meeting and arranged when to meet again. We left each other before half-past six. Afterwards I was terrified that she would be suspected of having killed father. After all, she had got a grudge against him. That’s why I got hold of that old picture of her up in the attic and slashed it about. I was afraid [[police|the police]] might go nosing about and get hold of it and recognize it. Dr. Haydock was frightened too. Sometimes, I believe, he really thought she had done it! Mother is rather a—desperate kind of person. She doesn’t count consequences.”

[032-015]She paused.

[032-016]“It’s queer. She and I belong to each other. Father and I didn’t. But mother—well, anyway, I’m going abroad with her. I shall be with her till—till the end. …”

[032-017]She got up and I took her hand.

[032-018]“God bless you both,” I said. “Some day, I hope, there is a lot of happiness coming to you, Lettice.”

[032-019]“There should be,” she said, with an attempt at a laugh. “There hasn’t been much so far—has there? Oh, well, I don’t suppose it matters. Goodbye, Mr. Clement. You’ve been frightfully decent to me always—you and [[griselda-clement|Griselda]].”

[032-020]Griselda!

[032-021]I had to own to her how terribly the [[letter|anonymous letter]] had upset me, and first she laughed, and then solemnly read me a lecture.

[032-022]“However,” she added, “I’m going to be very sober and God-fearing in future—quite like the Pilgrim fathers.”

[032-023]I did not see Griselda in the role of a Pilgrim father.

[032-024]She went on:

[032-025]“You see, Len, I have a steadying influence coming into my life. It’s coming into your life, too, but in your case it will be a kind of—of rejuvenating one—at least, I hope so! You can’t call me a dear child half so much when we have a real child of our own. And, Len, I’ve decided that now I’m going to be a real ‘wife and mother’ (as they say in books), I must be a housekeeper too. I’ve bought two books on Household Management and one on Mother [[love|Love]], and if that doesn’t turn me out a pattern I don’t know what will! They are all simply screamingly funny—not intentionally, you know. Especially the one about bringing up children.”

[032-026]“You haven’t bought a book on How to Treat a Husband, have you?” I asked, with sudden apprehension as I drew her to me.

[032-027]“I don’t need to,” said Griselda. “I’m a very good wife. I love you dearly. What more do you want?”

[032-028]“Nothing,” I said.

[032-029]“Could you say, just for once, that you love me madly?”

[032-030]“Griselda,” I said—“I adore you! I worship you! I am wildly, hopelessly and quite unclerically crazy about you!”

[032-031]My wife gave a deep and contented sigh.

[032-032]Then she drew away suddenly.

[032-033]“Bother! Here’s Miss Marple coming. Don’t let her suspect, will you? I don’t want everyone offering me cushions and urging me to put my feet up. Tell her I’ve gone down to the golf links. That will put her off the scent—and it’s quite true because I left my yellow pullover there and I want it.”

[032-034]Miss Marple came to the window, halted apologetically, and asked for Griselda.

[032-035]“Griselda,” I said, “has gone to the golf links.”

[032-036]An expression of concern leaped into Miss Marple’s eyes.

[032-037]“Oh, but surely,” she said, “that is most unwise—just now.”

[032-038]And then in a nice, old-fashioned, ladylike, maiden-lady way, she blushed.

[032-039]And to cover the moment’s confusion, we talked hurriedly of the Protheroe case, and of “Dr. [[dr-stone|Stone]],” who had turned out to be a well-known cracksman with several different aliases. [[miss-cram|Miss Cram]], by the way, had been cleared of all complicity. She had at last admitted taking the suitcase to the wood, but had done so in all good faith, Dr. Stone having told her that he feared the rivalry of other archaeologists who would not stick at burglary to gain their object of discrediting his theories. The girl apparently swallowed this not very plausible story. She is now, according to [[st-mary-mead|the village]], looking out for a more genuine article in the line of an elderly bachelor requiring a secretary.

[032-040]As we talked, I wondered very much how Miss Marple had discovered our latest secret. But presently, in a discreet fashion, Miss Marple herself supplied me with a clue.

[032-041]“I hope dear Griselda is not overdoing it,” she murmured, and, after a discreet pause, “I was in the bookshop in [[much-benham|Much Benham]] yesterday—”

[032-042]Poor Griselda—that book on Mother Love has been her undoing!

[032-043]“I wonder, Miss Marple,” I said suddenly, “if you were to commit a murder whether you would ever be found out.”

[032-044]“What a terrible idea,” said Miss Marple, shocked. “I hope I could never do such a wicked thing.”

[032-045]“But human nature being what it is,” I murmured.

[032-046]Miss Marple acknowledged the hit with a pretty old-ladyish laugh.

[032-047]“How naughty of you, Mr. Clement.” She rose. “But naturally you are in good spirits.”

[032-048]She paused by the window.

[032-049]“My love to dear Griselda—and tell her—that any little secret is quite safe with me.”

[032-050]Really Miss Marple is rather a dear. …
