---
description: "“Sir Anthony Ferndale” sat before the dressing-table in his room at the White Hart, idly polishing his nails."
id: ch02
label: "II: My Lord at the White Hart"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[002-001]“[[john-carstares|Sir Anthony Ferndale]]” sat before the dressing-table in his room at the [[white-hart-inn|White Hart]], idly polishing his nails. A gorgeous silk dressing gown lay over the back of his chair, and, behind him, [[jim-salter|Jim]] was attending to his [[wigs-and-grooming|wig]], at the same time hovering anxiously over the coat and waistcoat that were waiting to be donned.

[002-002][[john-carstares|Carstares]] left off polishing his nails, yawned, and leaned back in his chair, a slim, graceful figure in cambric shirt and apricot satin breeches. He studied his cravat for some moments in the mirror, and lifted a hand to it. Salter held his breath. With extreme deliberation the hand moved a diamond and emerald pin the fraction of an inch to one side, and fell to his side again. Salter drew a relieved breath, which brought his master’s eyes round to himself.

[002-003]“No trouble, [[jim-salter|Jim]]?”

[002-004]“None at all, sir.”

[002-005]“Neither had I. ’Twas most surprisingly easy. The birds had no more fight in them than sparrows. Two men in a [[coach]]—one a bullying rascal of a merchant, the other his clerk. Gad! but I was sorry for that little man!” He paused, his hand on the rouge pot.

[002-006][[jim-salter|Salter]] looked an inquiry.

[002-007]“Yes,” nodded Carstares. “Very sorry. The fat man would appear to bully and browbeat him after the manner of his kind; he even blamed him for my advent, the greasy coward! Yes, Jim, you are right—he did not appeal to me, *ce M. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]*. So—” ingenuously, “I relieved him of his cashbox and two hundred guineas. A present for the poor of Lewes.”

[002-008][[jim-salter|Jim]] jerked his shoulder, frowning.

[002-009]“If ye give away all ye get, sir, why do ye rob at all?” he asked bluntly.

[002-010]His whimsical little smile played about my lord’s mouth.

[002-011]“ ’Tis an object for my life, [[jim-salter|Jim]]: a noble object. And I believe it amuses me to play Robin Hood—take from the rich to give to the poor,” he added, for [[jim-salter|Salter]]’s benefit. “But to return to my victims—you would have laughed had you but seen my little man come tumbling out of the coach when I opened the door!”

[002-012]“Tumble, sir? Why should he do that?”

[002-013]“He was at pains to explain the reason. It seems he had been commanded to hold the door to prevent my entering—so when I jerked it open, sooner than loose his hold, he fell out on to the road. Of course, I apologised most abjectly—and we had some conversation. Quite a nice little man. … It made me laugh to see him sprawling on the road, though!”

[002-014]“Wish I could have seen it, your [[honour|honour]]. I would ha’ liked fine to ha’ been beside ye.” He looked down at the lithe form with some pride. “I’d give something to see ye hold up a coach, sir!”

[002-015]Haresfoot in hand, Jack met his admiring eyes in the glass, and laughed.

[002-016]“I make no doubt you would. … I have cultivated a superb voice, a trifle thick and beery, a little loud, perhaps—ah, something to dream of o’ nights! I doubt they do, too,” he added reflectively, and affixed the [[fashion|patch]] at the corner of his mouth.

[002-017]“So? A little low, you think? But ’twill suffice—What’s toward?”

[002-018]Down below in the street there was a great stirring and bustling: horses’ hoofs, shouts from the ostlers, and the sound of wheels on the cobblestones. [[jim-salter|Jim]] went to the window and looked down, craning his neck to see over the balcony.

[002-019]“ ’Tis a [[coach|coach]] arrived, sir.”

[002-020]“That much had I gathered,” replied my lord, busy with the [[wigs-and-grooming|powder]].

[002-021]“Yes, sir. O lord, sir!” He was shaken with laughter.

[002-022]“What now?”

[002-023]“ ’Tis the curiousest sight, sir! Two gentlemen, one fat and t’other small! One’s all shrivelled-looking, like a spider, while t’other—”

[002-024]“Resembles a hippopotamus—particularly in the face?”

[002-025]“Well yes, sir. He do rather. And he be wearing purple.”

[002-026]“Heavens, yes! Purple, and an orange waistcoat!”

[002-027][[jim-salter|Jim]] peered afresh.

[002-028]“So it is, sir! But how did you know?” Even as he put the question, understanding flashed into [[jim-salter|Jim]]’s eyes.

[002-029]“I rather think that I have had the [[honour|honour]] of meeting these gentlemen,” replied my lord placidly. “My buckle, Jim. … Is’t a prodigious great coach with wheels picked out in yellow?”

[002-030]“Ay, your [[honour|honour]]. The gentlemen seem a bit put out, too.”

[002-031]“That is quite probable. Does the smaller gentleman wear somewhat—ah—muddied garments?”

[002-032]“I can’t see, sir; he stands behind the fat gentleman.”

[002-033]“Mr. Bumble Bee. … [[jim-salter|Jim]]!”

[002-034]“Sir!” [[jim-salter|Jim]] turned quickly at the sound of the sharp voice.

[002-035]He found that my lord had risen, and was holding up a waistcoat of pea-green pattern on a bilious yellow ground, between a disgusted finger and thumb. Before his severe frown [[jim-salter|Jim]] dropped his eyes and stood looking for all the world like a schoolboy detected in some crime.

[002-036]“You put this—this monstrosity—out for *me* to wear?” in awful tones.

[002-037][[jim-salter|Jim]] eyed the waistcoat gloomily and nodded.

[002-038]“Yes, sir.”

[002-039]“Did I not specify cream ground?”

[002-040]“Yes, sir. I thought—I thought that ’twas cream!”

[002-041]“My good friend, it is—it is—I cannot say what it is. And pea-green!” he shuddered. “Remove it.”

[002-042][[jim-salter|Jim]] hurried forward and disposed of the offending garment.

[002-043]“And bring me the broidered satin. Yes, that is it. It is particularly pleasing to the eye.”

[002-044]“Yes, sir,” agreed the abashed [[jim-salter|Jim]].

[002-045]“You are excused this time,” added my lord, with a twinkle in his eye. “What are our two friends doing?”

[002-046][[jim-salter|Salter]] went back to the window.

[002-047]“They’ve gone into the house, sir. No, here’s the spider gentleman! He do seem in a hurry, your [[honour|honour]]!”

[002-048]“Ah!” murmured his lordship. “You may assist me into this coat. Thanks.”

[002-049]With no little difficulty, my lord managed to enter into the fine satin garment, which, when on, seemed moulded to his back, so excellently did it fit. He shook out his ruffles and slipped the emerald ring on to his finger with a slight frown.

[002-050]“I believe I shall remain here some few days,” he remarked presently. “To—ah—allay suspicion.” He looked across at his man as he spoke, through his lashes.

[002-051]It was not in [[jim-salter|Jim]]’s nature to inquire into his master’s affairs, much less to be surprised at anything he might do or say. He was content to receive and promptly execute his orders, and to worship [[john-carstares|Carstares]] with a doglike devotion, following blindly in his wake, happy as long as he might serve him.

[002-052]Carstares had found him in France, very down upon his luck, having been discharged from the service of his late master owing to the penniless condition of that gentleman’s pocket. He had engaged him as his own personal [[servant]], and the man had remained with him ever since, proving an invaluable acquisition to my Lord John. Despite a singularly wooden countenance, he was by no means a fool, and he had helped Carstares out of more than one tight corner during his inglorious and foolhardy career as [[highway-robbery|highwayman]]. He probably understood his somewhat erratic master better than anyone else, and he now divined what was in his mind. He returned that glance with a significant wink.

[002-053]“ ’Twas them gentlemen ye held up today, sir?” he asked, jerking an expressive thumb towards the window.

[002-054]“M’m. Mr. Bumble Bee and friend. It would almost appear so. I think I do not fully appreciate Mr. Bumble Bee. I find his conduct rather tiresome. But it is just possible that he thinks the same of me. I will further my acquaintance with him.”

[002-055][[jim-salter|Jim]] grunted scornfully, and an inquiring eye was cocked at him.

[002-056]“You do not admire our friend? Pray, do not judge him by his exterior. He may possess a beautiful mind. But I do not think so. N-no, I really do not think so.” He chuckled a little. “Do you know, [[jim-salter|Jim]], I believe I am going to enjoy myself tonight!”

[002-057]“I don’t doubt it, your [[honour|honour]]. ’Twere child’s play to trick the fat gentleman.”

[002-058]“Probably. But it is not with the fat gentleman that I shall have to deal. ’Tis with all the officials of this charming [[london|town]], an I mistake not. Do I hear the small spider returning?”

[002-059][[jim-salter|Salter]] stepped back to the window.

[002-060]“Ay, sir—with three others.”

[002-061]“Pre‑cisely. Be so good as to hand me my snuffbox. And my cane. Thank you. I feel the time has now come for me to put in an appearance. Pray, bear in mind that I am new come from France and journey by easy stages to [[london|London]]. And cultivate a stupid expression. Yes, that will do excellently.”

[002-062][[jim-salter|Jim]] grinned delightedly; he had assumed no expression of stupidity, and was consequently much pleased with this pleasantry. He swung open the door with an air, and watched “Sir Anthony” mince along the passage to the stairs.

[002-063]In the coffee-room the city merchant, Mr. Fudby by name, was relating the story of his wrongs, with many an impressive pause, and much emphasis, to the mayor, town-clerk, and beadle of Lewes. All three had been fetched by Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]], his clerk, in obedience to his orders, for the bigger the audience the better pleased was Mr. Fudby. He was now enjoying himself quite considerably, despite the loss of his precious cashbox.

[002-064]So was not Mr. [[mr-hedges|Hedges]], the mayor. He was a fussy little man who suffered from dyspepsia; he was not interested in the affair, and he did not see what was to be done for Mr. Fudby. Further, he had been haled from his dinner, and he was hungry; and, above all, he found Mr. Fudby very unattractive. Still, a highroad robbery was serious matter enough, and some course of action must be thought out; so he listened to the story with an assumption of interest, looking exceedingly wise, and, at the proper moments, uttering sounds betokening concern.

[002-065]The more he saw and heard of Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]], the less he liked him. Neither did the town-clerk care for him. There was that about Mr. Fudby that did not endear him to his fellow-men, especially when they chanced to be his inferiors in the social scale. The beadle did not think much about anything. Having decided (and rightly) that the affair had nothing whatever to do with him,he leaned back in his chair and stared stolidly up at the ceiling.

[002-066]The tale Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] was telling bore surprisingly little resemblance to the truth. It was a much embellished version, in which he himself had behaved with quite remarkable gallantry. It had been gradually concocted during the journey to Lewes.

[002-067]He was still holding forth when my lord entered the room. [[john-carstares|Carstares]] raised his glass languidly to survey the assembled company, bowed slightly, and walked over to the fire. He seated himself in an armchair and took no further notice of anybody.

[002-068]Mr. [[mr-hedges|Hedges]] had recognised at a glance that here was some *grand seigneur* and wished that Mr. Fudby would not speak in so loud a voice. But that individual, delighted at having a new auditor, continued his tale with much relish and in a still louder tone.

[002-069]My lord yawned delicately and took a pinch of snuff.

[002-070]“Yes, yes,” fussed Mr. [[mr-hedges|Hedges]]. “But, short of sending to London for the Runners, I do not see what I can do. If I send to London, it must, of course, be at your expense, sir.”

[002-071]Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] bristled.

[002-072]“At *my* expense, sir? Do ye say at *my* expense? I am surprised! I repeat—I am surprised!”

[002-073]“Indeed, sir? I can order the [[london|town]]-crier out, describing the horse, and—er—offering a reward for the capture of any man on such an animal. But—” he shrugged and looked across at the town-clerk—“I do not imagine that ’twould be of much use—eh, Mr. Brand?”

[002-074]The clerk pursed his lips and spread out his hands.

[002-075]“I fear not; I very much fear not. I would advise Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] to have a proclamation posted up round the country.” He sat back with the air of one who has contributed his share to the work, and does not intend to offer any more help.

[002-076]“Ho!” growled Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]. He blew out his cheeks. “ ’Twill be a grievous expense, though I suppose it must be done, and I cannot but feel that if it had not been for your deplorably cowardly conduct, [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]—yes, cowardly conduct, I say—I might never have been robbed of my two hundred!” He snuffled a little, and eyed the flushed but silent Chilter with mingled reproach and scorn. “However, my coachman assures me he could swear to the horse again, although he cannot remember much about the man himself. Chilter! How did he describe the horse?”

[002-077]“Oh—er—chestnut, Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]—chestnut, with a half-moon of white on its forehead, and one white foreleg.”

[002-078]Jack perceived that it was time he took a hand in the game. He half turned in his chair and levelled his quizzing-glass at Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]].

[002-079]“I beg your pardon?” he drawled.

[002-080]Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]’s eye brightened. The fine gentleman was roused to an expression of interest at last. He launched forth into his story once more for my lord’s benefit. [[john-carstares|Carstares]] eyed him coldly,seeing which, Mr. Hedges came hurriedly to the rescue.

[002-081]“Er—yes, Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]—quite so! Your pardon, sir, I have not the [[honour|honour]] of knowing your name?”

[002-082]“Ferndale,” supplied Jack, “[[john-carstares|Sir Anthony Ferndale]].”

[002-083]“Er—yes—” Mr. [[mr-hedges|Hedges]] bowed. “Pray pardon my importuning you with our—”

[002-084]“Not at all,” said my lord.

[002-085]“No—quite so—The fact is, these—er—gentlemen have had the—er—misfortune to be waylaid on their journey here.”

[002-086]Sir Anthony’s glass was again levelled at the group. His expression betokened mild surprise.

[002-087]“*All* these gentlemen?” he inquired blandly. “Dear, dear!”

[002-088]“Oh, no, no, no, sir! Not all—Only Mr.—er—”

[002-089]“[[mr-fudby|Fudby]],” said that worthy, and discovered that Sir Anthony was bowing frigidly. At once he rose, and resting his knuckles on the table before him, bent his body slowly and painfully. Sir Anthony inclined his head. Whereupon, to the delight of all the rest, Mr. Fudby bowed again with even greater stateliness than before. Mr. [[mr-hedges|Hedges]] observed Sir Anthony’s lips to twitch convulsively. He waited for Mr. Fudby to subside, and then continued:

[002-090]“Yes—Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] and Mr.—”

[002-091]“My clerk!” snapped [[mr-fudby|Fudby]].

[002-092]Sir Anthony favoured Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] with his peculiarly sweet smile, and turned again to Mr. Hedges.

[002-093]“I see. A *daylight* robbery, you say?”

[002-094]“Broad daylight!” boomed Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]].

[002-095]“Er—yes, yes,” interposed the mayor, fearing a fresh outbreak from that quarter. “I wonder if you have seen anything of such an animal as Mr.—er—[[mr-chilter|Chilter]]—described?”

[002-096]“ ’Tis a most extraordinary thing,” said [[john-carstares|Carstares]] slowly, “but I have just bought such an one.” He glanced round with an inquiring smile and one eyebrow lifted.

[002-097]“Well!” ejaculated Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]. “Well!”

[002-098]“Dear me, sir, what a strange coincidence! May I ask where you bought it, and from whom?”

[002-099]“She has not been in my possession over two hours. I bought her from an out-at-elbows ruffian, on my way hither. I thought at one time that ’twas strange that the man should possess such a mare—pure bred, I vow—and wondered why he was so eager to be rid of her.”

[002-100]“He was eager because he knew he would be recognised by her,” explained Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] kindly.

[002-101]“Without doubt. Perhaps you would like to see her? I will send my man—”

[002-102]“Oh no, no!” cried the mayor. “We would not dream of so inconveniencing you—”

[002-103]“ ’Twere a pleasure,” bowed Jack, devoutly hoping that Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] would not require to see Jenny, who, he felt sure, would betray him by her very evident affection.

[002-104]“No, no, Sir Anthony, ’tis quite unnecessary, I assure you, but I thank you for all that. Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]], if you would describe the man himself, I will see to the proclamation.”

[002-105]“Describe him, [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]!” ordered Mr. Fudby, who was becoming rather grumpy.

[002-106]Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] smiled suddenly.

[002-107]“Certainly, sir!” he said with alacrity. “ ’Twas a great ruffianly fellow, monstrous tall—”

[002-108]“How tall?” interrupted the [[london|town]]-clerk. “Six feet?”

[002-109]“Oh, quite!” lied Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]. “And fat.”

[002-110]Jack’s shoulders shook.

[002-111]“Fat, you say?” he asked gently.

[002-112]“Very fat,” affirmed Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]. “And prodigious rough, swearing dreadfully in his speech.”

[002-113]“You could not see his face, I suppose?”

[002-114]Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] hesitated.

[002-115]“I could see his mouth and chin,” he said, “and I remarked a long scar running from his underlip to the—er—bottom of his face.”

[002-116]Involuntarily [[john-carstares|Carstares]]’ hand caressed his perfectly smooth chin. Either the little clerk was a born romancer, or for some reason or other he did not want the [[highway-robbery|highwayman]] to be taken.

[002-117]“Well, Sir Anthony?” the mayor was saying. “Does that description fit your man?”

[002-118]My lord frowned thoughtfully.

[002-119]“Tall,” he said slowly, “and fat—you said fat, I think, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]?”

[002-120]Rather anxiously Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] reiterated this statement.

[002-121]“Ah! And with a long scar—yes, that is undoubtedly he. Furthermore,” he added audaciously, “he has a squint in his left eye. ’Tis a most ill-favoured rogue in all.”

[002-122]“It would appear so, Sir Anthony,” remarked the mayor drily. He did not in the least believe the story of the squint, and imagined that the fine court gentleman was amusing himself at their expense. Nevertheless, he had no intention of remonstrating; the sooner he could withdraw from this very tiresome affair the better. So he gravely took down all the absurd particulars, remarked that the man should be easy to find, and made ready to depart.

[002-123]The [[london|town]]-clerk rose, and tapped the beadle on the shoulder, whereupon that worthy, with a grunt, abandoned his pose of masterly inactivity and followed the mayor out of the room.

[002-124]Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]] rose.

[002-125]“I doubt I shall never see my money again,” he said pettishly. “If you, [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] had not been so—”

[002-126]“Allow me to offer you some snuff, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]],” interposed my lord gently, extending his jewelled box. “Doubtless, sir, you would wish to see my mare?”

[002-127]“I know nought of horses,” snorted Mr. [[mr-fudby|Fudby]]. “ ’Tis my clerk who appears to have remarked all the details.” He sneered terrifically.

[002-128]“Then pray, do me the [[honour|honour]] of walking as far as the stables, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]. ’Twere as well to be certain about the mare. Mr.-[[servant|ah—Fudb]]y, your servant.”

---

[002-129]“And now, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]], I have a grudge against you,” said [[john-carstares|Carstares]], as they walked across the little garden.

[002-130]“Me, sir? Oh—er—have you, Sir Anthony?”

[002-131]He looked up and perceived that the gentleman was laughing.

[002-132]“Yes, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]], a very serious grudge: you have described me as fat!”

[002-133][[mr-chilter|Chilter]] nearly fainted.

[002-134]“*You*, sir,” he gasped, and stared in amazement.

[002-135]“Also that I swear dreadfully in my speech, and that I have a scar running from my mouth to my chin.”

[002-136]Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] stood stock-still in the middle of the path.

[002-137]“It was you, sir, all the time? *You* held us up? Were *you* the man who wrenched open the door?”

[002-138]“I was that infamous scoundrel. I beg leave once more to apologise for my carelessness in opening that same door. Now tell me, why did you take such pains to throw dust in their sleepy eyes?”

[002-139]They resumed their walk slowly. The little clerk flushed.

[002-140]“I scarce know, sir, save that I—that I liked you, and—and—”

[002-141]“I see. ’Twas prodigious good of you, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]]. I wonder if there is anything that I can do to show my gratitude?”

[002-142]Again the clerk flushed and lifted his head proudly.

[002-143]“I thank you, sir, but there is nought.”

[002-144]By now they had reached the stable. [[john-carstares|Carstares]] opened the door and they entered.

[002-145]“Then will you accept this in token of my regard, sir?”

[002-146]Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] gazed at the emerald ring that glowed and winked at him from the palm of my lord’s hand. He looked up into the blue eyes and stammered a little.

[002-147]“Indeed, sir—I—I—”

[002-148]“ ’Tis honestly come by!” pleadingly. “Come, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]], you’ll not hurt my feelings by refusing? You will keep it in remembrance of a man—a fat man, Mr. Chilter—who rudely jerked[[coach| you]] on to the road?”

[002-149]The clerk took it with unsteady fingers.

[002-150]“I thank you most—”

[002-151]“Nay, I beg of you. ’Tis I thank you for aiding me so kindly. … Come and see my Jenny! Well, lass?” For the mare at the first sound of his voice had turned in her loose-box, and was whinnying and pawing the ground eagerly.

[002-152]“I do not understand, sir, anything: how it is that you are a [[highway-robbery|highwayman, or]] why you have honoured me with your confidence—why you should trust me. But—thank you.”

[002-153]As he spoke, Mr. [[mr-chilter|Chilter]] placed his hand in my lord’s, and for the second time in his life, felt the pressure of those firm, kindly fingers.

---

[002-154]“Why, your [[honour|honour]]! Ye’ve lost your emerald!”

[002-155]“No, [[jim-salter|Jim]]. I gave it away.”

[002-156]“Ye—ye *gave* it away, sir?”

[002-157]“M’m. To the small spider.”

[002-158]“B-but—”

[002-159]“And he called me fat, too.”

[002-160]“Called ye fat, sir?” asked the man, bewildered.

[002-161]“Yes. Very fat. By the way, let me tell you that I bought Jenny at Fittering today from the naughty ruffian who waylaid Mr. Bumble Bee.” He proceeded to give [[jim-salter|Jim]] a sketch of what had transpired below. When he had finished the man shook his head severely.

[002-162]“I doubt ye’ll never learn wisdom, sir,” he scolded.

[002-163]“I? What have I done?”

[002-164]“What did ye want to tell it all to the spider man for, sir? ’Twas most incautious of ye. Like as not, he’ll split to the fat gentleman, and we’ll have the whole [[london|town]] at our heels.”

[002-165]“Which just shows all you know of the small spider,” replied his master calmly. “Hand me the [[wigs-and-grooming|powder]].”
