---
description: "Mr. Bettison could make nothing of Diana of late. Her demeanour, at first so charming and so cheerful, had become listless, and even chilling."
id: ch16
label: "XVI: Mr. Bettison Proposes"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[016-001]Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]] could make nothing of [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] of late. Her demeanour, at first so charming and so cheerful, had become listless, and even chilling. She seemed hardly to listen to some of his best tales, and twice she actually forgot to laugh at what was surely a most witty pleasantry. It struck him that she regarded him with a resentful eye, as if she objected to his presence at Horton House, and had no desire to be courted. But Mr. Bettison was far too egotistic to believe such a thing, and he brushed the incredible suspicion away, deciding that her coldness was due to a very proper shyness. He continued his visits until they became so frequent that scarce a day passed without his strutting step being heard approaching the house and his voice inquiring for the Miss Beauleighs. Mr. [[mr-beauleigh|Beauleigh]], who secretly hoped for Mr. Bettison as a son-in-law, would not permit the ladies to deny themselves, and he further counselled [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] to absent herself after the first few moments, leaving the young couple together. Thus it was that it so continually fell to Diana’s lot to receive the Squire and to listen to his never-ending monologues. She persistently snubbed him, hoping to ward off the impending proposal, but either her snubs were not severe enough, or Mr. Bettison’s skin was too thick to feel them; for not a fortnight after my lord’s departure, he begged her hand in [[marriage-and-matrimony|marriage]]. It was refused him with great firmness, but, taking the refusal for coquettishness, he pressed his suit still more amorously, and with such a self-assured air that Mistress Di became indignant.

[016-002]“Sir,” she cried, “it seems you have indeed misread my attitude towards you!”

[016-003]Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]] was struck dumb with amazement. It had never entered his brain that Diana could seriously refuse him. He could hardly believe his ears at this quite unmistakable tone of voice, and sat gaping.

[016-004]“I must beg,” continued [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]], “I must beg that you will discontinue your all-too-frequent visits here. Please do not deem me unkind, but your persecution of me—I can call it nothing else—is wearying—and—you will forgive the word—tiresome. I confess I am surprised that you had not perceived your attentions to be distasteful to me.”

[016-005]“Distasteful!” cried Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]], recovering after two or three unsuccessful attempts from his speechlessness. “Do you mean what you say, Miss Diana? That you will not wed me?”

[016-006]She nodded.

[016-007]“Yes, Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]], I do.”

[016-008]“And that my attentions are displeasing to you! Well, [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]]! Well, indeed!”

[016-009][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] softened a little.

[016-010]“I am indeed sorry that you should have misconstrued—”

[016-011]“No misconstruction, madam!” snapped the Squire, who was fast losing control over his temper. “Do you dare aver that you did not encourage me to visit you?”

[016-012]“I do, most emphatically!”

[016-013]“Oh, I see what ’tis! You cannot hoodwink me. ’Twas never thus with you before that fellow came!”

[016-014]“Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]], I am entirely at a loss, but I desire you to leave this room before you say aught you may afterwards regret.”

[016-015]He disregarded her.

[016-016]“You are infatuated by that overdressed popinjay—that insufferable Carr, who, from all I hear, is but a shady fellow, and who—”

[016-017]With a sweeping movement [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] had risen and walked to the bell-rope. She now pulled it with such vigour that a great peal sounded throughout the house.

[016-018]She stood perfectly still, a statue of Disdain, tall, beautiful and furious, with compressed lips and head held high. Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]] broke off and mopped his brow, glaring at her.

[016-019]Startled Thomas appeared at the door.

[016-020]“Did you ring, madam?”

[016-021]“Show Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]] out,” was the proud answer.

[016-022]The Squire got up awkwardly.

[016-023]“I am sure I apologise if I said aught that was untrue,” he mumbled. “I hope you will not take my words amiss—”

[016-024]“I shall try to forget your insults, sir,” she replied. “The door, Thomas!”

[016-025]Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]] went out, and his step had lost some of its self-confident swagger.

[016-026]For a full minute after the great front door had shut behind him, [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] stood where she was, and then the colour suddenly flamed in her cheeks, and she turned and ran out of the room, up the stairs, to her own chamber, where she indulged in a luxurious fit of crying. From this enjoyable occupation she was interrupted by a rap on the door, and [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]]’s voice desiring to know if she was within.

[016-027]She instantly started up and with hasty fingers straightened her tumbled curls.

[016-028]“Pray enter!” she called, trying to sound jaunty. To complete the illusion, she started to hum. Her aunt entered.

[016-029]“I came to see if you had my broidery. I cannot find it, and I am sure ’twas you brought it in from the garden this morning.”

[016-030]“Yes—oh, yes—I am so sorry! ’Tis in that corner on the chair, I think,” replied [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]], keeping her face averted.

[016-031][[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] cast a shrewd glance at her, and sat down on the sofa with the air of one who means to stay.

[016-032]“What is it, my love?” she demanded.

[016-033][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] pretended to search for something in a cupboard.

[016-034]“Nothing, aunt! What should there be?”

[016-035]“I do not know. ’Tis what I want to find out,” answered [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] placidly.

[016-036]“There is nought amiss, I assure you!” To prove the truth of this statement, [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] essayed a laugh. It was a poor attempt, and wavered pitifully into a sob.

[016-037]“My pet, don’t tell me! You are crying!”

[016-038]“I—I’m n-not!” avowed [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]], hunting wildly for her pocket-handkerchief. “ ’Tis a cold in the head I have had these three days.”

[016-039]“Indeed, my love? Longer than that, I fear.”

[016-040]“Yes—perhaps so—I—What do you mean?”

[016-041]“I doubt but what you caught it the day that Mr. Carr left us.”

[016-042][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] started.

[016-043]“P-pray, do not be ridiculous, auntie!”

[016-044]“No, my dear. Come and sit beside me and tell me all about it,” coaxed [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]].

[016-045][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] hesitated, gave a damp sniff, and obeyed.

[016-046][[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] drew her head down on to her shoulder soothingly.

[016-047]“There, there! Don’t cry, my sweet! What has happened?”

[016-048]“ ’Tis that odious Mr. [[mr-bettison|Bettison]]!” sobbed Diana. “He—he had the audacity to ask me to m-marry him!”

[016-049]“You don’t say so, my love! I thought I heard him arrive. So you sent him about his business?”

[016-050]“N-not before he had time to insult m-me!”

[016-051]“Insult you? Di!”

[016-052]“He—he dared to insinuate—oh no! he accused me outright—of being infatuated by Mr. Carr! Infatuated!”

[016-053]Over her head [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] opened her eyes at her own reflection in the glass.

[016-054]“The brute! But, of course, ’tis true?”

[016-055]No answer.

[016-056]“Is it not?”

[016-057]The sobs came faster.

[016-058]“Of—of course ’tis true, but h-how dared he say so?”

[016-059]“Di, my love, you really are in love with that boy?”

[016-060]“I—I—I asked him to marry me—and he wouldn’t!”

[016-061]“Good gracious heavens!” [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] was genuinely horrified. “My dear Diana!”

[016-062]“N-not outright—b-but he understood—and—he loves me! And I’d do it again tomorrow, if I could—immodest or no! So there!”

[016-063]“Yes, yes,” soothed [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] hastily.[[diana-beauleigh| “Tel]]l me all about it.” Diana lifted her head.

[016-064]“That’s all. And he loves me—he does—he does!”

[016-065]“Did he say so?”

[016-066]“N-no—but I could tell. And I love him”—sob—“and I’d sooner die than live without him, and he won’t ask me b-because he has not got a spotless p-past, and he’d be a cur, and horrid things, and my husband must not be an—an—outcast, and-and—and I don’t care!”

[016-067]Her bewildered aunt unravelled this with difficulty.

[016-068]“He’d be a cur if he asked you to marry him?” she asked, with knitted brows.

[016-069]“Yes. Because he’s a [[highway-robbery|highwayman]].”

[016-070]“A [[highway-robbery|highwayman]]! Then ’twas true what he said? Well, well! I should never have thought it! That nice boy!”

[016-071][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] disengaged herself; in her eyes was a threatening gleam.

[016-072]“Don’t dare say a word against him!”

[016-073]“No, no—of course not! I was only surprised. But I am thankfully glad he did not ask you, for all that!”

[016-074]“Glad? How can you be so cruel?”

[016-075]“My dear, you could not possibly marry—a—a—”

[016-076]“Common felon!” sobbed [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]]. “I can—I can!”

[016-077]“And heaven alone knows what else he may have done! Why, child, he said himself that he had a—a spotty past!”

[016-078]At this her niece gave a tearful giggle.

[016-079]“La! What ails you now, Di?”

[016-080]“H-he never said—spotty.”

[016-081][[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] smiled reluctantly.

[016-082]“A doubtful past, then.”

[016-083]“I don’t believe it!”

[016-084]Her aunt pursed up her lips.

[016-085]“I won’t believe it. He couldn’t be wicked. You forget he saved me!”

[016-086][[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] relented.

[016-087]“No, I do not, my love; and, to be sure, I think he is a dear boy, but I also think ’twas very right of him to go away.”

[016-088]She was enveloped in a rapturous embrace.

[016-089]“Auntie, you know you love him almost as much as I do?”

[016-090]“No, that I do not!” was the grim retort. “*I* am not like to want to marry him!”

[016-091]There was another watery giggle at this, and Diana went over to the dressing-table to tidy her [[wigs-and-grooming|hair]].

[016-092]“I doubt I shall never see him again,” she said wretchedly. “Oh, auntie, if you could but have seen his dear, unhappy eyes!”

[016-093]“Stuff and nonsense! Not see him again, forsooth! He will call upon us in [[london|town]]. ’Tis but common politeness.”

[016-094]“You forget he is a [[highway-robbery|highwayman]], and not like to come nigh us again.”

[016-095]“Well, my dear, if he cares for you as you say he does, he will see to it that he takes up some decent occupation. Mayhap, he will go into the army, or whatnot. Then wait and see if he does not come to you.”

[016-096]“Do you think so?” doubtfully.

[016-097]“Of course I do, sweetheart! And if he does not try to mend his ways, and you see him no more—why then, snap your fingers at him, my love, for he will not be worth one tear!”

[016-098][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] sighed and poured out some water to bathe her face with.

[016-099]“Is not that sensible?” coaxed her aunt.

[016-100]She raised her head and looked unutterable scorn.

[016-101]“I think ’tis remarkable silly,” she answered. Then her dignity fell from her. “Oh, are all men such big stupids?” she cried.

[016-102]“Most of ’em,” nodded her aunt.

[016-103]“But can’t he tell that I shall be—oh, so miserable, and that I should not ruin my life if I married him?”

[016-104]“My dear, once a man gets an idea into his head, ’tis the very [[tracy-belmanoir|devil]] to get it out of him! Not but what I think Master Jack is right, mind you. And your dear papa and I had looked higher for you. After all—what is Mr. Carr?”

[016-105]“He is the only man I will ever marry! So you may cease looking higher for me! I suppose you want me to marry that great gaby, [[sir-denis-fabian|Sir Denis Fabian]], you are forever inviting to the house? Or, perhaps, this gallant Mr. Bettison? Or Mr. Everard? How *can* you be so unkind?”

[016-106]“I am not. But I could not bear to see you throw yourself away on a [[highway-robbery|highwayman]], my dear.”

[016-107][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] ran to her, putting her arms round her neck.

[016-108]“Dearest auntie, forgive my rudeness! I know you did not mean to be unkind! But you do not understand—I *love* him.”

[016-109]“I always said you’d take it badly,” nodded [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] gloomily.

[016-110]“Take what badly?”

[016-111]“Love. And no man is worth one teardrop, sweet.”

[016-112]The confident, tender little laugh that answered this statement made her look at her suddenly changed niece in surprise.

[016-113]“You don’t know,” said [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]]. Her eyes were soft and luminous. “You just do not know.”

[016-114]Before [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] could think of a suitable retort, a knock fell on the door. It was opened, and Thomas was found to be without.

[016-115]“My Lady O’Hara is below, madam.”

[016-116]For an instant the two ladies stared at one another. Then:

[016-117]“La and drat!” said [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]]. “With the drawing-room in a muddle after cleaning!”

[016-118][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] nodded to the man.

[016-119]“We will come, Thomas.” Then as soon as he had withdrawn, she stared again at her aunt. “Lady O’Hara! But why?”

[016-120]“I suppose she felt she must call after Sir [[miles-ohara|Miles]] had been here so often. But why, for goodness’ sake, must she choose the one day that the drawing-room is all untidy? Drat again, I say!”

[016-121][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] was [[wigs-and-grooming|powder]]ing her little nose, and anxiously looking to see if the tear-stains had quite vanished.

[016-122]“ ’Tis not untidy, [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Aunt Betty]]. Oh, I am quite eager to see her—I think she must be charming, from all Sir Miles said. Do hurry, aunt!”

[016-123]Miss Betty stuck a pin into her hair and smoothed out her [[fashion|dress]].

[016-124]“And me in this old taffeta!” she grumbled.

[016-125][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] swirled round, her own peach-coloured silk rustling fashionably.

[016-126]“Never mind, dear—you look very sweet. But *do* be quick!” [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]] suffered herself to be led to the door.

[016-127]“ ’Tis all very fine for you, my love, with a new gown fresh on today! Will you just take a look at my petticoat, though?”

[016-128]“Nonsense, you are beautiful! Come!”

[016-129]Together they descended the stairs, and went into the drawing-room.

[016-130]A dainty, very diminutive little lady arose from a chair at their entry, and came forward with outstretched hands, and such a fascinating smile that [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]]’s ill-humour vanished, and she responded to her visitor’s deep curtsy with one of her best jerky dips.

[016-131]“I am vastly delighted to welcome you, madam,” she said primly. “ ’Tis good in you to come this long way to see us.”

[016-132]She drew a chair forward for my lady, and presented her niece. Lady O’Hara gave the girl a swift, scrutinising glance, and curtsied again.

[016-133]“ ’Tis a great pleasure to me to meet you at last, [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]],” she smiled. “My husband has told me so much of you, I declare I was all agog to meet you!”

[016-134][[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] warmed instantly to the little lady’s charm.

[016-135]“Indeed, madam, we, too, have heard much of you from Sir [[miles-ohara|Miles]]. *We* have wanted to meet *you*!”

[016-136]Lady O’Hara seated herself and nodded briskly.

[016-137]“I expect he told you some dreadful tales of me,” she said happily. “I must ask your pardon for not having visited you before, but, as I daresay you know, I have been away, and, gracious me, when I returned everything seemed topsy-turvy!” She laughed across at [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]]. “I promise you I have had my hands full putting things to rights, [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]]!”

[016-138]Miss Betty drew her chair closer, and in a minute they were deep in truly feminine conversation: the prodigious extravagance of the servants; the helplessness of menfolk when left to themselves, and then [[london|London]], its shops, its parks, the newest play.

[016-139]Lady O’Hara was begged to take a dish of [[miss-betty-beauleigh|Miss Betty]]’s precious Bohea—a very high honour indeed—and when Mr. Beauleigh came into the room he found his sister and daughter seated on either side of a pretty, animated little lady whom he had never before seen, talking hard, and partaking of tay and angel cakes. Whereupon he retired hastily and shut himself up in his library.
