---
description: "Lady O’Hara looked across at her sleeping husband with no little severity in her glance. He was stretched in a chair beneath a giant oak, and she was busied with some needlework a few paces from him."
id: ch17
label: "XVII: Lady O’Hara Wins Her Point"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[017-001]Lady O’Hara looked across at her sleeping husband with no little severity in her glance. He was stretched in a chair beneath a giant oak, and she was busied with some needlework a few paces from him. O’Hara’s eyes were shut and his mouth open. My lady frowned and coughed. She rasped her throat quite considerably, but it was not without effect; her spouse shut his mouth and opened one lazy eyelid. Immediately my lady assumed an air of gentle mournfulness, and the eye regarding her twinkled a little, threatening to close. [[molly-ohara|Molly]] looked reproachful, and began to speak in an aggrieved tone:

[017-002]“Indeed, and I do not think it at all kind in you to go to sleep when I want to talk, sir.”

[017-003]O’Hara hastily opened the other eye.

[017-004]“Why, my love, I was not asleep! I was—er—thinking!”

[017-005]“Do you say so, sir? And do you usually think with your mouth open—*snoring*?”

[017-006]O’Hara started up.

[017-007]“I’ll swear I did not snore!” he cried. “[[molly-ohara|Molly]], ’tis a wicked tease ye are!”

[017-008]“[[miles-ohara|Miles]], ’tis a big baby you are!” she mimicked. “There is a caterpillar on your [[wigs-and-grooming|wig]], and ’tis on crooked.”

[017-009]“The caterpillar?” asked O’Hara, bewildered.

[017-010]“No, stupid, the [[wigs-and-grooming|wig]]. I had best straighten it for you, I suppose.” She rose and stooped over him, settling the wig and removing the caterpillar by means of two leaves, judiciously wielded. Then she dropped a kiss on her husband’s brow and sat down at his feet.

[017-011]“First, you have never asked me where I was gone to all yesterday afternoon.”

[017-012]O’Hara had been carefully broken in, and he now knew what was expected of him, and put on an expression of great interest.

[017-013]“Where *did* ye go, my lady?”

[017-014]“I went to call on [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]] and her niece, sir!”

[017-015]She looked up at him triumphantly and a little challengingly.

[017-016]“The [[tracy-belmanoir|devil]] ye did!”

[017-017]“Certainly, sir. I knew that there was something in the air, and I remembered your letter to me saying that Jack was in love with [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]]. So I thought I would go and see her for myself.”

[017-018][[miles-ohara|Miles]] looked down at her half indulgently, half vexedly.

[017-019]“Did you, puss?”

[017-020]“I did. And I found that she was in love with him as well as he with her—of course.”

[017-021]“Of course?”

[017-022]“Who could help falling in love with him? He’s so monstrous captivating, I would like to marry him myself.”

[017-023]She bent her head to hide the roguish smile that had sprung to her lips.

[017-024]“I beg your pardon?” asked O’Hara, startled.

[017-025]My lady traced patterns on his knee.

[017-026]“Provided, of course, that I had not already married you, [[miles-ohara|Miles]].”

[017-027]But O’Hara had seen the smile. He heaved a great sigh, and said in lugubrious tones:

[017-028]“There is always the river, madam.”

[017-029]My lady’s finger wavered and stopped, and her hand tucked itself away into his.

[017-030]“That is not a nice joke, [[miles-ohara|Miles]].”

[017-031]He laughed, and tweaked one of her curls.

[017-032]“Sure, and did ye not ask for it, asthore?”

[017-033]“Of course I did not. But about Jack, dear—”

[017-034]“I thought it *was* about Jack?”

[017-035]“[[miles-ohara|Miles]], will you be quiet and attend?”

[017-036]“Yes, m’dear.”

[017-037]“Very well, then. As I have told you, I drove over to Littledean yesterday afternoon, and made the acquaintance of the [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]]s.”

[017-038]“And what did ye think of them?”

[017-039]“I thought Diana was wonderfully beautiful—such eyes, Miles!—and such hair! Miss [[mr-beauleigh|Beauleigh]] is very amiable, and so droll! I drank a dish of tay with them, and I spoke of Jack—”

[017-040]“Madcap, never tell me ye called him [[john-carstares|Carstares]]?”

[017-041]“No, you great gaby! Of course I did not. As it chanced, [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]] mentioned him first, and she called him Mr. Carr. So I did, too.[[diana-beauleigh| And ]]I noticed that Diana said scarce a word about him, and when she did ’twas of the coolest. That, of course, made me all the more certain that she loved him.”

[017-042]O’Hara was plainly puzzled.

[017-043]“But why should you be certain if she did not speak of him, alanna?”

[017-044]“ ’Tis what you’ll never understand, my dear, because you are but a man. But no matter—I knew. I quite adored [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]], and determined to talk to her alone. So I admired the roses, and she offered to escort me round the garden, which was what I wanted. We went out together. I think Diana must have liked me, for—”

[017-045]“Nonsense!”

[017-046]“Be quiet, [[miles-ohara|Miles]]!—for she dropped her ice and became quite friendly. And I talked a lot.”

[017-047]She was aware of a convulsive movement above her, and a suppressed cough. She raised inquiring eyebrows.

[017-048]“Well, sir?”

[017-049]“Nothing, asthore—nothing. Go on with the tale—you were saying—”

[017-050]“That I talked a lot.” She paused, and her eyes dared him; then she dimpled and dropped her lashes over them. “I shan’t tell you all I said—”

[017-051]A relieved sigh interrupted her.

[017-052]“And if you continue to behave in this disagreeable [[fashion]] I shall not say another word about anything!”

[017-053]Having satisfied herself that he was not going to venture a retort, she continued:

[017-054]“We had a long chat, and I gathered, from all she said and left unsaid, that Jack, for some foolish reason, will not ask her to marry him.”

[017-055]“Foolish reason, asthore?” he interrupted.

[017-056]“Oh, I know you consider it a remarkable fine reason, but I tell you, ’tis [[class|rank]] cruelty to that poor child. As if she cared about [[highway-robbery|highwaymen]]!”

[017-057]“ ’Twas not so much that, I take it, as—”

[017-058]“Yes, but he could tell her he was innocent—oh, [[miles-ohara|Miles]], do not look so provoking! Of course he could! I vow if you had treated me so, I would never have let you go until you had truly repented! I am of a mind to speak to Jack.”

[017-059]“ ’Twould be an entertaining sight, but ye’ll kindly have a care how you touch him, my lady.”

[017-060]“He does not understand. I *know* she would be proud to marry him—”

[017-061]“And ye’d think it a fine thing in Jack to ask her, the way things are with him at present?”

[017-062]“I—oh, I don’t know!”

[017-063]“No, me love. Jack is right: he must first clear his name.”

[017-064]“Then, gracious goodness me, why does he not?” cried [[molly-ohara|Molly]], exasperated.

[017-065]This time it was O’Hara’s turn to look superior.

[017-066]“Well, alanna, that’s a question ye cannot hope to understand—because ye are but a woman.”

[017-067]Lady O’Hara ignored the challenge.

[017-068]“But what is to be done?”

[017-069]“Nought. He will have to work it out himself. He bound me to secrecy some time ago, or I would be tempted to speak to [[richard-carstares|Richard]].”

[017-070]“I quite *hate* [[richard-carstares|Richard]]!” she cried. “He must be a selfish, unkind person. And now Jack swears he must go away almost at once—and, oh!you should have seen Diana’s face of despair when I mentioned that he was going abroad again. Miles, we must keep him here as long as ever we can! Oh, dear! ’tis all very worrying.”

[017-071]She broke off as O’Hara pressed her hand warningly. My lord was coming across the lawn towards them.

[017-072]“I am in dire [[disgrace-and-exile|disgrace]],” he said. “I was left with your ferocious baby, Molly, and to quiet him, I gave him a string of beads that you had left on the table.”

[017-073]“My precious Indian wooden beads!”

[017-074]“Yes—I believe so. Anyway, the paint came off, and when Jane returned, David looked as though he had some horrible disease. She was most annoyed about it.” He sat down in [[molly-ohara|Molly]]’s [[wigs-and-grooming|late]]ly vacated chair, and carefully wiped a daub of green from his forefinger.

[017-075][[molly-ohara|Molly]] laughed.

[017-076]“Poor Jane! She will have such a task to clean him. But you’ve arrived most opportunely. We were talking of you.”

[017-077]O’Hara groaned inwardly, and tried to frown her down.

[017-078]“You were? I am flattered! May I ask what you were saying?”

[017-079]“Why, that we do not want you to go back to France.”

[017-080]O’Hara breathed again.

[017-081]“That is very kind of you, my lady. I regret the necessity myself.”

[017-082]“Are you sure it is necessary? You might just as well live in a nice place near here, with a dear old woman to keep house for you—and—and [[jim-salter|Jim]]—and—lots of pleasant things.”

[017-083]My lord shook his head.

[017-084]“No, thank you!”

[017-085]“Yes, yes! And later on you could choose a wife!” she continued audaciously.

[017-086]“Not at all. There would be no choice; I should be made to marry the dear old woman. You would bully me into it.”

[017-087]She laughed.

[017-088]“Seriously, Jack, could you not settle down near here?”

[017-089]“Not with that old woman, [[molly-ohara|Molly]].”

[017-090]“Never mind her; won’t you consider it? No one need know you—in fact, you need see no one—and—oh, Jack! don’t look like that. [[miles-ohara|Miles]], is he not ridiculous?”

[017-091]“Sure, alanna, ’tis a dreary life he’d be leading,” chuckled O’Hara.

[017-092]“I see what it is, [[molly-ohara|Molly]]. You have planned to make me a recluse, *and* to marry me to my housekeeper. I protest, ’tis great ill-usage!”

[017-093][[molly-ohara|Molly]] eyed him doubtfully.

[017-094]“Would you *much* object to the life, [[john-carstares|John]]?”

[017-095]“Madam,” he replied solemnly, “you would find my corpse in the garden at the end of the first week.”

[017-096]“Of course I should not like that,” she pondered. “But I do not see what else we can do for you. Oh, and that reminds me! I drove over to Littledean yesterday—[[miles-ohara|Miles]], my love, will you be so kind as to fetch me my hat? I protest, the sun—”

[017-097]“We will move more into the shade,” said her disobliging husband.

[017-098]“Oh, well! ’tis of no account, though I did hear that Brown was wanting to speak to you about the new cob—”

[017-099]“ ’Tis prodigious thoughtful of you, [[molly-ohara|Molly]], but I met Brown some time ago.”

[017-100]Lady O’Hara gave it up.

[017-101]“Well, as I was saying, Jack, I went to call at Horton House. Dear me, what a beautiful girl [[diana-beauleigh|Diana]] is, to be sure!”

[017-102][[john-carstares|Carstares]] tried to think of something to say, and failing, made a noncommittal sound.

[017-103]“Yes. They both sent their kind wishes, and hoped you were better. Goodness! ’tis very close here. I wonder if you will give me your arm round the garden? And would *you* fetch me my hat? I left it in the hall, I think. Thank you very much!”

[017-104]She waited until he was out of earshot before she turned to her husband.

[017-105]“Now, [[miles-ohara|Miles]], you must please to stay where you are. I am not going to do anything indiscreet.”

[017-106]“[[molly-ohara|Molly]], I can’t have ye worry him—”

[017-107]“No such thing! I am going to coax him to stay here instead of going abroad. I feel sure that if we can but persuade him to stay, something will happen.”

[017-108]“What will happen?”

[017-109]“Something!”

[017-110]“How do ye know?”

[017-111]“I don’t know; I only feel it.”

[017-112]“Very well, asthore. If you can tease Jack into staying, I’ll bless ye.”

[017-113]“That will be most enjoyable, I make no doubt!” she answered, and stepped back out of reach.

[017-114]“Oh, thank you, [[john-carstares|John]]!” She tied the hat over her curls, and placed her hand on my lord’s arm. “Lazy [[miles-ohara|Miles]] is going to sleep again!” she said. “And I so dislike to hear him snore, so let’s go a long way away—into the rose garden!”

[017-115]“Don’t go so far as all that!” drawled [[miles-ohara|Miles]], closing his eyes. “You will tire yourselves.”

[017-116]“Do you allow him to make these ribald remarks?” inquired Jack, waiting for her to extricate a stone from her shoe.

[017-117]“Not usually,” she answered. “He takes advantage when you are here.” She dropped the pebble on top of O’Hara and strolled away with my lord.

[017-118]As soon as they had rounded a corner in the shrubbery, she commenced the attack.

[017-119]“I want to speak to you of [[miles-ohara|Miles]],” she confided. “He is so worried.”

[017-120]“Is he, [[molly-ohara|Molly]]? Faith, I hadn’t noticed it!”

[017-121]She reflected that neither had she, but continued, nothing daunted:

[017-122]“Ah, but he is!”

[017-123]“What worries him?”

[017-124]“You,” sighed the lady mournfully. “ ’Tis the thought of your leaving us. I feel it myself.”

[017-125]“Why—”

[017-126]“He had hoped you would be with us for a long time—as I had.”

[017-127]“ ’Tis monstrous good of you both, but—”

[017-128]“I am sure I do not know what I shall do with [[miles-ohara|Miles]] when you are gone. He was so looking forward to having you with him.”

[017-129]“[[molly-ohara|Molly]]—”

[017-130]“And, indeed, it has come as a great disappointment to both of us to hear you talk of leaving. Won’t you think better of it?”

[017-131]“[[molly-ohara|Molly]], you overwhelm me. … How can I remain here indefinitely?”

[017-132]“If only you would! You don’t know how happy it would make us. I declare [[miles-ohara|Miles]] will worry himself quite ill if you persist in being so unkind.”

[017-133]“Oh, [[molly-ohara|Molly]], you rogue!”

[017-134]She could not repress a smile, but checked it almost at once. “I mean it, Jack.”

[017-135]“What! That [[miles-ohara|Miles]] is worrying himself ill over me? Fie!”

[017-136]“Perhaps not as bad as that,” she admitted. “But, indeed, he is much perturbed … and, oh! I wish that you would not make us so unhappy.” She dabbed at her eyes with a wispy handkerchief, but managed to watch his face all the same. “David loves you so, the pet! and [[miles-ohara|Miles]] is so delighted to have found you again—and *I* like you—and—and—and I think ’twill be indeed rude and horrid if you do go—besides being so silly!”

[017-137]“Do you, [[molly-ohara|Molly]]? You make me feel I should be an ungrateful boor to refuse—”

[017-138]The handkerchief was whisked away.

[017-139]“Then, of course you won’t try to refuse! You’ll stay? Promise!”

[017-140]“I cannot thank you enough—”

[017-141]“Oh, you nice Jack! Till the autumn? Promise!”

[017-142]“[[molly-ohara|Molly]], I really—”

[017-143]“Promise! I shall cry if you do not!”

[017-144]“I cannot! How could I prey upon your hospitality for so—”

[017-145]“What rubbish, Jack! As if Miles had not spent months and months at [[wyncham|Wyncham]] when you were boys—”

[017-146]“That was different—”

[017-147]“—when you were boys, and now you are so proud that you refuse to stay three miserable little months with us—”

[017-148]“No, no, [[molly-ohara|Molly]]; indeed, ’tis not that!”

[017-149]“Confess, if [[miles-ohara|Miles]] were a bachelor, you would not hesitate?” He was silent, nonplussed.

[017-150]“You see! And just because he has a wife you are disagreeable and proud. You feel you cannot bear to stay with me—”

[017-151]“I swear I do not!”

[017-152]“Then why do you refuse?” she triumphed.

[017-153]“[[molly-ohara|Molly]]—really, I—” He broke off, laughing. “You little wretch, you leave me nothing to say!”

[017-154]“Then you will stay, as I ask?”

[017-155]“You are quite sure—”

[017-156]“Quite.”

[017-157]“Thank you very much, I will stay. ’Tis monstrous good of you, I vow. When you are tired of me, say so.”

[017-158]“I will,” she promised. “Oh, but we shall do famously! How pleased [[miles-ohara|Miles]] will be! By the way,” she continued, airily, “I asked the [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]]s to honour us on Wednesday, but, unfortunately, they could not. Still, perhaps some other d—”

[017-159]She stopped, a little frightened, for he was standing before her, gripping her shoulders in a very elder-brotherly [[fashion|fashion]].

[017-160]“Listen to me, [[molly-ohara|Molly]]. I know that you have discovered that I love Diana, and I know that you think to be very kind and to bring us together. But I tell you that ’twill not be kind at all, only very cruel to us both. If you worry her to come here, I must go. Do you see?”

[017-161][[molly-ohara|Molly]] looked into the stern eyes, and her lip trembled.

[017-162]“I’m very—sorry!” she faltered.

[017-163]Jack drew her arm through his once more.

[017-164]“ ’Tis nothing to be sorry about; and, indeed, I am very grateful to you for trying to make me happy. But please do not!”

[017-165]“No, I promise I will not. But—but do you think you are being quite fair to—”

[017-166]“[[molly-ohara|Molly]], tell me this: do you think you are being quite good to disobey your husband?”

[017-167]The blue eyes were dancing. She smiled doubtfully.

[017-168]“What do you mean, Jack?”

[017-169]“Do you tell me that [[miles-ohara|Miles]] did not expressly forbid you to mention this subject to me?”

[017-170]She pulled her hand away, her mouth forming a soundless “Oh!”

[017-171]“Well—well—well, how horrid of you!” she cried, and shook her fist at him. “I’m going now!”

[017-172]Later, she found her husband in the library, and ran into his arms.

[017-173]“Do you mind holding me tightly?” she asked. “I’ve—I’ve been put in the corner!”

[017-174]“What?” O’Hara drew her on to his knee.

[017-175]“Yes—figuratively—by Jack. I think, perhaps, I shouldn’t like to marry him after all!”

[017-176]“What has he done?”

[017-177]“N-nothing. I’m *afraid*,” polishing one of his buttons with an assiduous finger, “I’m *afraid* that it was rather my own fault!”

[017-178]“Oh!”

[017-179]“Yes—but I only said *very* little about the [[diana-beauleigh|Miss Beauleigh]]s, and he suddenly turned into an iceberg and made me feel like a naughty little girl. But he is going to stay, all the same; so kiss me, Miles!”
