---
description: "Immediately on reaching the camp, the four negroes and old Nan were"
id: ch035
label: "Section 35"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[035-001]Immediately on reaching the camp, the four negroes and old Nan were

[035-002]placed under precisely the same treatment as the rest of the captives.

[035-003]In spite of a desperate resistance, they were deprived of their

[035-004]weapons, and fastened two and two, one behind another, by means of a

[035-005]pole about six feet long, forked at each end, and attached to their

[035-006]necks by an iron bolt. Their arms were left free, that they might carry

[035-007]any burdens, and in order to prevent an attempt to escape a heavy chain

[035-008]was passed round their waists. It was thus in single file, unable to

[035-009]turn either right or left, they would have to march hundreds of miles,

[035-010]goaded along their toilsome road by the havildar's whip. The lot of

[035-011]Hercules seemed preferable, exposed though undoubtedly he would be in

[035-012]his flight to hunger, and to the attacks of wild beasts, and to all the

[035-013]perils of that dreary country. But solitude, with its worst privations,

[035-014]was a thing to be envied in comparison to being in the hands of those

[035-015]pitiless drivers, who did not speak a word of the language of their

[035-016]victims, but communicated with them only by threatening gestures or by

[035-017]actual violence.

[035-018]As a white man, [[dick-sands|Dick]] was not attached to any other captive. The drivers

[035-019]were probably afraid to subject him to the same treatment as the

[035-020]negroes, and he was left unfettered, but placed under the strict

[035-021]surveillance of a havildar. At first he felt considerable surprise at

[035-022]not seeing Harris or [[negoro|Negoro]] in the camp, as he could not entertain a

[035-023]doubt that it was at their instigation the attack had been made upon

[035-024]their retreat; but when he came to reflect that [[mrs-weldon|Mrs. Weldon]], Jack, and

[035-025]Cousin Benedict had not been allowed to come with them, but had been

[035-026]carried off in some other direction, he began to think it probable that

[035-027]the two rascals had some scheme to carry out with regard to them

[035-028]elsewhere.

[035-029]The [[slave-caravan|caravan]] consisted of nearly eight hundred, including about five

[035-030]hundred slaves of both sexes, two hundred soldiers and freebooters, and

[035-031]a considerable number of havildars and drivers, over whom the agents

[035-032]acted as superior officers.

[035-033]These agents are usually of Portuguese or Arab extraction; and the

[035-034]cruelties they inflict upon the miserable captives are almost beyond

[035-035]conception; they beat them continually, and if any unfortunate slave

[035-036]sinks from exhaustion, or in any way becomes unfit for the market, he

[035-037]is forthwith either stabbed or shot. As the result of this brutality it

[035-038]rarely happens that fifty per cent of the slaves reach their

[035-039]destination; some few may contrive to escape, and many are left as

[035-040]skeletons along the line of route.

[035-041]Such of the agents as are Portuguese are (as it may well be imagined)

[035-042]of the very lowest dregs of society, outlaws, escaped criminals, and

[035-043]men of the most desperate character; of this stamp were the associates

[035-044]of Negoro and Harris, now in the employ of José Antonio Alvez, one of

[035-045]the most notorious of all the slave-dealers of [[africa|Central Africa]], and of

[035-046]whom Commander Cameron has given some curious information.

[035-047]Most frequently the soldiers who escort the captives are natives hired

[035-048]by the dealers, but they do not possess the entire monopoly of the

[035-049]forays made for the purpose of securing slaves; the native negro kings

[035-050]make war upon each other with this express design, and sell their

[035-051]vanquished antagonists, men, women, and children, to the traders for

[035-052]calico, guns, gunpowder and red beads; or in times of famine, according

[035-053]to Livingstone, even for a few grains of maize.

[035-054]The escort of old Alvez' caravan was an average specimen of these

[035-055]African soldiers. It was simply a horde of half-naked banditti,

[035-056]carrying old flint-locked muskets, the barrels of which were decorated

[035-057]with copper rings. The agents are very often put to their wits' end to

[035-058]know how to manage them; their orders are called in question, halts are

[035-059]continually demanded, and in order to avert desertion they are

[035-060]frequently obliged to yield to the obstreperous will of their

[035-061]undisciplined force.

[035-062]Although the slaves, both male and female, are compelled to carry

[035-063]burdens whilst on their march, a certain number of porters, called

[035-064]_pagazis_, is specially engaged to carry the more valuable merchandize,

[035-065]and principally the ivory. Tusks occasionally weigh as much as 160

[035-066]lbs., and require two men to carry them to the dépôts, whence they are

[035-067]sent to the markets of Khartoom, Natal, and Zanzibar. On their arrival

[035-068]the _pagazis_ are paid by the dealers according to contract, which is

[035-069]generally either by about twenty yards of the cotton stuff known as

[035-070]_merikani_, or by a little powder, by a handful or two of cowries, by

[035-071]some beads, or if all these be scarce, they are paid by being allotted

[035-072]some of the slaves who are otherwise unsalable.

[035-073]Among the five hundred slaves in the caravan, very few were at all

[035-074]advanced in years. The explanation of this circumstance was that

[035-075]whenever a raid is made, and a village is set on fire, every inhabitant

[035-076]above the age of forty is mercilessly massacred or hung upon the

[035-077]neighbouring trees; only the children and young adults of both sexes

[035-078]are reserved for the market, and as these constitute only a small

[035-079]proportion of the vanquished, some idea may be formed of the frightful

[035-080]depopulation which these vast districts of Equinoctial Africa are

[035-081]undergoing.

[035-082]Nothing could be more pitiable than the condition of this miserable

[035-083]herd. All alike were destitute of clothing, having nothing on them but

[035-084]a few strips of the stuff known as _mbuza_, made from the bark of

[035-085]trees; many of the women were covered with bleeding wounds from the

[035-086]drivers' lashes, and had their feet lacerated by the constant friction

[035-087]of the road, but in addition to other burdens were compelled to carry

[035-088]their own emaciated children; young men, too, there were who had lost

[035-089]their voices from exhaustion, and who, to use Livingstone's expression,

[035-090]had been reduced to "ebony skeletons" by toiling under the yoke of the

[035-091]fork, which is far more galling than the galley-chain. It was a sight

[035-092]that might have moved the most stony-hearted, but yet there was no

[035-093]symptom of compassion on the part of those Arab and Portuguese drivers

[035-094]whom Cameron pronounces "worse than brutes."[1]

[035-095][Footnote 1: Cameron says, "In order to obtain the fifty women of whom

[035-096]Alvez is the owner, ten villages, containing altogether a population of

[035-097]not less than 1500, were totally destroyed. A few of the inhabitants

[035-098]contrived to escape, but the majority either perished in the flames,

[035-099]were slain in defending their families, or were killed by hunger or

[035-100]wild beasts in the jungle.... The crimes which are perpetuated in

[035-101]Africa, by men who call themselves Christians, seem incredible to the

[035-102]inhabitants of civilized countries. It is impossible that the

[035-103]government at Lisbon can be aware of the atrocities committed by those

[035-104]who boast of being subject to her flag." _Tour du Monde_.

[035-105]N.B.--Against these assertions of Cameron, loud protestations have been

[035-106]made in Portugal.]

[035-107]The guard over the prisoners was so strict that Dick Sands felt it

[035-108]would be utterly useless for him to make any attempt to seek for Mrs.

[035-109]Weldon. She and her son had doubtless been carried off by Negoro, and

[035-110]his heart sank when he thought of the dangers to which too probably she

[035-111]would be exposed. Again and again he repeated his reproaches on himself

[035-112]that he had ever allowed either Negoro or Harris to escape his hands.

[035-113]Neither Mrs. Weldon nor Jack could expect the least assistance from

[035-114]Cousin Benedict; the good man was barely able to consult for himself.

[035-115]All three of them would, he conjectured, be conveyed to some remote

[035-116]district of Angola; the poor mother, like some miserable slave, would

[035-117]insist upon carrying her own sick son until her strength failed her,

[035-118]and, exhausted by her endurances, she sank down helpless on the way.

[035-119]A prisoner, and powerless to help! the very thought was itself a

[035-120]torture to poor Dick. Even [[dingo|Dingo]] was gone! It would have been a

[035-121]satisfaction to have had the dog to send off upon the track of the lost

[035-122]ones. One only hope remained. Hercules still was free. All that human

[035-123]strength could attempt in Mrs. Weldon's behalf, Hercules would not fail

[035-124]to try. Perhaps, too, under cover of the night, it was not altogether

[035-125]improbable that the stalwart negro would mingle with the crowd of

[035-126]negroes (amongst whom his dark skin would enable him to pass

[035-127]unnoticed), and make his way to Dick himself; then might not the two

[035-128]together elude the vigilance of the watch? might they not follow after

[035-129]and overtake Mrs. Weldon in the forest? would they not perchance be

[035-130]able either by stealth or by force to liberate her, and once free they

[035-131]would effect an escape to the river, and finally accomplish the

[035-132]undertaking in which they had been so lamentably frustrated. Such were

[035-133]the sanguine visions in which Dick permitted himself to indulge; his

[035-134]temperament overcame all tendency to despair, and kept him alive to the

[035-135]faintest chance of [[rescue|deliverance]].

[035-136]The next thing of importance was to ascertain the destination of the

[035-137]caravan. It was a matter of the most serious moment whether the convoy

[035-138]of slaves were going to be carried to one of the dépôts of Angola, or

[035-139]whether they were to be sent hundreds of miles into the interior to

[035-140]Nyangwe, in the heart of the great lake district that Livingstone was

[035-141]then [[exploration|exploring]]. To reach the latter spot would occupy some months, and

[035-142]to return thence to the coast, even if they should be fortunate enough

[035-143]to regain their [[freedom|liberty]], would be a work of insuperable difficulty.

[035-144]He was not long left in suspense. Although he could not understand the

[035-145]half-African, half-Arab dialect that was used by the leaders of the

[035-146]caravan, he noticed that the word Kazonndé occurred very frequently,

[035-147]and knowing it as the name of an important market in the province, he

[035-148]naturally concluded that it was there the slaves were to be disposed

[035-149]of; whether for the advantage of the king of the district, or of one of

[035-150]the rich traders, he had no means of telling. Unless his geographical

[035-151]knowledge was at fault, he was aware that Kazonndé must be about 400

[035-152]miles from S. Paul de Loanda, and consequently that it could hardly be

[035-153]more than 250 miles from the part of the Coanza where they were now

[035-154]encamped. Under favourable circumstances it was a journey that could

[035-155]not be accomplished in less than twelve or fourteen days, but allowing

[035-156]for the retarded progress of a caravan already exhausted by a

[035-157]lengthened march, Dick was convinced that they could not reach the

[035-158]place for at least three weeks.

[035-159]He was most anxious to communicate to his companions in adversity his

[035-160]impression that they were not to be carried into the heart of the

[035-161]country, and began to cogitate whether some plan could not be devised

[035-162]for exchanging a few words with them.

[035-163]Forked together, as it has been said, two and two, the four negroes

[035-164]were at the right-hand extremity of the camp; Bat attached to his

[035-165]father, Austin to Actæon. A havildar, with twelve soldiers, formed

[035-166]their guard. Dick, at first, was about fifty yards away from the group,

[035-167]but being left free to move about, contrived gradually to diminish the

[035-168]distance between himself and them. Tom seemed to apprehend his

[035-169]intention, and whispered a word to his companions that they should be

[035-170]on the look-out. Without moving they were all on their guard in a

[035-171]moment. Dick, careful to conceal his design, strolled backward with a

[035-172]feigned indifference, and succeeded in getting so near that he might

[035-173]have called out and informed Tom that they were going to Kazonndé. But

[035-174]he was desirous of accomplishing more than this; he wanted to get an

[035-175]opportunity of having some conversation as to their future plans, and

[035-176]he ventured to approach still nearer. His heart beat high as he

[035-177]believed he was on the point of attaining his object, when all at once

[035-178]the havildar, becoming aware of his design, rushed upon him like a

[035-179]madman, summoned some soldiers, and with considerable violence sent him

[035-180]back to the front. Tom and the others were quickly removed to another

[035-181]part of the encampment.
