---
description: '"And which of them built this ant-hill?" inquired Dick.'
id: ch033
label: "Section 33"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[033-001]"And which of them built this ant-hill?" inquired [[dick-sands|Dick]].

[033-002]"The bellicosi!" replied Benedict, pronouncing the name with as much

[033-003]pride as if he were eulogizing the Macedonians or some warlike nation

[033-004]of antiquity. "Bellicosi," he continued, "are to be found of every

[033-005]size. There is as much difference between the largest and the smallest

[033-006]of them as there is between Hercules and a dwarf; the workers are about

[033-007]one-fifth of an inch long; the soldiers, or fighting-ants, are half an

[033-008]inch; whilst the males and females measure four fifths of an inch.

[033-009]There is another curious species, called 'sirafoos,' which are about

[033-010]half an inch long, and have pincers instead of mandibles, and heads

[033-011]larger than their bodies, like sharks. In fact, if sharks and sirafoos

[033-012]were placed in competition, I should be inclined to back the sharks."

[033-013]"And where are these sirafoos most generally to be found?" said Dick

[033-014]cautiously.

[033-015]"In [[africa|Africa]], in the southern and central provinces. Africa may truly be

[033-016]termed the land of ants. Livingstone, in the notes brought home by

[033-017]Stanley, describes a battle which he was fortunate enough to witness

[033-018]between an army of black ants and an army of red. The black ants, or

[033-019]drivers, which are what the natives call sirafoos, got the best of it;

[033-020]and the red ants, or 'tchoongoos,' after a very resolute defence, were

[033-021]obliged to retire defeated, carrying their eggs and young ones with

[033-022]them. Livingstone avows that he never saw the warlike instinct so

[033-023]strongly developed as in these sirafoos; the stoutest man, the largest

[033-024]animal, a lion or an elephant, quails before the grip of their

[033-025]mandibles: no obstacle impedes their progress; no tree is too lofty for

[033-026]them to scale, and they contrive to cross wide streams by forming their

[033-027]own bodies into a kind of suspension bridge. Equally amazing are their

[033-028]numbers; Du Chaillu, another African traveller, relates how it took

[033-029]more than twelve hours for a column of ants to file pass him, without a

[033-030]moment's pause in their march. These numbers, however cease to be so

[033-031]surprising when it is explained that their fecundity is such that a

[033-032]single female of the termites bellicosi has been estimated to produce

[033-033]as many as sixty thousand eggs a day. These Neuroptera furnish the

[033-034]natives with a favourite food, grilled ants being considered a great

[033-035]delicacy."

[033-036]"Have you ever tasted them?" asked Hercules, with a grin.

[033-037]"Never," answered the naturalist; "but I am in hopes I shall have a

[033-038]chance of doing so very soon."

[033-039]"Surely you don't imagine yourself in Africa!" said Tom suddenly.

[033-040]"Africa! no; why should I?" replied Benedict; "but, as I have already

[033-041]seen a tzetsy in America, I do not despair of having the satisfaction

[033-042]of discovering white ants there too. You do not know the sensation I

[033-043]shall make in Europe when I publish my folio volume and its

[033-044]illustrations."

[033-045]It was evident that no inkling of the truth had yet entered poor

[033-046]Benedict's brain, and it seemed likely that it would require

[033-047]demonstration far more striking than any natural phenomena to undeceive

[033-048]the minds of such of the party as were not already in possession of the

[033-049]fatal secret.

[033-050]Although it was nine o'clock, Cousin Benedict went on talking

[033-051]incessantly, regardless of the fact that one by one his audience were

[033-052]falling to sleep in their separate cells. Dick Sands did not sleep, but

[033-053]neither did he interrupt the entomologist by farther questions;

[033-054]Hercules kept up his attention longer than the rest, but at length he

[033-055]too succumbed to weariness, and his eyes and ears were closed to all

[033-056]external sights and sounds.

[033-057]But endurance has limits, and at last Cousin Benedict, having worn

[033-058]himself out, clambered up to the topmost cell of the cone, which he had

[033-059]chosen for his dormitory, and fell into a peaceful slumber.

[033-060]The lantern had been already extinguished. All was darkness and silence

[033-061]within, whilst the storm without still raged with a violence that gave

[033-062]no sign of abatement.

[033-063]Dick Sands himself was the only one of the party who was not partaking

[033-064]in the repose that was so indispensable to them all; but he could not

[033-065]sleep; his every thought was absorbed in the [[duty|responsibility]] that rested

[033-066]on him to rescue those under his charge from the dangers that

[033-067]threatened them. Again and again he recalled every incident that had

[033-068]occurred since the loss of [[captain-hull|Captain Hull]] and his crew; he remembered the

[033-069]occasion when he had stood with his pistol pointed at [[negoro|Negoro]]'s head;

[033-070]why, oh why, had his hand faltered then? why had he not at that moment

[033-071]hurled the miserable wretch overboard, and thus relieved himself and

[033-072]his partners in trouble from the catastrophe that had since befallen

[033-073]them? Peril was still staring them in the face, and his sole drop of

[033-074]consolation in the bitter cup of despondency was that [[mrs-weldon|Mrs. Weldon]] was

[033-075]still ignorant of their real situation.

[033-076]At that moment, just in the fever of his agony, he felt a light breath

[033-077]upon his forehead; a hand was laid upon his shoulder, and a gentle

[033-078]voice murmured in his ear,--

[033-079]"My poor boy, I know everything. God will help us! His will be done!"

[033-080][Illustration: "My poor boy, I know everything."]

[033-081]CHAPTER VI.

[033-082]A DIVING-BELL.

[033-083]This sudden revelation that Mrs. Weldon was acquainted with the true

[033-084]state of things left Dick speechless. Even had he been capable of

[033-085]replying, she gave him no opportunity, but immediately retired to the

[033-086]side of her son. The various incidents of the march had all gradually

[033-087]enlightened her, and perhaps the exclamation of Cousin Benedict on the

[033-088]preceding evening had crowned them all; anyhow the brave lady now knew

[033-089]the worst. Dick felt, however, that she did not despair; neither would

[033-090]he.

[033-091]He lay and longed for the dawn, when he hoped to explore the situation

[033-092]better, and perchance to find the watercourse which he was convinced

[033-093]could not be far distant. Moreover, he was extremely anxious to be out

[033-094]of the reach of the natives whom, it was only too likely, Negoro and

[033-095]Harris might be putting on their track.

[033-096]But as yet no glimmer of daylight penetrated the aperture of the cone,

[033-097]whilst the heavy rumblings, deadened as they were by the thickness of

[033-098]the walls, made it certain that the storm was still raging with

[033-099]undiminished fury. Attentively Dick listened, and he could distinctly

[033-100]hear the rain beating around the base of the ant-hill; the heavy drops

[033-101]splashed again as they fell, in a way altogether different to what they

[033-102]would upon solid ground, so that he felt sure that the adjacent land

[033-103]was by this time completely flooded. He was getting very drowsy when it

[033-104]suddenly occurred to him that it was not unlikely the aperture was

[033-105]getting blocked up with damp clay; in that case he knew that the breath

[033-106]of the inmates would quickly vitiate the internal atmosphere. He crept

[033-107]along the ground and had the satisfaction of finding that the clay

[033-108]embankment was still perfectly dry; the orifice was quite unobstructed,

[033-109]allowing not only a free passage to the air, but admitting the glare of

[033-110]the occasional flashes of lightning, which the descending volumes of

[033-111]water did not seem to stay.

[033-112]Having thus far satisfied himself that all was well, and that there was

[033-113]no immediate danger, Dick thought that he might now resign himself to

[033-114]sleep as well as the rest: he took the precaution, however, of

[033-115]stretching himself upon the embankment within easy reach of the

[033-116]opening, and with his head supported against the wall, after a while

[033-117]dozed off.

[033-118]How long his light slumber had lasted he could not say, when he was

[033-119]aroused by a sensation of cold. He started up, and to his horror

[033-120]discovered that the water had entered the ant-hill and was rising

[033-121]rapidly; it could not be long, he saw, before it reached the cells

[033-122]which were occupied by Hercules and Tom. He woke them at once, and told

[033-123]them what he had observed. The lantern was soon lighted, and they set

[033-124]to work to ascertain what progress the water was making It rose for

[033-125]about five feet, when it was found to remain stationary.

[033-126]"What is the matter, Dick?" inquired Mrs. Weldon, disturbed by the

[033-127]movements of the men.

[033-128]"Nothing very alarming," answered Dick promptly; "only some water has

[033-129]found its way into the lower part of the place; it will not reach your

[033-130]upper cells; probably some river has overflowed its boundaries."

[033-131]"The very river, perhaps," suggested Hercules assuringly, "that is to

[033-132]carry us to the coast."

[033-133]Mrs. Weldon made no reply.

[033-134]Cousin Benedict was still sleeping as soundly as if he were himself a

[033-135]white ant; the negroes were peering down on to the sheet of water which

[033-136]reflected back the rays of the lantern, ready to carry out any orders

[033-137]given by Dick, who was quietly gauging the inundation, and removing the

[033-138]provisions and fire-arms out of its reach.

[033-139][Illustration: They set to work to ascertain what progress the water

[033-140]was making.]

[033-141]"Did the water get in at the opening, Mr. Dick?" asked Tom.

[033-142]"Yes, Tom, and consequently we are coming to the end of our stock of

[033-143]fresh air," was Dick's reply.

[033-144]"But why should we not make another opening above the water level?" Tom

[033-145]inquired.

[033-146]"A thing to be thought about," said Dick; "but we have to remember that

[033-147]if we have five feet of water here inside, there is probably a depth of

[033-148]six or seven outside. In rising here the flood has compressed the air,

[033-149]and made it an obstacle to further progress, but if we allow the air to

[033-150]escape, we may perhaps only be letting the water rise too high for our

[033-151]safety. We are just as if we were in a diving-bell."

[033-152]"Then what is to be done?" asked the old negro.

[033-153]"No doubt," replied Dick, "we must proceed very cautiously. An

[033-154]inconsiderate step will jeopardize our lives." Dick Sands was quite

[033-155]correct in comparing the cone to an immersed diving-bell. In that

[033-156]mechanical contrivance, however, the air can always be renewed by means

[033-157]of pumps, so that it can be occupied without inconvenience beyond what

[033-158]is entailed by a somewhat confined atmosphere; but here the interior

[033-159]space had already been reduced by a third part through the encroachment

[033-160]of the water, and there was no method of communicating with the outer

[033-161]air except by opening a new aperture, an operation in which there was

[033-162]manifest danger.

[033-163]Dick did not entertain the slightest apprehension that the ant-hill

[033-164]would be carried away bodily by the inundation; he knew that it would

[033-165]adhere to its base as firmly as a beaver-hut; what he really dreaded

[033-166]was that the storm would last so long that the flood would rise high

[033-167]above the plain, perhaps submerging the ant-hill entirely, so that

[033-168]ultimately all air would be expelled by the persistent pressure.

[033-169]The more he pondered the more he felt himself driven to the conviction

[033-170]that the inundation would be wide and deep. It could not be, he felt

[033-171]sure, entirely owing to the downpour from the clouds that the rapid

[033-172]flood was rising; there must have been the sudden overflowing of some

[033-173]stream to cause such a deluge over the low-lying plain. It could not be

[033-174]proved that the ant hill was not already under water, so that escape

[033-175]might be no longer possible, even from its highest point.

[033-176]With all Dick's courage, it was yet evident that he was very uneasy; he

[033-177]did not know what to do, and asked himself again and again whether

[033-178]patient waiting or decisive action would be his more prudent course.

[033-179]It was now about three o'clock in the morning. All within the ant-hill

[033-180]were silent and motionless, listening to the incessant turmoil which

[033-181]told that the strife of the elements had not yet ceased.

[033-182]Presently, old Tom pointed out that the height of the water was

[033-183]gradually increasing, but only by very slow ascent. Dick could only say

[033-184]that if the flood continued to rise, however slowly, it must inevitably

[033-185]drive out the air.
