---
description: "A low whining was the sole reply."
id: ch042
label: "Section 42"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[042-001]A low whining was the sole reply.

[042-002]"It must be [[dingo|Dingo]]," muttered [[dick-sands|Dick]] to himself; "[[negoro|Negoro]] may have told me

[042-003]a lie; perhaps, after all, the dog is not dead."

[042-004]As though in answer to his thoughts, a dog's paw was pushed below the

[042-005]door. Dick seized it eagerly; he had no doubt it was Dingo's; but if

[042-006]the dog brought a message, it was sure to be tied to his neck, and

[042-007]there seemed to be no means of getting at it, except the hole

[042-008]underneath could be made large enough to admit the animal's head. Dick

[042-009]determined to try and scrape away the soil at the threshold, and

[042-010]commenced digging with his nails. But he had scarcely set himself to

[042-011]his task when loud barkings, other than Dingo's, were heard in the

[042-012]distance. The faithful creature had been scented out by the native

[042-013]dogs, and instinct dictated an immediate flight. Alarm had evidently

[042-014]been taken, as several gun-shots were fired; the havildar half roused

[042-015]himself from his slumber, and Dick was fain to roll himself once more

[042-016]into his corner, there to await the dawn of the day which was intended

[042-017]to be his last.

[042-018][Illustration: All his energies were restored.]

[042-019]Throughout that day, the grave-digging was carried on with unremitted

[042-020]activity. A large number of the natives, under the superintendence of

[042-021]the queen's prime minister, were set to work, and according to the

[042-022]decree of Moena, who seemed resolved to continue the rigorous sway of

[042-023]her departed husband, were bound, under penalty of mutilation, to

[042-024]accomplish their task within the proscribed time.

[042-025]As soon as the stream had been diverted into its temporary channel,

[042-026]there was hollowed out in the dry river bed a pit, fifty feet long, ten

[042-027]feet wide, and ten feet deep. This, towards the close of the day, was

[042-028]lined throughout with living women, selected from Moené Loonga's

[042-029]slaves; in ordinary cases it would have been their fate to be buried

[042-030]alive beside their master; but in recognition of his miraculous death

[042-031]it was ordained that they should be drowned beside his remains.[1]

[042-032][Footnote 1: The horrible hecatombs that commemorate the death of any

[042-033]powerful chief in [[africa|Central Africa]] defy all description. Cameron relates

[042-034]that more than a hundred victims were sacrificed at the obsequies of

[042-035]the father of the King of Kassongo.]

[042-036]Generally, the royal corpse is arrayed in its richest vestments before

[042-037]being consigned to the tomb, but in this case, when the remains

[042-038]consisted only of a few charred bones, another plan was adopted. An

[042-039]image of the king, perhaps rather flattering to the original, was made

[042-040]of wicker-work; inside this were placed the fragments of bones and

[042-041]skin, and the effigy itself was then arrayed in the robes of state,

[042-042]which, as already mentioned, were not of a very costly description.

[042-043]Cousin Benedict's spectacles were not forgotten, but were firmly

[042-044]affixed to the countenance of the image. The masquerade had its

[042-045]ludicrous as well as its terrible side.

[042-046]When the evening arrived, a long procession was seen wending its way to

[042-047]the place of interment; the uproar was perfectly deafening; shouts,

[042-048]yells, the boisterous incantations of the musicians, the clang of

[042-049]musical instruments, and the reports of many old muskets, mingled in

[042-050]wild confusion.

[042-051]The ceremony was to take place by torch-light, and the whole population

[042-052]of Kazonndé, native and otherwise, was bound to be present. Alvez,

[042-053]Coïmbra, Negoro, the Arab dealers and their havildars all helped to

[042-054]swell the numbers, the queen having given express orders that no one

[042-055]who had been at the lakoni should leave the town, and it was not deemed

[042-056]prudent to disobey her commands.

[042-057]The remains of the king were carried in a palanquin in the rear of the

[042-058]cortége, surrounded by the wives of the second class, some of whom were

[042-059]doomed to follow their master beyond the tomb. Queen Moena, in state

[042-060]array, marched behind the catafalque.

[042-061]Night was well advanced when the entire procession reached the banks of

[042-062]the brook, but the resin-torches, waved on high by their bearers, shed

[042-063]a ruddy glare upon the teeming crowd. The grave, with its lining of

[042-064]living women, bound to its side by chains, was plainly visible; fifty

[042-065]slaves, some resigned and mute, others uttering loud and piteous cries,

[042-066]were there awaiting the moment when the rushing torrent should be

[042-067]opened upon them.

[042-068]The wives who were destined to perish had been selected by the queen

[042-069]herself and were all in holiday-attire. One of the victims, who bore

[042-070]the title of second wife, was forced down upon her hands and knees in

[042-071]the grave, in order to form a resting-place for the effigy, as she had

[042-072]been accustomed to do for the living sovereign; the third wife had to

[042-073]sustain the image in an upright position, and the fourth lay down at

[042-074]its feet to make a footstool.

[042-075]In front of the effigy, at the end of the grave, a huge stake, painted

[042-076]red, was planted firmly in the earth. Bound to this stake, his body

[042-077]half naked, exhibiting marks of the tortures which by Negoro's orders

[042-078]he had already undergone, friendless and hopeless, was Dick Sands!

[042-079][Illustration: Friendless and hopeless.]

[042-080]The time, however, for opening the flood-gate had not yet arrived.

[042-081]First of all, at a sign from the queen, the fourth wife, forming the

[042-082]royal footstool had her throat cut by an executioner, her blood

[042-083]streaming into the grave. This barbarous deed was the commencement of a

[042-084]most frightful butchery. One after another, fifty slaves fell beneath

[042-085]the slaughterous knife, until the river-bed was a very cataract of

[042-086]blood. For half an hour the shrieks of the victims mingled with the

[042-087]imprecations of their murderers, without evoking one single expression

[042-088]of horror or sympathy from the gazing crowd around.

[042-089]At a second signal from the queen, the barrier, which retained the

[042-090]water above, was opened. By a refinement of cruelty the torrent was not

[042-091]admitted suddenly to the grave, but allowed to trickle gradually in.

[042-092]The first to be drowned were the slaves that carpeted the bottom of the

[042-093]trench, their frightful struggles bearing witness to the slow death

[042-094]that was overpowering them. Dick was immersed to his knees, but he

[042-095]could be seen making what might seem one last frantic effort to burst

[042-096]his bonds.

[042-097]Steadily rose the water; the stream resumed its proper course; the last

[042-098]head disappeared beneath its surface, and soon there remained nothing

[042-099]to indicate that in the depth below there was a tomb where a hundred

[042-100]victims had been sacrificed to the memory of the King of Kazonndé.

[042-101]Painful as they are to describe, it is impossible to ignore the reality

[042-102]of such scenes.

[042-103]CHAPTER XIII.

[042-104]IN CAPTIVITY.

[042-105]So far from [[mrs-weldon|Mrs. Weldon]] and Jack having succumbed to the hardships to

[042-106]which they had been exposed, they were both alive, and together with

[042-107]Cousin Benedict were now in Kazonndé. After the assault upon the

[042-108]ant-hill they had all three been conveyed beyond the encampment to a

[042-109]spot where a rude palanquin was in readiness for Mrs. Weldon and her

[042-110]son. The journey hence to Kazonndé was consequently accomplished

[042-111]without much difficulty; Cousin Benedict, who performed it on foot, was

[042-112]allowed to entomologize as much as he pleased upon the road, so that to

[042-113]him the distance was a matter of no concern. The party reached their

[042-114]destination a week sooner than Ibn Hamish's [[slave-caravan|caravan]], and the prisoners

[042-115]were lodged in Alvez' quarters.

[042-116]Jack was much better. After leaving the marshy districts he had no

[042-117]return of fever, and as a certain amount of indulgence had been allowed

[042-118]them on their journey, both he and his mother, as far as their health

[042-119]was concerned, might be said to be in a satisfactory condition.

[042-120]Of the rest of her former companions Mrs. Weldon could hear nothing.

[042-121]She had herself been a witness of the escape of Hercules, but of course

[042-122]knew nothing further of his fate; as for Dick Sands, she entertained a

[042-123]sanguine hope that his white skin would protect him from any severe

[042-124]treatment; but for Nan and the other poor negroes, here upon African

[042-125]soil, she feared the very worst.

[042-126]Being entirely shut off from communication with the outer world, she

[042-127]was quite unaware of the arrival of the caravan; even if she had heard

[042-128]the noisy commotion of the market she would not have known what it

[042-129]meant, and she was in ignorance alike of the death of Harris, of the

[042-130]sale of Tom and his companions, of the dreadful end of the king, and of

[042-131]the royal obsequies in which poor Dick had been assigned so melancholy

[042-132]a share. During the journey from the Coanza to Kazonndé, Harris and

[042-133]Negoro had held no conversation with her, and since her arrival she had

[042-134]not been allowed to pass the inclosure of the establishment, so that,

[042-135]as far as she knew, she was quite alone, and being in Negoro's power,

[042-136]was in a position from which it seemed only too likely nothing but

[042-137]death could release her.

[042-138]From Cousin Benedict, it is needless to repeat, she could expect no

[042-139]assistance; his own personal pursuits engrossed him, and he had no care

[042-140]nor leisure to bestow upon external circumstances. His first feeling,

[042-141]on being made to understand that he was not in America, was one of deep

[042-142]disappointment that the wonderful things he had seen were no

[042-143]discoveries at all; they were simply African [[entomology|insects]] common on African

[042-144]soil. This vexation, however, soon passed away, and he began to believe

[042-145]that "the land of the Pharaohs" might possess as much entomological

[042-146]wealth as "the land of the Incas."

[042-147]"Ah," he would exclaim to Mrs. Weldon, heedless that she gave him

[042-148]little or no attention, "this is the country of the manticoræ, and

[042-149]wonderful coleoptera they are, with their long hairy legs, their sharp

[042-150]elytra and their big mandibles; the most remarkable of them all is the

[042-151]tuberous manticora. And isn't this, too, the land of the golden-tipped

[042-152]calosomi? and of the prickly-legged goliaths of Guinea and Gabon? Here,

[042-153]too, we ought to find the spotted anthidia, which lay their eggs in

[042-154]empty snail-shells; and the sacred atenchus, which the old Egyptians

[042-155]used to venerate as divine."

[042-156]"Yes, yes;" he would say at another time, "this is the proper habitat

[042-157]of those death's-head sphinxes which are now so common everywhere; and

[042-158]this is the place for those 'Idias Bigoti,' so formidable to the

[042-159]natives of Senegal. There must be wonderful discoveries to be made here

[042-160]if only those good people will let me."

[042-161]The "good people" referred to were Negoro and Harris, who had restored

[042-162]him much of the [[freedom|liberty]] of which Dick Sands had found it necessary to

[042-163]deprive him. With freedom to roam and in possession of his tin box,

[042-164]Benedict would have been amongst the most contented of men, had it not

[042-165]been for the loss of his spectacles and magnifying-glass, now buried

[042-166]with the King of Kazonndé. Reduced to the necessity of poking every

[042-167]insect almost into his eyes before he could discover its

[042-168]characteristics, he would have sacrificed much to recover or replace

[042-169]his glasses, but as such articles were not to be procured at any price,

[042-170]he contented himself with the permission to go where he pleased within

[042-171]the limits of the palisade. His keepers knew him well enough to be

[042-172]satisfied that he would make no attempt to escape, and as the enclosure

[042-173]was nearly a mile in circumference, containing many shrubs and trees

[042-174]and huts with thatched roofs, besides being intersected by a running

[042-175]stream, it afforded him a very fair scope for his researches, and who

[042-176]should say that he would not discover some novel specimen to which, in

[042-177]the records of entomological science, his own name might be assigned?

[042-178]If thus the domain of Antonio Alvez was sufficient to satisfy Benedict,

[042-179]to little Jack it might well seem immense. But though allowed to ramble

[042-180]over the whole place as he liked, the child rarely cared to leave his

[042-181]mother; he would be continually inquiring about his father, whom he had

[042-182]now so long been expecting to see: he would ask why Nan and Hercules

[042-183]and Dingo had gone away and left him; and perpetually he would be

[042-184]expressing his wonder where Dick could be, and wishing he would come

[042-185]back again. Mrs. Weldon could only hide her tears and answer him by

[042-186]caresses.
