---
description: '"Set it alight!" cried the slave-dealer, grinning slily as he spoke.'
id: ch041
label: "Section 41"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[041-001]"Set it alight!" cried the slave-dealer, grinning slily as he spoke.

[041-002]The king applied the match to the surface of the spirit. The effect was

[041-003]instantaneous. High above the edge of the bowl the blue flame rose and

[041-004]curled. To give intensity to the process Alvez had added a sprinkling

[041-005]of salt to the mixture, and this caused the fire to cast upon the faces

[041-006]of all around that lurid glare which is generally associated with

[041-007]apparitions of ghosts and phantoms. Half intoxicated already, the

[041-008]negroes yelled and gesticulated; and joining hands, they performed a

[041-009]fiendish dance around their monarch. Alvez stood and stirred the spirit

[041-010]with an enormous metal ladle, attached to a pole, and as the flames

[041-011]rose yet higher and higher they seemed to throw a more and more

[041-012]unearthly glamour over the ape-like forms that circled in their wild

[041-013]career.

[041-014]Moené Loonga, in his eagerness, soon seized the ladle from the

[041-015]slave-dealer's hands, plunged it deep into the bowl, and bringing it up

[041-016]again full of the blazing punch, raised it to his lips.

[041-017]A horrible shriek brought the dancers to a sudden standstill. By a kind

[041-018]of spontaneous combustion, the king had taken fire internally; though

[041-019]it was a fire that emitted little heat, it was none the less intense

[041-020]and consuming. In an instant one of the ministers in attendance ran to

[041-021]the king's assistance, but he, almost as much alcoholized as his

[041-022]master, caught fire as well, and soon both monarch and minister lay

[041-023]writhing on the ground in unutterable agony. Not a soul was able to

[041-024]lend a helping hand. Alvez and [[negoro|Negoro]] were at a loss what to do; the

[041-025]courtiers dared not expose themselves to so terrible a fate; the women

[041-026]had all fled in alarm, and Coïmbra, awakened to the conviction of the

[041-027]inflammability of his own condition, had rapidly decamped.

[041-028][Illustration: The king had taken fire internally.]

[041-029]To say the truth, it was impossible to do anything; water would have

[041-030]proved unavailing to quench the pale blue flame that hovered over the

[041-031]prostrate forms, every tissue of which was so thoroughly impregnated

[041-032]with spirit, that combustion, though outwardly extinguished, would

[041-033]continue its work internally.

[041-034]In a few minutes life was extinct, but the bodies continued long

[041-035]afterwards to burn; until, upon the spot where they had fallen, a few

[041-036]light ashes, some fragments of the spinal column, some fingers and some

[041-037]toes, covered with a thin layer of stinking soot, were all that

[041-038]remained of the King of Kazonndé and his ill fated minister.

[041-039]CHAPTER XII.

[041-040]ROYAL OBSEQUIES.

[041-041]On the following morning the town of Kazonndé presented an aspect of

[041-042]unwonted desolation. Awe-struck at the event of the previous evening,

[041-043]the natives had all shut themselves up in their huts. That a monarch

[041-044]who was to be assumed as of divine origin should perish with one of his

[041-045]ministers by so horrible a death was a thing wholly unparalleled in

[041-046]their experience. Some of the elder part of the community remembered

[041-047]having taken part in certain [[cannibalism|cannibal]] preparations, and were aware that

[041-048]the cremation of a human body is no easy matter, yet here was a case in

[041-049]which two men had been all but utterly consumed without any extraneous

[041-050]application. Here was a mystery that baffled all their comprehension.

[041-051]Old Alvez had also retired to the seclusion of his own residence;

[041-052]having been warned by Negoro that he would probably be held responsible

[041-053]for the occurrence, he deemed it prudent to keep in retirement.

[041-054]Meanwhile Negoro industriously circulated the report that the king's

[041-055]death had been brought about by supernatural means reserved by the

[041-056]great Manitoo solely for his elect, and that it was sacred fire that

[041-057]had proceeded from his body. The superstitious natives readily received

[041-058]this version of the affair, and at once proceeded to honour Moené

[041-059]Loonga with funeral rites worthy of one thus conspicuously elevated to

[041-060]the rank of the gods. The ceremony (which entailed an expenditure of

[041-061]human blood incredible except that it is authenticated by Cameron and

[041-062]other African travellers) was just the opportunity that Negoro required

[041-063]for carrying out his designs against [[dick-sands|Dick]], whom he intended to take a

[041-064]prominent part in it.

[041-065]The natural successor to the king was the queen Moena. By inaugurating

[041-066]the funeral without delay and thus assuming the semblance of authority,

[041-067]she forestalled the king of Ukusu or any other rival who might venture

[041-068]to dispute her sovereignty; and moreover, by taking the reins of

[041-069]government into her hands she avoided the fate reserved for the other

[041-070]wives who, had they been allowed to live, might prove somewhat

[041-071]troublesome to the shrew. Accordingly, with the sound of coodoo horns

[041-072]and marimbas, she caused a proclamation to be made in the various

[041-073]quarters of the town, that the obsequies of the deceased monarch would

[041-074]be celebrated on the next evening with all due solemnity.

[041-075]The announcement met with no opposition either from the officials about

[041-076]the court or from the public at large. Alvez and the traders generally

[041-077]were quite satisfied with Moena's assumption of the supremacy, knowing

[041-078]that by a few presents and a little flattery they could make her

[041-079]sufficiently considerate for their own interests.

[041-080]Preparations began at once. At the end of the chief thoroughfare flowed

[041-081]a deep and rapid brook, an affluent of the Coango, in the dry bed of

[041-082]which the royal grave was to be formed. Natives were immediately set to

[041-083]work to construct a dam by means of which the water should be diverted,

[041-084]until the burial was over, into a temporary channel across the plain;

[041-085]the last act in the ceremonial being to undam the stream and allow it

[041-086]to resume its proper course.

[041-087]Negoro had formed the resolution that Dick Sands should be one of the

[041-088]victims to be sacrificed upon the king's tomb. Thoroughly aware as he

[041-089]was that the indignation which had caused the death of Harris extended

[041-090]in at least an equal degree to himself, the cowardly rascal would not

[041-091]have ventured to approach Dick under similar circumstances at the risk

[041-092]of meeting a similar fate; but knowing him to be a prisoner bound hand

[041-093]and foot, from whom there could be nothing to fear, he resolved to go

[041-094]to him in his dungeon-*

[041-095]Not only did he delight in torturing his victims, but he derived an

[041-096]especial gratification from witnessing the torture.

[041-097][[About]] the middle of the day, accordingly, he made his way to the cell

[041-098]where Dick was detained under the strict watch of a havildar. There,

[041-099]bound with fetters that penetrated his very flesh, lay the poor boy;

[041-100]for the last four and twenty hours he had not been allowed a morsel of

[041-101]food, and would gladly have faced the most painful death as a welcome

[041-102]relief to his miseries.

[041-103]But at the sight of Negoro all his energy revived; instinctively he

[041-104]made an effort to burst his bonds, and to get a hold upon his

[041-105]persecutor; but the strength of a giant would have been utterly

[041-106]unavailing for such a design. Dick felt that the struggle he had to

[041-107]make was of another kind, and forcing himself to an apparent composure,

[041-108]he determined to look Negoro straight in the face, but to vouchsafe no

[041-109]reply to anything he might say.

[041-110]"I felt bound," Negoro began, "to come and pay my respects to my young

[041-111]captain, and to tell him how sorry I am that he has not the same

[041-112]authority here that he had on board the '[[the-pilgrim|Pilgrim]].'"

[041-113]Finding that Dick returned no answer, he continued,--

[041-114]"You remember your old cook, captain: I have come to know what you

[041-115]would like to order for your breakfast."

[041-116]Here he paused to give a brutal kick at Dick's foot, and went on,--

[041-117]"I have also another question to ask you, captain; can you tell me how

[041-118]it was that you landed here in Angola instead of upon the coast of

[041-119]America?"

[041-120]The way in which the question was put more than ever confirmed Dick's

[041-121]impression that the "Pilgrim's" course had been altered by Negoro, but

[041-122]he persevered in maintaining a contemptuous silence.

[041-123]"It was a lucky thing for you, captain," resumed the vindictive

[041-124]Portuguese, "that you had a good seaman on board, otherwise the ship

[041-125]would have run aground on some reef in the [[storm-at-sea|tempest]], instead of coming

[041-126]ashore here in a friendly port."

[041-127][Illustration: "Your life is in my hands!"]

[041-128]Whilst he was speaking, Negoro had gradually drawn nearer to the

[041-129]prisoner, until their faces were almost in contact. Exasperated by

[041-130]Dick's calmness, his countenance assumed an expression of the utmost

[041-131]ferocity, and at last he burst forth in a paroxysm of rage.

[041-132]"It is my turn now! I am master now! I am captain here! You are in my

[041-133]power now! Your life is in my hands!"

[041-134]"Take it, then," said Dick quietly; "death has no terrors for me, and

[041-135]your wickedness will soon be avenged."

[041-136]"Avenged!" roared Negoro; "do you suppose there is a single soul to

[041-137]care about you? Avenged! who will concern himself with what befalls

[041-138]you? except Alvez and me, there is no one with a shadow of authority

[041-139]here; if you think you are going to get any help from old Tom or any of

[041-140]those niggers, let me tell you that they are every one of them sold and

[041-141]have been sent off to Zanzibar."

[041-142]"Hercules is free," said Dick.

[041-143]"Hercules!" sneered Negoro; "he has been food for lions and panthers

[041-144]long ago, I am only sorry that I did not get the chance of disposing of

[041-145]him myself."

[041-146]"And there is [[dingo|Dingo]]," calmly persisted Dick; "sure as fate, he will

[041-147]find you out some day."

[041-148]"Dingo is dead!" retorted Negoro with malicious glee: "I shot the brute

[041-149]myself, and I should be glad if every survivor of the 'Pilgrim' had

[041-150]shared his fate."

[041-151]"But remember," said Dick, "you have to follow them all yourself;" and

[041-152]he fixed a sharp gaze upon his persecutor's eye.

[041-153]The Portuguese villain was stung to the quick; he made a dash towards

[041-154]the youth, and would have strangled him upon the spot, but remembering

[041-155]that any such sudden action would be to liberate him from the torture

[041-156]he was determined he should undergo, he controlled his rage, and after

[041-157]giving strict orders to the havildar, who had been a passive spectator

[041-158]of the scene, to keep a careful watch upon his charge, he left the

[041-159]dungeon.

[041-160]So far from depressing Dick's spirits, the interview had altogether a

[041-161]contrary effect; his feelings had undergone a reaction, so that all his

[041-162]energies were restored. Possibly Negoro in his sudden assault had

[041-163]unintentionally loosened his fetters, for he certainly seemed to have

[041-164]greater play for his limbs, and fancied that by a slight effort he

[041-165]might succeed in disengaging his arms. Even that amount of freedom,

[041-166]however, he knew could be of no real avail to him; he was a

[041-167]closely-guarded prisoner, without hope of succour from without; and now

[041-168]he had no other wish than cheerfully to meet the death that should

[041-169]unite him to the friends who had gone before.

[041-170]The hours passed on. The gleams of daylight that penetrated the

[041-171]thatched roof of the prison gradually faded into darkness; the few

[041-172]sounds on the chitoka, a great contrast to the hubbub of the day,

[041-173]became hushed into silence, and night fell upon the town of Kazonndé.

[041-174]Dick Sands slept soundly for about a couple of hours, and woke up

[041-175]considerably refreshed. One of his arms, which was somewhat less

[041-176]swollen than the other, he was able to withdraw from its bonds; it was

[041-177]at any rate a relief to stretch it at his pleasure.

[041-178]The havildar, grasping the neck of a brandy-bottle which he had just

[041-179]drained, had sunk into a heavy slumber, and Dick Sands was

[041-180]contemplating the possibility of getting posssession of his gaoler's

[041-181]weapons when his attention was arrested by a scratching at the bottom

[041-182]of the door. By the help of his liberated arm he contrived to crawl

[041-183]noiselessly to the threshold, where the scratching increased in

[041-184]violence. For a moment he was in doubt whether the noise proceeded from

[041-185]the movements of a man or an animal. He gave a glance at the havildar,

[041-186]who was sound asleep, and placing his lips against the door murmured

[041-187]"Hercules!"
