---
description: "But the discordant concert which suddenly broke upon the ear was the"
id: ch040
label: "Section 40"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[040-001]But the discordant concert which suddenly broke upon the ear was the

[040-002]signal for business to be at once suspended. The crowd might cease its

[040-003]uproar, and recover its breath. The King of Kazonndé, Moené Loonga, was

[040-004]about to honour the _lakoni_ with a visit.

[040-005]Attended by a large retinue of wives, officers, soldiers, and slaves,

[040-006]the monarch was conveyed to the middle of the market-place in an old

[040-007]palanquin, from which he was obliged to have five or six people to help

[040-008]him to descend. Alvez and the other traders advanced to meet him with

[040-009]the most exaggerated gestures of reverence, all of which he received as

[040-010]his rightful homage.

[040-011]He was a man of fifty years of age, but might easily have passed for

[040-012]eighty. He looked like an old, decrepit monkey. On his head was a kind

[040-013]of tiara, adorned with leopards' claws dyed red, and tufts of

[040-014]greyish-white hair; this was the usual crown of the sovereigns of

[040-015]Kazonndé. From his waist hung two skirts of coodoo-hide, stiff as

[040-016]blacksmiths' aprons, and embroidered with pearls. The tattooings on his

[040-017]breast were so numerous that his pedigree, which they declared, might

[040-018]seem to reach back to time immemorial. His wrists and arms were encased

[040-019]in copper bracelets, thickly encrusted with beads; he wore a pair of

[040-020]top-boots, a present from Alvez some twenty years ago; in his left hand

[040-021]he carried a great stick surmounted by a silver knob; in his right a

[040-022]fly-flapper with a handle studded with pearls; over his head was

[040-023]carried an old umbrella with as many patches as a Harlequin's coat,

[040-024]whilst from his neck hung Cousin Benedict's magnifying-glass, and on

[040-025]his nose were the spectacles which had been stolen from Bat's pocket.

[040-026][Illustration: The potentate beneath whose sway the country trembled

[040-027]for a hundred miles round]

[040-028]Such was the appearance of the potentate beneath whose sway the country

[040-029]trembled for a hundred miles round.

[040-030]By virtue of his sovereignty Moené Loonga claimed to be of celestial

[040-031]origin; and any subject who should have the audacity to raise a

[040-032]question on this point would have been despatched forthwith to another

[040-033]world. All his actions, his eating and drinking, were supposed to be

[040-034]performed by divine impulse. He certainly drank like no other mortal;

[040-035]his officers and ministers, confirmed tipplers as they were, appeared

[040-036]sober men in comparison with himself, and he seemed never to be doing

[040-037]anything but imbibing strong pombé, and over-proof spirit with which

[040-038]Alvez kept him liberally supplied.

[040-039]In his harem Moené Loonga had wives of all ages from forty to fourteen,

[040-040]most of whom accompanied him on his visit to the _lakoni_. Moena, the

[040-041]chief wife, who was called the queen, was the eldest of them all, and,

[040-042]like the rest, was of royal blood. She was a vixenish-looking woman,

[040-043]very gaily attired; she wore a kind of bright tartan over a skirt of

[040-044]woven grass, embroidered with pearls; round her throat was a profusion

[040-045]of necklaces, and her hair was mounted up in tiers that toppled high

[040-046]above her head, making her resemble some hideous monster. The younger

[040-047]wives, all of them sisters or cousins of the king, were less

[040-048]elaborately dressed. They walked behind her, ready at the slightest

[040-049]sign to perform the most menial services. Did his Majesty wish to sit

[040-050]down, two of them would immediately stoop to the ground and form a seat

[040-051]with their bodies, whilst others would have to lie down and support his

[040-052]feet upon their backs: a throne and footstool of living ebony.

[040-053]Amidst the staggering, half-tipsy crowd of ministers, officers, and

[040-054]magicians that composed Moené Loonga's suite, there was hardly a man to

[040-055]be seen who had not lost either an eye, an ear, or hand, or nose. Death

[040-056]and mutilation were the only two punishments practised in Kazonndé, and

[040-057]the slightest offence involved the instant amputation of some member of

[040-058]the body. The loss of the ear was considered the severest penalty, as

[040-059]it prevented the possibility of wearing earrings!

[040-060]The governors of districts, or _kilolos_, whether hereditary or

[040-061]appointed for four years, were distinguished by red waistcoats and

[040-062]zebra-skin caps; in their hands they brandished long rattans, coated at

[040-063]one extremity with a varnish of magic drugs.

[040-064]The weapons carried by the soldiers consisted of wooden bows adorned

[040-065]with fringes and provided with a spare bowstring, knives filed into the

[040-066]shape of serpents' tongues, long, broad lances, and shields of palm

[040-067]wood, ornamented with arabesques. In the matter of uniform, the royal

[040-068]army had no demands to make upon the royal treasury.

[040-069]Amongst the attendants of the king there was a considerable number of

[040-070]sorcerers and musicians. The sorcerers, or _mganga_, were practically

[040-071]the physicians of the court, the savages having the most implicit faith

[040-072]in divinations and incantations of every kind, and employing fetishes,

[040-073]clay or wooden figures, representing sometimes ordinary human beings

[040-074]and sometimes fantastic animals. Like the rest of the retinue, these

[040-075]magicians were, for the most part, more or less mutilated, an

[040-076]indication that some of their prescriptions on behalf of the king had

[040-077]failed of success.

[040-078]The musicians were of both sexes, some performing on shrill rattles,

[040-079]some on huge drums, whilst others played on instruments called

[040-080]_marimbas_, a kind of dulcimer made of two rows of different-sized

[040-081]gourds fastened in a frame, and struck by sticks with india-rubber

[040-082]balls at the end. To any but native ears the music was perfectly

[040-083]deafening.

[040-084][Illustration: Alvez advanced and presented the king with some fresh

[040-085]tobacco.]

[040-086]Several flags and banners were carried in the procession, and amongst

[040-087]these was mixed up a number of long pikes, upon which were stuck the

[040-088]skulls of the various chiefs that Moené Loonga had conquered in battle.

[040-089]As the king as helped out of his palanquin, the acclamations rose

[040-090]higher and higher from every quarter of the market place The soldiers

[040-091]attached to the caravans fired off their old guns, though the reports

[040-092]were almost too feeble to be heard above the noisy vociferations of the

[040-093]crowd; and the havildars rubbed their black noses with cinnabar powder,

[040-094]which they carried in bags, and prostrated themselves. Alvez advanced

[040-095]and presented the king with some fresh tobacco, "the appeasing herb,"

[040-096]as it is called in the native dialect; and certainly Moené Loonga

[040-097]seemed to require some appeasing, as, for some unknown reason, he was

[040-098]in a thoroughly bad temper.

[040-099]Coïmbra, Ibn Hamish and the dealers all came forward to pay their court

[040-100]to the monarch, the Arabs greeting him with the cry of _marhaba_, or

[040-101]welcome; others clapped their hands and bowed to the very ground; while

[040-102]some even smeared themselves with mud, in token of their most servile

[040-103]subjection.

[040-104]But Moené Loonga scarcely took notice of any of them; he went

[040-105]staggering along, rolling like a ship upon a stormy sea, and made his

[040-106]way past the crowds of slaves, each of whom, no less than their

[040-107]masters, trembled lest he should think fit to claim them for his own.

[040-108][[negoro|Negoro]], who kept close at Alvez' side, did not fail to render his

[040-109]homage along with the rest. Alvez and the king were carrying on a

[040-110]conversation in the native language, if that could be called a

[040-111]conversation in which Moené Loonga merely jerked out a few

[040-112]monosyllables from his inflamed and swollen lips. He was asking Alvez

[040-113]to replenish his stock of brandy.

[040-114]"We are proud to welcome your majesty at the market of Kazonndé," Alvez

[040-115]was saying.

[040-116]"Get me brandy," was all the drunken king's reply.

[040-117]"Will it please your majesty to take part in the business of the

[040-118]_lakoni_?" Alvez tried to ask.

[040-119]"Drink!" blurted out the king impatiently.

[040-120]Alvez continued,--

[040-121]"My friend Negoro here is anxious to greet your majesty after his long

[040-122]absence."

[040-123]"Drink!" roared the monarch again.

[040-124]"Will the king take pombé or mead?" asked Alvez, at last obliged to

[040-125]take notice of the demand.

[040-126]"Brandy! give me fire-water!" yelled the king, in a fury. "For every

[040-127]drop you shall have ..."

[040-128]"A drop of a white man's blood!" suggested Negoro, glancing at Alvez.

[040-129]"Yes, yes; kill a white man," assented Moené Loonga, his ferocious

[040-130]instincts all aroused by the proposition.

[040-131]"There is a white man here," said Alvez, "who has killed my agent. He

[040-132]must be punished for his act."

[040-133]"Send him to King Masongo!" cried the king; "Masongo and the Assuas

[040-134]will cut him up and eat him alive."

[040-135]Only too true it is that cannibalism is still openly practised in

[040-136]certain provinces of [[africa|Central Africa]]. Livingstone records that the

[040-137]Manyuemas not only eat men killed in war, but even buy slaves for that

[040-138]purpose; it is said to be the avowal of these Manyuemas that "human

[040-139]flesh is slightly salt, and requires no seasoning." Cameron relates how

[040-140]in the dominions of Moené Booga dead bodies were soaked for a few days

[040-141]in running water as a preparation for their being devoured; and Stanley

[040-142]found traces of a widely-spread cannibalism amongst the inhabitants of

[040-143]Ukusu.

[040-144]But however horrible might be the manner of death proposed by Moené

[040-145]Loonga, it did not at all suit Negoro's purpose to let [[dick-sands|Dick Sands]] out

[040-146]of his clutches.

[040-147]"The white man is here," he said to the king; "it is here he has

[040-148]committed his offence, and here he should be punished."

[040-149]"If you will," replied Moené Loonga; "only I must have fire-water; a

[040-150]drop of fire-water for every drop of the white man's blood."

[040-151]"Yes, you shall have the fire-water," assented Alvez, "and what is

[040-152]more, you shall have it all alight. We will give your majesty a bowl of

[040-153]blazing punch."

[040-154]The thought had struck Alvez, and he was himself delighted with the

[040-155]idea, that he would set the spirit in flames. Moené Loonga had

[040-156]complained that the "fire-water" did not justify its name as it ought,

[040-157]and Alvez hoped that perhaps, administered in this new form, it might

[040-158]revivify the deadened membranes of the palate of the king.

[040-159]Moené Loonga did not conceal his satisfaction. Wives and courtiers

[040-160]alike were full of anticipation. They had all drunk brandy, but they

[040-161]had not drunk brandy alight. And not only was their thirst for alcohol

[040-162]to be satisfied; their thirst for blood was likewise to be indulged;

[040-163]and when it is remembered how, even amongst the civilized, drunkenness

[040-164]reduces a man below the level of a brute, it may be imagined to what

[040-165]barbarous cruelties Dick Sands was likely to be exposed. The idea of

[040-166]torturing a white man was not altogether repugnant to the coloured

[040-167]blood of either Alvez or Coïmbra, while with Negoro the spirit of

[040-168]vengeance had completely overpowered all feeling of compunction.

[040-169]Night, without any intervening twilight, was soon drawing on, and the

[040-170]contemplated display could hardly fail to be effective. The programme

[040-171]for the evening consisted of two parts; first, the blazing punch-bowl;

[040-172]then the torture, culminating in an execution.

[040-173]The destined victim was still closely confined in his dark and dreary

[040-174]dungeon; all the slaves, whether sold or not, had been driven back to

[040-175]the barracks, and the chitoka was cleared of every one except the

[040-176]slave-dealers, the havildars, and the soldiers, who hoped, by favour of

[040-177]the king, to have a share of the flaming punch.

[040-178]Alvez did not long delay the proceedings. He ordered a huge caldron,

[040-179]capable of containing more than twenty gallons, to be placed in the

[040-180]centre of the market-place. Into this were emptied several casks of

[040-181]highly-rectified spirit, of a very inferior quality, to which was added

[040-182]a supply of cinnamon and other spices, no ingredient being omitted

[040-183]which was likely to give a pungency to suit the savage palate.

[040-184]The whole royal retinue formed a circle round the king. Fascinated by

[040-185]the sight of the spirit, Moené Loonga came reeling up to the edge of

[040-186]the punch-bowl, and seemed ready to plunge himself head foremost into

[040-187]it. Alvez held him back, at the same time placing a lucifer in his hand.
