---
description: "Before Alvez had time to ask the sovereign to what cause he was"
id: ch047
label: "Section 47"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[047-001]Before Alvez had time to ask the sovereign to what cause he was

[047-002]indebted for the honour of her visit, the magician had cleared a wide

[047-003]space around him, and had once again commenced his performances.

[047-004]Brandishing his arms wildly he pointed to the clouds as though he were

[047-005]arresting them in their course; he inflated his huge cheeks and blew

[047-006]with all his strength, as if resolved to disperse the heavy masses, and

[047-007]then stretching himself to his full height, he appeared to clutch them

[047-008]in his giant grasp.

[047-009]Deeply impressed, the superstitious Moena was half beside herself with

[047-010]excitement; she uttered loud cries and involuntarily began herself to

[047-011]imitate every one of the _mganga's_ gestures. The entire crowd joined

[047-012]in, and very soon the low guttural note of the sorcerer was lost,

[047-013]totally drowned in the turmoil of howls, shrieks, and discordant songs.

[047-014]To the chagrin, however, both of the queen and her subjects, there was

[047-015]not the slightest intimation that the clouds above were going to permit

[047-016]a rift by which the rays of the tropical sun could find a passage. On

[047-017]the contrary, the tokens of improvement in the weather, which had been

[047-018]observed in the early morning, had all disappeared, the atmosphere was

[047-019]darker than ever, and heavy storm-drops began to patter down.

[047-020]A reaction was beginning to take place in the enthusiasm of the crowd.

[047-021]After all, then, it would seem that this famous _mganga_ from whom so

[047-022]much had been expected, had no power above the rest. Disappointment

[047-023]every moment grew more keen, and soon there was a positive display of

[047-024]irritation. The natives pressed around him with closed fists and

[047-025]threatening gestures. A frown gathered on Moena's face, and her lips

[047-026]opened with muttered words clear enough to make the magician understand

[047-027]that his ears were in jeopardy. His position was evidently becoming

[047-028]critical.

[047-029]An unexpected incident suddenly altered the aspect of affairs.

[047-030]The _mganga_ was quite tall enough to see over the heads of the crowd,

[047-031]and all at once pausing in the midst of his incantations, he pointed to

[047-032]a distant corner of the enclosure. All eyes were instantly turned in

[047-033]that direction. [[mrs-weldon|Mrs. Weldon]] and Jack had just come out of their hut,

[047-034]and catching sight of them, the _mganga_ stood with his left hand

[047-035]pointing towards them and his right upstretched towards the heavens.

[047-036]Intuitively the multitude comprehended his meaning. Here was the

[047-037]explanation of the mystery. It was this white woman with her child that

[047-038]had been the cause of all their misery, it was owing to them that the

[047-039]clouds had poured down this desolating rain. With yells of execration

[047-040]the whole mob made a dash towards the unfortunate lady who, pale with

[047-041]fright and rigid as a statue, stood clasping her boy to her side. The

[047-042]_mganga_, however, anticipated them. Having pushed his way through the

[047-043]infuriated throng, he seized the child and held him high in the air, as

[047-044]though about to hurl him to the ground, a peace-offering to the

[047-045]offended gods.

[047-046][Illustration: "Here they are, captain! both of them!!"]

[047-047]Mrs. Weldon gave a piercing shriek, and fell senseless to the earth.

[047-048]Lifting her up, and making a sign to the queen that all would now be

[047-049]right, the _mganga_ retreated carrying both mother and child through

[047-050]the crowd, who retreated before him and made an open passage.

[047-051]Alvez now felt that it was time to interfere. Already one of his

[047-052]prisoners had eluded his vigilance, and was he now to see two more

[047-053]carried off before his eyes? was he to lose the whole of the expected

[047-054]ransom? no, rather would he see Kazonndé destroyed by a deluge, than

[047-055]resign his chance of securing so good a prize. Darting forwards he

[047-056]attempted to obstruct the magician's progress; but public opinion was

[047-057]against him; at a sign from the queen, he was seized by the guards, and

[047-058]he was aware well enough of what would be the immediate consequence of

[047-059]resistance. He deemed it prudent to desist from his obstruction, but in

[047-060]his heart he bitterly cursed the stupid credulity of the natives for

[047-061]supposing that the blood of the white woman or the child could avail to

[047-062]put an end to the disasters they were suffering.

[047-063]Making the natives understand that they were not to follow him, the

[047-064]magician carried off his burden as easily as a lion would carry a

[047-065]couple of kids. The lady was still unconscious, and Jack was all but

[047-066]paralyzed with fright. Once free of the enclosure the _mganga_ crossed

[047-067]the town, entered the forest, and after a march of three miles, during

[047-068]which he did not slacken his pace for a moment, reached the bank of a

[047-069]river which was flowing towards the north.

[047-070]Here in the cavity of a rock, concealed by drooping foliage, a canoe

[047-071]was moored, covered with a kind of thatched roof; on this the magician

[047-072]deposited his burden, and sending the light craft into mid-stream with

[047-073]a vigorous kick, exclaimed in a cheery voice,--

[047-074]"Here they are, captain! both of them! Mrs. Weldon and Master Jack,

[047-075]both! We will be off now! I hope those idiots of Kazonndé will have

[047-076]plenty more rain yet! Off we go!"

[047-077]CHAPTER XVII.

[047-078]DRIFTING DOWN THE STREAM.

[047-079]"Off we go!" It was the voice of Hercules addressing [[dick-sands|Dick Sands]], who,

[047-080]frightfully debilitated by recent sufferings, was leaning against

[047-081]Cousin Benedict for support. [[dingo|Dingo]] was lying at his feet.

[047-082]Mrs. Weldon gradually recovered her consciousness. Looking around her

[047-083]in amazement she caught sight of Dick.

[047-084]"Dick, is it you?" she muttered feebly.

[047-085]The lad with some difficulty arose, and took her hand in his, while

[047-086]Jack overwhelmed him with kisses.

[047-087]"And who would have thought it was you, Hercules, that carried us

[047-088]away?" said the child; "I did not know you a bit; you were so

[047-089]dreadfully ugly."

[047-090]"I was a sort of a devil, you know, Master Jack," Hercules answered;

[047-091]"and the devil is not particularly handsome;" and he began rubbing his

[047-092]chest vigorously to get rid of the white pattern with which he had

[047-093]adorned it.

[047-094]Mrs. Weldon held out her hand to him with a grateful smile.

[047-095]"Yes, Mrs. Weldon, he has saved you, and although he does not own it,

[047-096]he has saved me too," said Dick.

[047-097]"Saved!" repeated Hercules, "you must not talk about safety, for you

[047-098]are not saved yet."

[047-099]And pointing to Benedict, he continued,--

[047-100]"That's where your thanks are due; unless he had come and informed me

[047-101]all about you and where you were, I should have known nothing, and

[047-102]should have been powerless to aid you."

[047-103]It was now five days since he had fallen in with the entomologist as he

[047-104]was chasing the manticora, and unceremoniously had carried him off.

[047-105]As the canoe drifted rapidly along the stream, Hercules briefly related

[047-106]his adventures since his escape from the encampment on the Coanza. He

[047-107]described how he had followed the kitanda which was conveying Mrs.

[047-108]Weldon; how in the course of his march he had found Dingo badly

[047-109]wounded; how he and the dog together had reached the neighbourhood of

[047-110]Kazonndé, and how he had contrived to send a note to Dick, intending to

[047-111]inform him of Mrs. Weldon's destination. Then he went on to say that

[047-112]since his unexpected _rencontre_ with Cousin Benedict he had watched

[047-113]very closely for a chance to get into the guardeddépôt, but until now

[047-114]had entirely failed. A celebrated _mganga_ had been passing on his way

[047-115]through the forest, and he had resolved upon impersonating him as a

[047-116]means of gaining the admittance he wanted. His strength made the

[047-117]undertaking sufficiently easy; and having stripped the magician of his

[047-118]paraphernalia, and bound him securely to a tree, he painted his own

[047-119]body with a pattern like that which he observed on his victim's chest,

[047-120]and having attired himself with the magical garments was quite equipped

[047-121]to impose upon the credulous natives. The result of his stratagem they

[047-122]had all that day witnessed.

[047-123]He had hardly finished his account of himself when Mrs. Weldon, smiling

[047-124]at his success, turned to Dick.

[047-125]"And how, all this time, my dear boy, has it fared with you?" she asked.

[047-126]Dick said,--

[047-127]"I remember very little to tell you. I recollect being fastened to a

[047-128]stake in the river-bed and the water rising and rising till it was

[047-129]above my head. My last thoughts were about yourself and Jack. Then

[047-130]everything became a blank, and I knew nothing more until I found myself

[047-131]amongst the papyrus on the river-bank, with Hercules tending me like a

[047-132]nurse."

[047-133]"You see I am the right sort of _mganga_" interposed Hercules; "I am a

[047-134]doctor as well as a conjurer."

[047-135]"But tell me, Hercules, how did you save him?"

[047-136]"Oh, it was not a difficult matter by any means," answered Hercules

[047-137]modestly; "it was dark, you know, so that at the proper moment it was

[047-138]quite possible to wade in amongst the poor wretches at the bottom of

[047-139]the trench, and to wrench the stake from its socket. Anybody could have

[047-140]done it. Cousin Benedict could have done it. Dingo, too, might have

[047-141]done it. Perhaps, after all, it was Dingo that did it."

[047-142]"No, no, Hercules, that won't do," cried Jack; "besides, look, Dingo is

[047-143]shaking his head; he is telling you he didn't do it."

[047-144]"Dingo must not tell tales, Master Jack," said Hercules, laughing.

[047-145]But, nevertheless, although the brave fellow's modesty prompted him to

[047-146]conceal it, it was clear that he had accomplished a daring feat, of

[047-147]which few would have ventured to incur the risk.

[047-148]Inquiry was next made after Tom, Bat, Actæon, and Austin. His

[047-149]countenance fell, and large tears gathered in his eyes as Hercules told

[047-150]how he had seen them pass through the forest in a slave-[[slave-caravan|caravan]]. They

[047-151]were gone; he feared they were gone for ever.

[047-152]Mrs. Weldon tried to console him with the hope that they might still be

[047-153]spared to meet again some day; but he shook his head mournfully. She

[047-154]then communicated to Dick the terms of the compact that had been

[047-155]entered into for her own release, and observed that under the

[047-156]circumstances it might really have been more prudent for her to remain

[047-157]in Kazonndé.

[047-158]"Then I have made a mistake; I have been an idiot, in bringing you

[047-159]away," said Hercules, ever ready to depreciate his own actions.

[047-160]"No," said Dick; "you have made no mistake; you could not have done

[047-161]better; those rascals, ten chances to one, will only get Mr. Weldon

[047-162]into some trap. We must get to Mossamedes before [[negoro|Negoro]] arrives; once

[047-163]there, we shall find that the Portuguese authorities will lend us their

[047-164]protection, and when old Alvez arrives to claim his 100,000 dollars--"

[047-165]"He shall receive a good thrashing for his pains," said Hercules,

[047-166]finishing Dick's sentence, and chuckling heartily at the prospect.

[047-167]It was agreed on all hands that it was most important that Negoro's

[047-168]arrival at Mossamedes should be forestalled. The plan which Dick had so

[047-169]long contemplated of reaching the coast by descending some river seemed

[047-170]now in a fair way of being accomplished, and from the northerly

[047-171]direction in which they were proceeding it was quite probable that they

[047-172]would ultimately reach the Zaire, and in that case not actually arrive

[047-173]at S. Paul de Loanda; but that would be immaterial, as they would be

[047-174]sure of finding help anywhere in the colonies of Lower Guinea.

[047-175]On finding himself on the river-bank, Dick's first thought had been to

[047-176]embark upon one of the floating islands that are continually to be seen

[047-177]upon the surface of the African streams, but it happened that Hercules

[047-178]during one of his rambles found a native boat that had run adrift. It

[047-179]was just the discovery that suited their need. It was one of the long,

[047-180]narrow canoes, thirty feet in length by three or four in breadth, that

[047-181]with a large number of paddles can be driven with immense velocity, but

[047-182]by the aid of a single scull can be safely guided down the current of a

[047-183]stream.
