---
description: "Dick was somewhat afraid that, to elude observation, it would be"
id: ch048
label: "Section 48"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[048-001][[dick-sands|Dick]] was somewhat afraid that, to elude observation, it would be

[048-002]necessary to proceed only by night, but as the loss of twelve hours out

[048-003]of the twenty-four would double the length of the voyage, he devised

[048-004]the plan of covering the canoe with a roof of long grass, supported by

[048-005]a horizontal pole from stem to stern, and this not only afforded a

[048-006]shelter from the sun, but so effectually concealed the craft,

[048-007]rudder-scull and all, that the very birds mistook it for one of the

[048-008]natural islets, and red-beaked gulls, black _arringhas_ and grey and

[048-009]white kingfishers would frequently alight upon it in search of food.

[048-010]Though comparatively free from fatigue, the voyage must necessarily be

[048-011]long, and by no means free from danger, and the daily supply of

[048-012]provisions was not easy to procure. If fishing failed, Dick had the one

[048-013]gun which Hercules had carried away with him from the ant-hill, and as

[048-014]he was by no means a bad shot, he hoped to find plenty of game, either

[048-015]along the banks or by firing through a loophole in the thatch.

[048-016]The rate of the current, as far as he could tell, was about two miles

[048-017]an hour, enough to carry them about fifty miles a day; it was a speed,

[048-018]however, that made it necessary for them to keep a sharp look-out for

[048-019]any rocks or submerged trunks of trees, as well as to be on their guard

[048-020]against rapids and cataracts.

[048-021]Dick's strength and spirits all revived at the delight of having Mrs.

[048-022][[mrs-weldon|Weldon]] and Jack restored to him, and he assumed his post at the bow of

[048-023]the canoe, directing Hercules how to use the scull at the stern. A

[048-024]litter of soft grass was made for Mrs. Weldon, who spent most of her

[048-025]time lying thoughtfully in the shade. Cousin Benedict was very

[048-026]taciturn; he had not recovered the loss of the manticora, and frowned

[048-027]ever and again at Hercules, as if he had not yet forgiven him for

[048-028]stopping him in the chase. Jack, who had been told that he must not be

[048-029]noisy, amused himself by playing with [[dingo|Dingo]].

[048-030]The first two days passed without any special incident. The stock of

[048-031]provisions was quite enough for that time, so that there was no need to

[048-032]disembark, and Dick merely lay to for a few hours in the night to take

[048-033]a little necessary repose.

[048-034]The stream nowhere exceeded 150 feet in breadth. The floating islands

[048-035]moved at the same pace as the canoe, and except from some unforeseen

[048-036]circumstance, there could be no apprehension of a collision. The banks

[048-037]were destitute of human inhabitants, but were richly clothed with wild

[048-038]plants, of which the blossoms were of the most gorgeous colours; the

[048-039]asclepiae, the gladiolus, the clematis, lilies, aloes, umbelliferae,

[048-040]arborescent ferns and fragrant shrubs, combining on either hand to make

[048-041]a border of surpassing beauty. Here and there the forest extended to

[048-042]the very shore, and copal-trees, acacias with their stiff foliage,

[048-043]bauhinias clothed with lichen, fig-trees with their masses of pendant

[048-044]roots, and other trees of splendid growth rose to the height of a

[048-045]hundred feet, forming a shade which the rays of the sun utterly failed

[048-046]to penetrate.

[048-047][Illustration: Hercules could leave the boat without much fear of

[048-048]detection.]

[048-049]Occasionally a wreath of creepers would form an arch from shore to

[048-050]shore, and on the 27th, to Jack's great delight, a group of monkeys was

[048-051]seen crossing one of these natural bridges, holding on most carefully

[048-052]by their tails, lest the aerial pathway should snap beneath their

[048-053]weight. These monkeys, belonging to a smaller kind of chimpanzee, which

[048-054]are known in [[africa|Central Africa]] by the name of _sokos_, were hideous

[048-055]creatures with low foreheads, bright yellow faces, and long, upright

[048-056]ears; they herd in troops of about ten, bark like dogs, and are much

[048-057]dreaded by the natives on account of their alleged propensity to carry

[048-058]off young children; there is no telling what predatory designs they

[048-059]might have formed against Master Jack if they had spied him out, but

[048-060]Dick's artifice effectually screened him from their observation.

[048-061]Twenty miles further on the canoe came to a sudden standstill.

[048-062]"What's the matter now, captain?" cried Hercules from the stern.

[048-063]"We have drifted on to a grass barrier, and there is no hope for it, we

[048-064]shall have to cut our way through," answered Dick.

[048-065]"All right, I dare say we shall manage it," promptly replied Hercules,

[048-066]leaving his rudder to come in front.

[048-067]The obstruction was formed by the interlacing of masses of the tough,

[048-068]glossy grass known by the name of _tikatika_, which, when compressed,

[048-069]affords a surface so compact and resisting that travellers have been

[048-070]known by means of it to cross rivers dry-footed. Splendid specimens of

[048-071]lotus plants had taken root amongst the vegetation.

[048-072]As it was nearly dark, Hercules could leave the boat without much fear

[048-073]of detection, and so effectually did he wield his hatchet that, in two

[048-074]hours after the stoppage, the barrier was hewn asunder, and the light

[048-075]craft resumed the channel.

[048-076]It must be owned that it was with a sense of reluctance that Benedict

[048-077]felt the boat was again beginning to move forward; the whole voyage

[048-078]appeared to him to be perfectly uninteresting and unnecessary; not a

[048-079]single insect had he observed since he left Kazonndé, and his most

[048-080]ardent wish was that he could return there and regain possession of his

[048-081]invaluable tin box. But an unlooked for gratification was in store for

[048-082]him.

[048-083]Hercules, who had been his pupil long enough to have an eye for the

[048-084]kind of creature Benedict was ever trying to secure, on coming back

[048-085]from his exertions on the grass-barrier, brought a horrible-looking

[048-086]animal, and submitted it to the sullen entomologist.

[048-087]"Is this of any use to you?"

[048-088]The amateur lifted it up carefully, and having almost poked it into his

[048-089]near-sighted eyes, uttered a cry of delight,--

[048-090]"Bravo, Hercules! you are making amends for your past mischief; it is

[048-091]splendid! it is unique!"

[048-092]"Is it really very curious?" said Mrs. Weldon.

[048-093]"Yes, indeed," answered the enraptured naturalist; "it is really

[048-094]unique; it belongs to neither of the ten orders; it can be classed

[048-095]neither with the coleoptera, neuroptera, nor to the hymenoptera: if it

[048-096]had eight legs I should know how to classify it; I should place it

[048-097]amongst the second section of the arachnida; but it is a hexapod, a

[048-098]genuine hexapod; a spider with six legs; a grand discovery; it must be

[048-099]entered on the catalogue as 'Hexapodes Benedictus.'" Once again

[048-100]mounted on his hobby, the worthy enthusiast continued to discourse with

[048-101]an unwonted vivacity to his indulgent ii* not over attentive audience.

[048-102]Meanwhile the canoe was steadily threading its way over the dark

[048-103]waters, the silence of the night broken only by the rattle of the

[048-104]scales of some crocodiles, or by the snorting of hippopotamuses in the

[048-105]neighbourhood. Once the travellers were startled by a loud noise, such

[048-106]as might proceed from some ponderous machinery in motion: it was caused

[048-107]by a troop of a hundred or more elephants that, after feasting through

[048-108]the day on the roots of the forest, had come to quench their thirst at

[048-109]the river-side.

[048-110][Illustration: It was caused by a troop of a hundred or more elephants.]

[048-111]But no danger was to be apprehended; lighted by the pale moon that rose

[048-112]over the tall trees, the canoe throughout the night pursued in safety

[048-113]its solitary voyage.

[048-114]CHAPTER XVIII.

[048-115]AN ANXIOUS VOYAGE.

[048-116]Thus the canoe drifted on for a week, the forests that for many miles

[048-117]had skirted the river ultimately giving place to extensive jungles that

[048-118]stretched far away to the horizon. Destitute, fortunately for the

[048-119]travellers, of human inhabitants, the district abounded in a large

[048-120]variety of animal life; zebras, elands, caamas, sported on the bank,

[048-121]disappearing at night-fall before howling leopards and roaring lions.

[048-122]It was Dick's general custom, as he lay to for a while in the

[048-123]afternoon, to go ashore in search of food, and as the manioc, maize,

[048-124]and sorghum that were to be found were of a wild growth and

[048-125]consequently not fit for consumption, he was obliged to run the risk of

[048-126]using his gun. On the 4th of July he succeeded by a single shot in

[048-127]killing _pokoo_, a kind of antelope about five feet long, with

[048-128]annulated horns, a tawny skin dappled with bright spots, and a white

[048-129]belly. The venison proved excellent, and was roasted over a fire

[048-130]procured by the primitive method, practised, it is said, even by

[048-131]gorillas, of rubbing two sticks together.

[048-132]In spite of these halts, and the time taken for the night's rest, the

[048-133]distance accomplished by the 8th could not be estimated at less than a

[048-134]hundred miles. The river, augmented by only a few insignificant

[048-135]tributaries, had not materially increased in volume; its direction,

[048-136]however, had slightly changed more to the north-west. It afforded a

[048-137]very fair supply of fish, which were caught by lines made of the long

[048-138]stems of creepers furnished with thorns instead of fish-hooks, a

[048-139]considerable proportion being the delicate _sandjtkas_, which when

[048-140]dried may be transported to any climate; besides these there were the

[048-141]black _usakas_, the wide-headed _monndés_, and occasionally the little

[048-142]_dagalas_, resembling Thames whitebait.

[048-143][Illustration: He stood face to face with his foe.]

[048-144]Next day, Dick met with an adventure that put all his courage and

[048-145]composure to the test. He had noticed the horns of a caama projecting

[048-146]above the brushwood, and went ashore alone with the intention of

[048-147]securing it. He succeeded in getting tolerably close to it and fired,

[048-148]but he was terribly startled when a formidable creature bounded along

[048-149]some thirty paces ahead, and took possession of the prey he had just

[048-150]wounded.

[048-151]It was a majestic lion, at least five feet in height, of the kind

[048-152]called _káramoo_, in distinction to the maneless species known as the

[048-153]_Nyassi-lion_. Before Dick had time to reload, the huge brute had

[048-154]caught sight of him, and without relaxing its hold upon the writhing

[048-155]antelope beneath its claws, glared upon him fiercely. Dick's presence

[048-156]of mind did not forsake him; flight he knew was not to be thought of;

[048-157]his only chance he felt intuitively would be by keeping perfectly

[048-158]still; and aware that the beast would be unlikely to give up a

[048-159]struggling prey for another that was motionless, he stood face to face

[048-160]with his foe, not venturing to move an eyelid. In a few minutes the

[048-161]lion's patience seemed to be exhausted; with a grand stateliness, it

[048-162]picked up the caama as easily as a dog would lift a hare, turned round,

[048-163]and lashing the bushes with its tail, disappeared in the jungle.

[048-164]It took Dick some little time to recover himself sufficiently to return

[048-165]to the canoe. On arriving, he said nothing of the peril to which he had

[048-166]been exposed, but heartily congratulated himself that they had means of

[048-167]transport without making their way through jungles and forests.

[048-168]As they advanced, they repeatedly came across evidences that the

[048-169]country had not been always, as now it was, utterly devoid of

[048-170]population; more than once, they observed traces which betokened the

[048-171]former existence of villages; either some ruined palisades or the

[048-172]_débris_ of some thatched huts, or some solitary sacred tree within an

[048-173]enclosure would indicate that the death of a chief had, according to

[048-174]custom, made a native tribe migrate to new quarters.

[048-175]If natives were still dwelling in the district, as was just probable,

[048-176]they must have been living underground, only emerging at night like

[048-177]beasts of prey, from which they were only a grade removed.

[048-178]Dick Sands had every reason to feel convinced that cannibalism had been

[048-179]practised in the neighbourhood, Three times, as he was wandering in the

[048-180]forest, he had come upon piles of ashes and half-charred human bones,

[048-181]the remnants, no doubt, of a ghastly meal, and although he mentioned

[048-182]nothing of what he had seen to Mrs. Weldon, he made up his mind to go

[048-183]ashore as seldom as possible, and as often as he found it absolutely

[048-184]necessary to go, he gave Hercules strict directions to push off into

[048-185]mid-stream at the very first intimation of danger.
