---
description: '"A tuberous manticora!" he exclaimed.'
id: ch046
label: "Section 46"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[046-001]"A tuberous manticora!" he exclaimed.

[046-002]The insect began to move again, and as it crawled down to the entrance

[046-003]of the nostrils the tickling sensation became too much for endurance,

[046-004]and Benedict sneezed. He made a sudden clutch, but of course he only

[046-005]caught his own nose. His vexation was very great, but he did not lose

[046-006]his composure; he knew that the manticora rarely flies very high, and

[046-007]that more frequently than not it simply crawls. Accordingly he groped

[046-008]about a long time on his hands and knees, and at last he found it

[046-009]basking in a ray of sunshine within a foot of him. His resolution was

[046-010]soon taken. He would not run the risk of crushing it by trying to catch

[046-011]it, but would make his observations on it as it crawled; and so with

[046-012]his nose close to the ground, like a dog upon the scent, he followed it

[046-013]on all fours, admiring it and examining it as it moved. Regardless of

[046-014]the heat he not only left the doorway of his hut, but continued

[046-015]creeping along till he reached the enclosing palisade.

[046-016]At the foot of the fence the manticora, according to the habits of its

[046-017]kind, began to seek a subterranean retreat, and coming to the opening

[046-018]of a mole-track entered it at once. Benedict quite thought he had now

[046-019]lost sight of his prize altogether, but his surprise was very great

[046-020]when he found that the aperture was at least two feet wide, and that it

[046-021]led into a gallery which would admit his whole body. His momentary

[046-022]feeling of astonishment, however, gave way to his eagerness to follow

[046-023]up the hexapod, and he continued burrowing like a ferret.

[046-024]Without knowing it, he actually passed under the palisading, and was

[046-025]now beyond it;--the mole-track, in fact, was a communication that had

[046-026]been made between the interior and exterior of the enclosure. Benedict

[046-027]had obtained his freedom, but so far from caring in the least for his

[046-028][[freedom|liberty]] he continued totally absorbed in the pursuit upon which he had

[046-029]started. He watched with unflagging vigilance, and it was only when the

[046-030]hexapod expanded its wings as if for flight that he prepared to

[046-031]imprison it in the hollow of his hand.

[046-032]All at once, however, he was taken by surprise; a whizz and a whirr and

[046-033]the prize was gone!

[046-034]Disappointed rather than despairing, Benedict raised himself up, and

[046-035]looked about him. Before long the old black speck was again flitting

[046-036]just above his head. There was every reason to hope that it would

[046-037]ultimately settle once more upon the ground, but on this side of the

[046-038]palisade there was a large forest a little way to the north, and if the

[046-039]manticora were to get into its mass of foliage all hope of keeping it

[046-040]in view would be lost, and there would be an end of the proud

[046-041]expectation of storing it in the tin box, to be preserved among the

[046-042]rest of the entomological wonders.

[046-043]After a while the insect descended to the earth; it did not rest at

[046-044]all, nor crawl as it had done previously, but made its advance by a

[046-045]series of rapid hops. This made the chase for the near-sighted

[046-046]naturalist a matter of great difficulty; he put his face as close to

[046-047]the ground as possible, and kept starting off and stopping and starting

[046-048]off again with his arms extended like a swimming frog, continually

[046-049]making frantic clutches to find as continually that his grasp had been

[046-050]eluded.

[046-051]After running till he was out of breath, and scratching his hands

[046-052]against the brushwood and the foliage till they bled, he had the

[046-053]mortification of feeling the insect dash past his ear with what might

[046-054]be a defiant buzz, and finding that it was out of sight for ever.

[046-055]"Ungrateful hexapod!" he cried in dismay, "I intended to honour you

[046-056]with the best place in my collection."

[046-057][Illustration: For that day at least Cousin Benedict had lost his

[046-058]chance of being the happiest of entomologists. _Page 435._]

[046-059]He knew not what to do, and could not reconcile himself to the loss; he

[046-060]reproached himself for not having secured the manticora at the first;

[046-061]he gazed at the forest till he persuaded himself he could see the

[046-062]coveted insect in the distance, and, seized with a frantic impulse,

[046-063]exclaimed,--

[046-064]"I will have you yet!"

[046-065]He did not even yet realize the fact that he had gained his liberty,

[046-066]but heedless of everything except his own burning disappointment, and

[046-067]at the risk of being attacked by natives or beset by wild beasts, he

[046-068]was just on the very point of dashing into the heart of the wood when

[046-069]suddenly a giant form confronted him, as suddenly a giant hand seized

[046-070]him by the nape of his neck, and, lifting him up, carried him off with

[046-071]apparently as little exertion as he could himself have carried off his

[046-072]hexapod!

[046-073]For that day at least Cousin Benedict had lost his chance of being the

[046-074]happiest of entomologists.

[046-075]CHAPTER XVI.

[046-076]A MAGICIAN.

[046-077]On finding that Cousin Benedict did not return to his quarters at the

[046-078]proper hour, [[mrs-weldon|Mrs. Weldon]] began to feel uneasy. She could not imagine

[046-079]what had become of him; his tin box with its contents were safe in his

[046-080]hut, and even if a chance of escape had been offered him, she knew that

[046-081]nothing would have induced him voluntarily to abandon his treasures.

[046-082]She enlisted the services of Halima, and spent the remainder of the day

[046-083]in searching for him, until at last she felt herself driven to the

[046-084]conviction that he must have been confined by the orders of Alvez

[046-085]himself; for what reason she could not divine, as Benedict had

[046-086]undoubtedly been included in the number of prisoners to be delivered to

[046-087]Mr. Weldon for the stipulated ransom.

[046-088]But the rage of the trader when he heard of the escape of the captive

[046-089]was an ample proof that he had had no hand in his disappearance. A

[046-090]rigorous search was instituted in every direction, which resulted in

[046-091]the discovery of the mole-track. Here beyond a question was the passage

[046-092]through which the fly-catcher had found his way.

[046-093]"Idiot! fool! rascal!" muttered Alvez, full of rage at the prospect of

[046-094]losing a portion of the redemption-money; "if ever I get hold of him,

[046-095]he shall pay dearly for this freak."

[046-096]The opening was at once blocked up, the woods were scoured all round

[046-097]for a considerable distance, but no trace of Benedict was to be found.

[046-098]Mrs. Weldon was bitterly grieved and much overcome, but she had no

[046-099]alternative except to resign herself as best she could to the loss of

[046-100]her unfortunate relation; there was a tinge of bitterness in her

[046-101]anxiety, for she could not help being irritated at the recklessness

[046-102]with which he had withdrawn himself from the reach of her protection.

[046-103]Meanwhile the weather for the time of year underwent a very unusual

[046-104]change. Although the rainy season is ordinarily reckoned to terminate

[046-105]about the end of April, the sky had suddenly become overcast in the

[046-106]middle of June, rain had recommenced falling, and the downpour had been

[046-107]so heavy and continuous that all the ground was thoroughly sodden. To

[046-108]Mrs. Weldon personally this incessant rainfall brought no other

[046-109]inconvenience beyond depriving her of her daily exercise, but to the

[046-110]natives in general it was a very serious calamity.

[046-111]The ripening crops in the low-lying districts were completely flooded,

[046-112]and the inhabitants feared that they would be reduced to the greatest

[046-113]extremities; all agricultural pursuits had come to a standstill, and

[046-114]neither the queen nor her ministers could devise any expedient to avert

[046-115]or mitigate the misfortune. They resolved at last to have recourse to

[046-116]the magicians, not those who are called in request to heal diseases or

[046-117]to procure good luck, but to the _mganga_, sorcerers of a superior

[046-118]order, who are credited with the faculty of invoking or dispelling rain.

[046-119]But it was all to no purpose. It was in vain that the _mganga_

[046-120]monotoned their incantations, flourished their rattles, jingled their

[046-121]bells, and exhibited their amulets; it was equally without avail that

[046-122]they rolled up their balls of dirt and spat in the faces of all the

[046-123]courtiers: the pitiless rain continued to descend, and the malign

[046-124]influences that were ruling the clouds refused to be propitiated.

[046-125]The prospect seemed to become more and more hopeless, when the report

[046-126]was brought to Moena that there was a most wonderful _mganga_ resident

[046-127]in the north of Angola. He had never been seen in this part of the

[046-128]country, but fame declared him to be a magician of the very highest

[046-129]order. Application, without delay, should be made to him; he surely

[046-130]would be able to stay the rain.

[046-131]Early in the morning of the 25th a great tinkling of bells announced

[046-132]the magician's arrival at Kazonndé. The natives poured out to meet him

[046-133]on his way to the _chitoka_, their minds being already predisposed in

[046-134]his favour by a moderation of the downpour, and by sundry indications

[046-135]of a coming change of wind.

[046-136]The ordinary practice of the professors of the magical art is to

[046-137]perambulate the villages in parties of three or four, accompanied by a

[046-138]considerable number of acolytes and assistants. In this case the

[046-139]_mganga_ came entirely alone. He was a pure negro of most imposing

[046-140]stature, more than six feet high, and broad in proportion. All over his

[046-141]chest was a fantastic pattern traced in pipe-clay, the lower portion of

[046-142]his body being covered with a flowing skirt of woven grass, so long

[046-143]that it made a train. Round his neck hung a string of birds' skulls,

[046-144]upon his head he wore a leathern helmet ornamented with pearls and

[046-145]plumes, and about his waist was a copper girdle, to which was attached

[046-146]bells that tinkled like the harness of a Spanish mule. The only

[046-147]instrument indicating his art was a basket he carried made of a

[046-148]calabash containing shells, amulets, little wooden idols and other

[046-149]fetishes, together with what was more important than all, a large

[046-150]number of those balls of dung, without which no African ceremony of

[046-151]divination could ever be complete.

[046-152]One peculiarity was soon discovered by the crowd; the _mganga_ was

[046-153]dumb, and could utter only one low, guttural sound, which was quite

[046-154]unintelligible; this was a circumstance, however, that seemed only to

[046-155]augment their faith in his powers.

[046-156]With a stately strut that brought all his tinkling paraphernalia into

[046-157]full play, the magician proceeded to make the circuit of the

[046-158]market-place. The natives followed in a troop behind, endeavouring,

[046-159]like monkeys, to imitate his every movement. He turned into the main

[046-160]thoroughfare, and began to make his way direct to the royal residence,

[046-161]whence, as soon as the queen heard of his approach, she advanced to

[046-162]meet him. On seeing her, the _mganga_ bowed to the very dust; then,

[046-163]rearing himself to his full height, he pointed aloft, and by the

[046-164]significance of his animated gestures indicated that, although the

[046-165]fleeting clouds were now going to the west, they would soon return

[046-166]eastwards with a rotatory motion irresistibly strong.

[046-167][Illustration: The entire crowd joined in. _Page_ 441.]

[046-168]All at once, to the surprise of the beholders, he stooped and took the

[046-169]hand of the mighty sovereign of Kazonndé.

[046-170]The courtiers hurried forward to check the unprecedented breach of

[046-171]etiquette, but the foremost was driven back with so staggering a blow

[046-172]that the others deemed it prudent to retire.

[046-173]The queen herself appeared not to take the least offence at the

[046-174]familiarity; she bestowed a hideous grimace, which was meant for a

[046-175]smile, upon her illustrious visitor, who, still keeping his hold upon

[046-176]her hand, started off walking at a rapid pace, the crowd following in

[046-177]the rear. He directed his steps towards the residence of Alvez, and

[046-178]finding the door closed, applied his strong shoulder to it with such

[046-179]effect, that it fell bodily to the ground, and the passive sovereign

[046-180]stood within the limits of the enclosure. The trader was about to

[046-181]summon his slaves and soldiers to repel the unceremonious invasion of

[046-182]his premises, but on beholding the queen all stepped back with

[046-183]respectful reverence.
