---
description: "But it was years before I saw Allgood Newton again, for when I got to Blackstable I found a letter from Mrs. Barton Trafford (who had taken the precaution to..."
id: ch20
label: "Chapter 20"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## XX

[020-001]But it was years before I saw [[allgood-newton|Allgood Newton]] again, for when I got to [[blackstable|Blackstable]] I found a letter from Mrs. [[mrs-barton-trafford|Barton Trafford]] (who had taken the precaution to note my address) asking me, for reasons that she would explain when she saw me, not to come to her flat but to meet her at six o’clock in the first-[[social-class|class]] waiting room at [[victoria-station|Victoria Station]]. As soon then as I could get away from [[st-lukes-hospital|the hospital]] on Monday I made my way there, and after waiting for a while saw her come in. She came toward me with little tripping steps.

[020-002]“Well, have you anything to tell me? Let us find a quiet corner and sit down.”

[020-003]We sought a place and found it.

[020-004]“I must explain why I asked you to come here,” she said. “Edward is staying with me. At first he did not want to come, but I persuaded him. But he’s nervous and ill and irritable. I did not want to run the risk of his seeing you.”

[020-005]I told Mrs. Trafford the bare facts of my story and she listened attentively. Now and then she nodded her head. But I could not hope to make her understand the commotion I had found at Blackstable. The town was beside itself with excitement. Nothing so thrilling had happened there for years and no one could talk of anything else. Humpty Dumpty had had a great fall. [[lord-george-kemp|Lord George Kemp]] had absconded. [[About]] a week before he had announced that he had to go up to [[london|London]] on business, and two days later a petition in bankruptcy was filed against him. It appeared that his building operations had not been successful, his attempt to make Blackstable into a frequented seaside resort meeting with no response, and he had been forced to raise money in every way he could. All kinds of rumours ran through the little town. Quite a number of small people who had entrusted their savings to him were faced with the loss of all they had. The details were vague, for neither my uncle nor my aunt knew anything of business matters, nor had I the knowledge to make what they told me comprehensible. But there was a mortgage on George Kemp’s house and a bill of sale on his furniture. His wife was left without a penny. His two sons, lads of twenty and twenty-one, were in the coal business, but that, too, was involved in the general ruin. George Kemp had gone off with all the cash he could lay hands on, something like fifteen hundred pounds, they said, though how they knew I cannot imagine; and it was reported that a warrant had been issued for his arrest. It was supposed that he had left the country; some said he had gone to Australia and some to Canada.

[020-006]“I hope they catch him,” said my uncle. “He ought to get penal servitude for life.”

[020-007]The indignation was universal. They could not forgive him because he had always been so noisy and boisterous, because he had chaffed them and stood them drinks and given them garden parties, because he had driven such a smart trap and worn his brown billycock hat at such a rakish angle. But it was on Sunday night after church in the vestry that the churchwarden told my uncle the worst. For the last two years he had been meeting [[rosie-driffield|Rosie Driffield]] at [[haversham|Haversham]] almost every week and they had been spending the night together at a public house. The licensee of this had put money into one of Lord George’s wildcat schemes, and on discovering that he had lost it blurted out the whole story. He could have borne it if Lord George had defrauded others, but that he should defraud him who had done him a good turn and whom he looked upon as a chum, that was the limit.

[020-008]“I expect they’ve run away together,” said my uncle.

[020-009]“I shouldn’t be surprised,” said the churchwarden.

[020-010]After supper, while the housemaid was clearing away, I went into the kitchen to talk to [[mary-ann|Mary-Ann]]. She had been at church and had heard the story too. I cannot believe that the congregation had listened very attentively to my uncle’s sermon.

[020-011]“The vicar says they’ve run away together,” I said. I had not breathed a word of what I knew.

[020-012]“Why, of course they ’ave,” said Mary-Ann. “He was the only man she ever really fancied. He only ’ad to lift ’is little finger and she’d leave anyone no matter who it was.”

[020-013]I lowered my eyes. I was suffering from bitter mortification; and I was angry with Rosie: I thought she had behaved very badly to me.

[020-014]“I suppose we shall never see her again,” I said. It gave me a pang to utter the words.

[020-015]“I don’t suppose we shall,” said Mary-Ann cheerfully.

[020-016]When I had told Mrs. Barton Trafford as much of this story as I thought she need know, she sighed, but whether from satisfaction or distress I had no notion.

[020-017]“Well, that’s the end of Rosie at all [[event-index|events]],” she said. She got up and held out her hand. “Why will these literary men make these unfortunate marriages? It’s all very sad, very sad. Thank you so much for what you’ve done. We know where we are now. The great thing is that it shouldn’t interfere with Edward’s work.”

[020-018]Her remarks seemed a trifle disconnected to me. The fact was, I have no doubt, that she was giving me not the smallest thought. I led her out of Victoria Station and put her into a bus that went down the King’s Road, [[chelsea|Chelsea]]; then I walked back to my lodgings.
