---
description: "John entered the office and, after hesitating slightly, greeted Jim rather ungraciously. Jim’s reply was scarcely audible. Their eyes met for an instant but eac…"
id: Ch-29
label: "Chapter 29"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

##### XXIX

[029-001] [[john-winter|John]] entered the office and, after hesitating slightly, greeted [[james-sprague|Jim]] rather ungraciously. Jim’s reply was scarcely audible. Their eyes met for an instant but each showed that he was anxious to avoid the other’s gaze. They exchanged a few necessary remarks. Jim held out the photograph of a lately completed house. His hand was unsteady as he called John’s attention to the picture. John barely glanced at it. Coughing nervously, he walked to the window. After a few moments he murmured something unintelligible about Layard’s and, taking up his hat, went out.

[029-002] When Jim was alone, he stood irresolute for a time, then, taking his own hat and coat, followed John’s example.

[029-003] In the street, Jim took the first surface car, without even noticing the destination indicated on the front, and he did not reappear at the office until late that evening.

[029-004] [[nannie-merwent|Nannie]] did not return to [[rosedene|Rosedene]] until nearly five o’clock in the afternoon. She came at once, through the dining room, into the kitchen where [[lucy-winter|Lucy]] was making a dessert.

[029-005] “Just look at my clothes! I have little enough without having this ruined.” Mrs. Merwent held out her linen skirt which was ripped at the hem and had a small tear suggestive of the imprint of a man’s boot heel. “The cars were so crowded! It was so hot standing there and I missed the first train. Miss Powell had an engagement and couldn’t wait with me. If I had only known I was going to be so late I could have gone to John’s office. Hasn’t he come yet?” Nannie’s air was injured.

[029-006] “No, he hasn’t come yet.” Lucy bent over her work.

[029-007] “Why, I already told [[katy-lockhart|Katy]] to have peaches and cream!” Mrs. Merwent’s eye took in Lucy’s preparations and her voice rose irritably.

[029-008] Lucy made no response.

[029-009] “Did you fix the celery soup?” Mrs. Merwent asked the negress.

[029-010] “No, Miss Nannie. You see Miss Lucy wanted me to have—”

[029-011] “You needn’t bother about the dinner. Everything is ready,” interrupted Lucy, looking full at her [[motherhood|mother]].

[029-012] “Now, Lucy, there was no need for your working in the kitchen. I had instructed Katy about everything, and two heads only make confusion.”

[029-013] “There’s only one head,” replied Lucy.

[029-014] “Of course I know that you are the mistress, but I have taken things over for you, and it only mixes things up—”

[029-015] “You haven’t taken things over,” Lucy interrupted. “I don’t need your help any longer.”

[029-016] “Why, Lucy—”

[029-017] “From now on I shall attend to my own [[domestic-life|household]]. There is absolutely nothing for you to do.”

[029-018] “Why, Lucy, what has happened?” demanded Nannie in a voice in which was mingled astonishment and alarm.

[029-019] “A lot of things have happened, but suppose we don’t [[gossip-and-reputation|talk]] them over before the servant.” Katy had gone into the dining room.

[029-020] “Well! When John comes home I think I’ll ask about this!”

[029-021] “Do,” advised Lucy as Katy returned to the kitchen.

[029-022] Nannie left the room and went upstairs to experiment with a new device for curling the hair, one of the day’s purchases.

[029-023] “Hello, Mamma!” shouted [[dimmie-winter|Dimmie]] shortly afterward, coming in from the back yard.

[029-024] “Hello, Sonny,” beamed Lucy. “Here, let me get you ready for dinner. Papa will be home soon.”

[029-025] “Has Nannie come?” inquired Dimmie.

[029-026] “Yes,” answered Lucy, washing his face and hands.

[029-027] “Where is she?” he insisted. “Don’t wash so hard, Mamma. It hurts.”

[029-028] “Oh, she’s upstairs, I think. Now come let me brush your hair.”

[029-029] “I’m goin’ upstairs to see what Nannie’s got for me!” Dimmie was impatient.

[029-030] John’s key was heard in the latch.

[029-031] “There’s Papa!” exclaimed Lucy. “Let’s run to meet him.” And catching Dimmie’s hand, she ran with him into the hall.

[029-032] Smiling uneasily, she waited for John. She wore a blue muslin dress and had fastened a half opened white rose in her hair.

[029-033] “Well, dear,” she greeted him.

[029-034] His glance passed abstractedly over the dress and the rose. He kissed her forehead but said nothing. He seemed worried and depressed.

[029-035] “Is anything the matter, John?” she asked, regarding him timidly.

[029-036] “No‑o,” he responded indefinitely.

[029-037] “I’m here, Papa,” called Dimmie who had not been kissed.

[029-038] “Yes?” John noticed absently.

[029-039] “Get washed, dear. Dinner is all ready to put on the table,” said Lucy.

[029-040] “Has Nannie come back yet?” He avoided Lucy’s gaze as he spoke.

[029-041] “Yes. She’s in her room.”

[029-042] John’s frown deepened. He mounted the stairs.

[029-043] Lucy superintended the placing of the meal on the table and John reappeared almost immediately.

[029-044] “Isn’t she coming down to dinner?” he inquired nervously.

[029-045] “Go and call Mrs. Merwent, Katy,” Lucy bade the servant.

[029-046] Nannie followed Katy downstairs and entered the dining room. Her hair was beautifully curled and as she came in she put her hand to her head with a self conscious gesture.

[029-047] “Why, how are you, John?” she began. “I didn’t know you had come home.”

[029-048] The meal proceeded in constrained silence.

[029-049] “Miss Powell and I had such a nice day,” remarked Nannie at length, “but this evening I got into a jam on the car. I did so wish you had been with me, John. The most insulting man! He crowded me so I almost ruined my dress. But that’s the way with these Chicagoans. If you had been around he would have behaved mighty differently.”

[029-050] John smiled slightly but kept his eyes on his plate. Neither he nor Lucy replied to the remark.

[029-051] “We thought of coming past your office but we were afraid you might be busy.”

[029-052] “I’ve been very busy today,” said John.

[029-053] “Then I’m glad we didn’t. And John, sometime next month I want you to take me up the lake. Miss Powell says it’s such a lovely trip in the early summer. You will, won’t you?”

[029-054] John fidgeted uncomfortably and Lucy attended assiduously to Dimmie’s wants.

[029-055] “Why—of course,” John agreed after some hesitation. “That is, so far as I know now.” He laughed uneasily and added, “We may all be dead by that time.”

[029-056] Silence hovered over the group once more.

[029-057] “You look frightfully glum, John. I’m almost afraid of you tonight,” observed Mrs. Merwent after some minutes. She, too, laughed rather forcedly as she spoke.

[029-058] “I didn’t know I was glum,” apologized John. “I’m rather tired. I’ve had a hard day.” It was obvious that he talked with an effort.

[029-059] “I’m through,” Dimmie announced with a sigh of satisfaction.

[029-060] “Are you, Son?” Lucy untied his bib.

[029-061] “Yes, and I want you to tell me stories like you promised to.”

[029-062] “All right,” Lucy consented brightly. “Come on. Get down from your chair and kiss Papa good night, and we’ll go upstairs and I’ll tell you ever so many stories till you’re ready to go to bed.”

[029-063] “Will you sing, too?” stipulated Dimmie.

[029-064] “Yes, I’ll sing too,” she promised.

[029-065] “I want to kiss Nannie, too,” Dimmie declared, climbing out of his chair.

[029-066] “Of course you do. You wouldn’t forget Nannie, would you, Jimmie?” Mrs. Merwent put in quickly. “Wait a minute. Wipe your hands first.”

[029-067] “Poor John!” sympathized Nannie as soon as they were alone. “I could see that you were tired before you spoke of it.”

[029-068] “Oh, I’m all right,” exclaimed John irritably, at the same time lighting a cigarette.

[029-069] “I know you never let on, John, but you can always be sure that *I* understand you, whether anyone else does or not.”

[029-070] John drummed on the table.

[029-071] “Let’s go into the sitting room,” suggested Mrs. Merwent, rising as Katy entered to clear the table. “Shall I sing for you?” She passed into the living room and moved toward the piano.

[029-072] “I don’t believe I’ve got time,” explained John hurriedly. “I’ve got to go out tonight. I ought to catch that next train.”

[029-073] “I’m so sorry,” said Nannie. “I especially wanted to talk some things over tonight. I got another letter from Professor Walsh,” she added significantly.

[029-074] “Talk what things over?” John gave her a quick scrutiny.

[029-075] Mrs. Merwent turned with a surprised air.

[029-076] “Why, about Lucy principally, John, and—and about what ought to be done.”

[029-077] “What about Lucy?”

[029-078] “Well, nothing in particular, but she’s getting all worked up again about the housekeeping, and I thought you might speak to her.”

[029-079] “Why should I speak to her?” John’s manner was combative. Nannie gazed at him reproachfully.

[029-080] “Well, you know what you say has more effect on her than what I say. If you would just tell her to leave things to me as they have been, and not go and bother Katy with a lot of counter orders and that sort of thing. It’s pretty hard, John, for me to look after everything and then be interfered with all the time.”

[029-081] John stood twirling the charm on his watch fob. When he spoke his voice showed embarrassment.

[029-082] “I think, Nannie, that—that is—that it would be better—if you didn’t try to—to take things out of Lucy’s hands so much.”

[029-083] Mrs. Merwent’s eyes filled with tears.

[029-084] “Oh, John, how can you say such a thing when I try so hard, and all I do is for her sake? I’ve never considered myself at all.”

[029-085] “I know you haven’t, Nannie,” acceded John miserably, “but I’m—I’m in a hard place. I wish you and Lucy didn’t have to—to disagree so much. I’m almost at my wits’ end.”

[029-086] Nannie studied his perplexed face. Suddenly she seemed to decide something.

[029-087] “All right, John. I’ll do anything you say,” she promised, wiping her eyes. “I would do *anything* for you, John. You have been so good to me.”

[029-088] John remained in an attitude of thought.

[029-089] “Just try your best to get along without any friction, Nannie,” he begged. “I know it’s hard for you sometimes. Lucy’s peculiar about some things. But I’m about to go dippy with matters as they are, and I want you to help me out.”

[029-090] “Poor John! Of course I will. If I had my way you would never have a care or a worry.”

[029-091] “Thank you, Nannie. I knew you would help me all you could. Lucy is in a terribly nervous state and we’ve got to get her out of this silly notion that—that—well, that she’s left out—or she’ll do something foolish.”

[029-092] “I understand, John. Lucy has always been curious and babyish, but now—” She paused expressively. “There has been so much tragedy in my life, John, and now to see you going through the same thing!”

[029-093] “I guess you never had anybody to help you out, Nannie.” John’s voice was almost inaudible.

[029-094] “John—”

[029-095] “Yes, Nannie. I’ve got to be going, you know.” He moved toward the door.

[029-096] Nannie linked and unlinked her fingers.

[029-097] “We do sympathize with and understand each other, John! You know I told you I got another letter from Professor Walsh.”

[029-098] “Well?”

[029-099] “Oh, John, if it were anyone but you I would rather die than ask [[money-and-class|money]] of them—but the check didn’t come—and—Oh, John, what shall I do?” She began to cry.

[029-100] “How much do you want, Nannie?”

[029-101] “Just a little, John. But Lucy always misunderstands things—and I have no one else to go to!”

[029-102] He took a bill from his pocket and pressed it into her hand.

[029-103] “But, John!” she protested, glancing at the denomination of the money.

[029-104] “Cut that out, Nannie!” John’s voice was gruff with emotion. “Some things may happen that I can’t help, but just remember, first, last, and always, that what belongs to me and Lucy belongs to you too, and if she—” He broke off abruptly and strode into the hall.

[029-105] “Oh, John, I can’t tell you—” Nannie began; but for response the front door clicked.

[029-106] She sighed and looked down at the money.

---

[029-107] John walked up and down the street for more than half an hour. At the end of this time he met Dr. [[howard-hamilton|Hamilton]] returning from a patient.

[029-108] “Well, Mr. Winter,” the [[illness-and-medicine|doctor]] halted and shook hands, “you seem to be wandering around like a lost soul.”

[029-109] “I had a slight headache,” lied John, “and came out to get a little fresh air.”

[029-110] “Good stunt,” approved the doctor. “You lead a pretty sedentary life, and exercise is good for you. How is Mrs. Winter?”

[029-111] “Oh, I think she’s all right now.” John shifted his weight from one foot to the other.

[029-112] “Don’t allow anything to worry or excite her, Mr. Winter,” Dr. Hamilton urged earnestly. “Her nerves and heart won’t stand it. Well, good night. I’m going to get a cup of cocoa and go to bed.”

[029-113] “Good night,” answered John. “I think I’ll turn in too.” And he made his way toward home.

[029-114] Letting himself in through the front entrance, John found both living room and dining room dark.

[029-115] “Where’s Mrs. Merwent?” he queried of Katy, who came in after locking the kitchen door and windows.

[029-116] “Why, she done went to bed, Mr. Winter, right after you all went out.”

[029-117] As he ascended the stairs, he saw through the transom of Lucy’s door that her light was burning. He had been sleeping in Jim’s room for some time past, and now made his way toward it. As he was opposite Lucy’s door he heard her call softly.

[029-118] “Why don’t you come in, John?” she asked.

[029-119] He halted and, after a slight hesitation, turned the handle of the lock and entered. Lucy was sitting on the edge of the bed braiding her hair. She smiled pityingly at his troubled face.

[029-120] “I heard you go out,” she said. “I expect you had a disagreeable time, didn’t you? What did she say?”

[029-121] “Why, I had a talk with Nannie,” John parried somewhat uncertainly, “and she has agreed to—to—not to—interfere in the running of the house, and to—well, *you* know—cut out the kind of things that get on your nerves. I thought that if she would quit worrying you,” he went on rapidly, “that it would be more—more, well, more considerate and—better, not to actually put her out of the house, at least not without any warning.” He rattled the keys in his pocket, avoiding Lucy’s gaze. “Of course if she continues to—to—that is, I mean if you don’t want her at all, we can later gradually—and—”

[029-122] “And you didn’t dare tell her to go?” Lucy sprang to her feet. Her loose hair flowing down from her pale face gave her a ghostlike [[beauty-and-appearance|appearance]].

[029-123] “Now, Lucy,” pleaded John, his eyes meeting hers for an instant and then falling, “I really don’t think we ought to—” His voice died away.

[029-124] Lucy gathered up some clothing from the bed and walked past him into the hall. A second later he heard the door of Jim’s room shut and the key turn.

[029-125] John went twice to the locked door, but did not knock. Finally he went to bed in Lucy’s room. He lay restless for a long time. Once he imagined he could hear Lucy sobbing, and at length he rose to investigate. He could distinguish nothing but Nannie’s gentle snoring, and returned to bed.

[029-126] After midnight he fell into a sound sleep.
