---
description: "				The Raid of the Baltimore"
id: ch08
label: "Chapter VIII"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[008-001]The [[raid-of-the-baltimore|Raid of the Baltimore]]

[008-002]The blazing lights of [[the-baltimore-cabaret|the Baltimore]] were put out and the entrance was padlocked. [[fifth-avenue|Fifth Avenue]] and [[lenox-avenue|Lenox]] talked about nothing else. Buddy meeting buddy and chippie greeting chippie, asked: “Did you hear the news?”﻿ ﻿… “Well, what do you know about that?”

[008-003]Yet nothing sensational had happened in the Baltimore. The police had not, on a certain night, swept into it and closed it up because of indecent doings. No. It was an indirect raid. Oh, and that made the gossip toothier! For the Baltimore was not just an ordinary [[cabaret-culture|cabaret]]. It had mortgages and policies in the best of the [[speakeasy]] places of [[harlem|the Belt]]. And the mass of Harlem held the Baltimore in high respect because (it was rumored and believed) it was protected by Tammany Hall.

[008-004][[jake-brown|Jake]], since he had given up hoping about his lost brown, had stopped haunting the Baltimore, yet he had happened to be very much in on the affair that cost the Baltimore its license. Jake’s living with [[rose-congo|Rose]] had, in spite of himself, projected him into a more elegant atmosphere of worldliness. Through Rose and her associates he had gained access to [[buffet-flat|buffet flats]] and private rendezvous apartments that were called “nifty.”

[008-005]And Jake was a high favorite wherever he went. There was something so naturally beautiful about his presence that everybody liked and desired him. Buddies, on the slightest provocation, were ready to fight for him, and the girls liked to make an argument around him.

[008-006]Jake had gained admission to Madame Adeline Suarez’s buffet flat, which was indeed a great feat. He was the first [[longshoreman]], colored or white, to tread that magnificent red carpet. [[madame-suarez|Madame Suarez]] catered to sporty colored persons of consequence only and certain groups of downtown whites that used to frequent Harlem in the good old pre-[[prohibition]] days.

[008-007]“Ain’t got no time for cheap-no-’count niggers,” Madame Suarez often said. “Gimme their room to their company any time, even if they’ve got money to spend,” Madame Suarez came from Florida and she claimed Cuban descent through her father. By her claim to that exotic blood she moved like a queen among the blue-veins of the colored [[the-sporting-world|sporting world]].

[008-008]But Jake’s rough charm could conquer anything.

[008-009]“[[ofay|Ofay]]’s mixing in!” he exclaimed to himself the first night he penetrated into Madame Suarez’s. “But ofay or ofay not, this here is the real stuff,” he reflected. And so many nights he absented himself from [[the-congo|the Congo]] (he had no interest in Rose’s art of flirting money out of hypnotized newcomers) to luxuriate with charmingly painted pansies among the colored cushions and under the soft, shaded lights of Madame Suarez’s speakeasy. It was a new world for Jake and he took it easily. That was his natural way, wherever he went, whatever new people he met. It had helped him over many a bad crossing at [[brest|Brest]] at Havre and in [[london|London]].﻿ ﻿… Take it easy﻿ ﻿… take life easy. Sometimes he was disgusted with life, but he was never frightened of it.

[008-010]Jake had never seen colored women so carefully elegant as these rich-browns and yellow-creams at Madame Suarez’s. They were fascinating in soft bright draperies and pretty pumps and they drank liquor with a fetching graceful abandon. Gin and [[gin-whisky|whisky]] seemed to lose their barbaric punch in that atmosphere and take on a romantic color. The women’s coiffure was arranged in different striking styles and their arms and necks and breasts tinted to emphasize the peculiar richness of each skin. One girl, who was the favorite of Madame Suarez, and the darkest in the group, looked like a breathing statue of burnished bronze. With their arresting poses and gestures, their deep shining painted eyes, they resembled the wonderfully beautiful pictures of women of ancient Egypt.

[008-011]Here Jake brushed against big men of the colored sporting world and their white friends. That strange un-American world where colored meets and mingles freely and naturally with white in amusement basements, buffet flats, poker establishments. Sometimes there were two or three white women, who attracted attention because they were white and strange to Harlem, but they appeared like faded carnations among those burning orchids of a tropical race.

[008-012]One night Jake noticed three young white men, clean-shaven, flashily-dressed, who paid for champagne for everybody in the flat. They were introduced by a perfectly groomed dark-brown man, a close friend of the boss of the Baltimore. Money seemed worthless to them except as a means of getting fun out of it. Madame Suarez made special efforts to please them. Showed them all of the buffet flat, even her own bedroom. One of them, very freckled and red-haired, sat down to the piano and jazzed out popular songs. The trio radiated friendliness all around them. Danced with the colored beauties and made lively conversation with the men. They were gay and recklessly spendthrift.﻿ ﻿…

[008-013]They returned on a Saturday night, between midnight and morning, when the atmosphere of Madame Suarez’s was fairly bacchic and [[jazz|jazz music]] was snake-wriggling in and out and around everything and forcing everybody into amatory states and attitudes. The three young white men had two others with them. At the piano a girl curiously made up in mauve was rendering the greatest [[ragtime]] song of the day. Broadway was wild about it and Harlem was crazy. All America jazzed to it, and it was already world-famous. Already being jazzed perhaps in Paris and Cairo, Shanghai, Honolulu, and Java. It was a song about cocktails and cherries. Like this in some ways:

[008-014]>

[008-015]Take a juicy cocktail cherry,

[008-016]Take a dainty little bite,

[008-017]And we’ll all be very merry

[008-018]On a cherry drunk tonight.

[008-019]We’ll all be merry when you have a cherry,

[008-020]And we’ll twine and twine like a fruitful vine,

[008-021]Grape vine, red wine, babe mine, bite a berry,

[008-022]You taste a cherry and twine, rose vine, sweet wine.

[008-023]Cherry‑ee‑ee‑ee‑ee, cherry‑ee‑ee‑ee‑ee‑ee, ee‑ee‑ee

[008-024]Cherry‑ee‑ee‑ee‑ee, cherry‑ee‑ee‑ee‑ee‑ee, ee‑ee‑ee

[008-025]Grape vine, rose vine, sweet wine.﻿ ﻿…

[008-026]Love is like a cocktail cherry,

[008-027]Just a fruity little bit,

[008-028]And you’ve never yet been merry,

[008-029]If you’ve not been drunk on it.

[008-030]We’ll all be merry when you have.﻿ ﻿…

[008-031]The women, carried away by the sheer rhythm of delight, had risen above their commercial instincts (a common trait of Negroes in emotional states) and abandoned themselves to pure voluptuous jazzing. They were gorgeous animals swaying there through the dance, punctuating it with marks of warm physical excitement. The atmosphere was charged with intensity and overcharged with currents of personal reaction.﻿ ﻿…

[008-032]Then the five young white men unmasked as the Vice Squad and killed the thing.

[008-033]Dicks! They had wooed and lured and solicited for their trade. For two weeks they had spilled money like water at the Baltimore. Sometimes they were accompanied by white girls who swilled enormous quantities of champagne and outshrieked the little ginned-up Negresses and mulattresses of the cabaret. They had posed as good fellows, regular guys, looking for a good time only in the Black Belt. They were wearied of the pleasures of the big white world, wanted something new﻿—the primitive joy of Harlem.

[008-034]So at last, with their spendthrift and charming ways, they had convinced the wary boss of the Baltimore that they were fine fellows. The boss was a fine fellow himself, who loved life and various forms of fun and had no morals about them. And so one night when the trio had left their hired white ladies behind, he was persuaded to give his youthful white guests an introduction to Madame Adeline Suarez’s buffet flat.﻿ ﻿…

[008-035]The uniformed police were summoned. Madame Suarez and her clients were ordered to get ready to go down to the Night Court. The women asked permission to veil themselves. Many windows were raked up in the block and heads craned forth to watch the prisoners bundled into waiting taxicabs. The women were afraid. Some of them were false grass-widows whose husbands were working somewhere. Some of them were church members. Perhaps one could claim a place in local society!

[008-036]They were all fined. But Madame Suarez, besides being fined, was sent to Blackwell’s Island for six months.

[008-037]To the two white girls that were also taken in the raid the judge remarked that it was a pity he had no power to order them whipped. For whipping was the only punishment he considered suitable for white women who dishonored their race by associating with colored persons.

[008-038]The high point of the case was the indictment of the boss of the Baltimore as accessory to the speakeasy crime. The boss was not convicted, but the Baltimore was ordered to be padlocked. That decision was appealed. But the cabaret remained padlocked. A black member of Tammany had no chances against the Moral Arm of the city.

[008-039]The Belt’s cabaret sets licked their lips over the sensation for weeks. For a long time Negro proprietors would not admit white customers into their cabarets and near-white members of the black race, whose features were unfamiliar in Harlem, had a difficult time proving their identity.

---
