---
description: "How Oliver Bit the Dust and Took Six Good Men with Him"
id: B4C22
label: "Book 4, Ch. 22: How Oliver Bit the Dust and Took Six Good Men with Him"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

### XXII

[109-001]
How Oliver Bit the Dust and Took Six Good Men with Him

[109-002]
So as we sat down to refresh our bodies and to rest, Oliver sent the peasant out to buy food and also powder and shot. He being gone, he takes off his coat and says he, “Brother, I can no longer carry this devils’ money about with me alone”: and with that unbound a pair of bags like sausages that he wore on his naked body, threw them on the table, and went on, “Of these thou must take care till I come to my holidays and we both have enough, for the accursed stuff hath worked sores upon my body, so that I can no longer carry it.” I answered, “Brother, hadst thou as little as I, ’twould not gall thee.” But he cut me short. “How,” says he, “what is mine is also thine; and what we do further win shall be fairly-shared.” So I took up the two sausages and found they were indeed mighty heavy, being gold pieces only. Then I told him ’twas all ill-packed, and an he would, I would so sew the money in that it should not vex him half so much in the carrying. And when he agreed to this he had me with him to a hollow tree wherein he had scissors, needles, and thread: and there I made for him and me a pair of knapsacks out of a pair of breeches, and many a fine red penny I sewed therein. So having put the same on under our shirts, ’twas as if we had golden armour behind and before, by means of which we were become, if not proof against bullets, yet against swords. Then did I wonder why he kept no silver coin: to which he answered he had more than a thousand thalers lying in a tree from which he allowed the peasant to buy victuals, and never asked for a reckoning, as not greatly valuing such trash.

[109-003]
This done and the money packed, away we went to our hut, and there cooked our food and warmed ourselves by the stove all night. And thither at one o’clock of the day, when we did least expect it, came six musketeers with a corporal to our hut with their pieces ready and their matches burning, who burst in the door and cried to us to surrender. But Oliver (that, like me, had ever his loaded piece lying by him and his sharp sword also, and then sat behind the table, and I by the stove behind the door) answered them with a couple of musket-balls, wherewith he brought two to the ground, while I with a like shot slew one and wounded the fourth. Then Oliver whipped out his terrible sword (that could cut hairs asunder and might well be compared to Caliburn, the sword of King Arthur of England) and therewith he clove the fifth man from the shoulder to the belly, so that his bowels gushed out and he himself fell down beside them in gruesome fashion. And meanwhile I knocked the sixth man on the head with the butt-end of my piece, so that he fell lifeless: but Oliver got even such a blow from the seventh, and that with such force that his brains flew out, and I in turn dealt him that did that such a crack that he must needs join his comrades on the dead muster-roll. So when the one that I had shot at and wounded was ware of such cuffs and saw that I made for him with the butt of my piece also, he threw away his gun and began to run as if the devil was at his heels. Yet all this fight lasted no longer than one could say a paternoster, in which brief space seven brave soldiers did bite the dust.

[109-004]
Now when I thus found myself master of the field, I examined Oliver to see if he had a breath left in him, but finding him quite dead, methought ’twas folly to leave so much money on a corpse that could not need it, and so I stripped him of his golden fleece that I had made but yesterday and hung it round my neck with the other. And having broken mine own gun, I took Oliver’s musket and sharp battle-sword to myself, wherewith I provided me against all chances, and so away I went and that by the road by which I knew our peasant must return: and sitting down by the wayside I waited for him and further considered what I should now do.
