---
description: "II."
id: ch01
label: "II."
tags: ["[chapter]"]
type: "chapter"
---

### THE LEGEND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND.

[001-001] The text containing the Legend of the Destruction of Mankind is written
[001-002] in hieroglyphs, and is found on the four walls of a small chamber which
[001-003] is entered from the "hall of columns" in the tomb of Seti I., which is
[001-004] situated on the west bank of the Nile at Thebes. On the wall facing
[001-005] the door of this chamber is painted in red the figure of the large "Cow
[001-006] of Heaven." The lower part of her belly is decorated with a series of
[001-007] thirteen stars, and immediately beneath it are the two Boats of Ra,
[001-008] called Semketet and Mantchet, or Sektet and Matet. Each of her four
[001-009] legs is held in position by two gods, and the god Shu, with
[001-010] outstretched uplifted arms, supports her body. The Cow was published
[001-011] by Champollion,[FN#5] without the text. This most important
[001-012] mythological text was first published and translated by Professor E.
[001-013] Naville in 1874.[FN#6] It was republished by Bergmann[FN#7] and
[001-014] Brugsch,[FN#8] who gave a transcription of the text, with a German
[001-015] translation. Other German versions by Lauth,[FN#9] Brugsch,[FN#10] and
[001-016] Wiedemann[FN#11] have appeared, and a part of the text was translated
[001-017] into French by Lefebure.[FN#12] The latest edition of the text was
[001-018] published by Lefebure,[FN#13] and text of a second copy, very much
[001-019] mutilated, was published by Professor Naville, with a French
[001-020] translation in 1885.[FN#14] The text printed in this volume is that of
[001-021] M. Lefebure.

[FN#5] Monuments, tom. iii., p. 245.

[FN#6] Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch., vol. iv., p. 1 ff.

[FN#7] Hieroglyphische Inschriften, Bl. 85 fl.

[FN#8] Die neue Weltordnung nach Vernichtung des sundigen  
[001-022] Menschengeschlechtes, Berlin, 1881.

[FN#9] Aus Aegyptens Vorzeit, p. 71.

[FN#10] Religion der alten Aegypter, p. 436.

[FN#11] Die Religion, p. 32.

[FN#12] A. Z., 1883, p. 32.

[FN#13] Tombeau de Seti I., Part IV., plates 15-18.

[FN#14] Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch., vol. viii., p. 412 ft.

[001-023] The legend takes us back to the time when the gods of Egypt went about
[001-024] in the country, and mingled with men and were thoroughly acquainted
[001-025] with their desires and needs. The king who reigned over Egypt was Ra,
[001-026] the Sun-god, who was not, however, the first of the Dynasty of Gods who
[001-027] ruled the land. His predecessor on the throne was Hephaistos, who,
[001-028] according to Manetho, reigned 9000 years, whilst Ra reigned only 992
[001-029] years; Panodorus makes his reign to have lasted less than 100 years.
[001-030] Be this as it may, it seems that the "self-created and self-begotten"
[001-031] god Ra had been ruling over mankind for a very long time, for his
[001-032] subjects were murmuring against him, and they were complaining that he
[001-033] was old, that his bones were like silver, his body like gold, and his
[001-034] hair like lapis-lazuli. When Ra heard these murmurings he ordered his
[001-035] bodyguard to summon all the gods who had been with him in the primeval
[001-036] World-ocean, and to bid them privately to assemble in the Great House,
[001-037] which can be no other than the famous temple of Heliopolis. This
[001-038] statement is interesting, for it proves that the legend is of
[001-039] Heliopolitan origin, like the cult of Ra itself, and that it does not
[001-040] belong, at least in so far as it applies to Ra, to the Predynastic
[001-041] Period.

[001-042] When Ra entered the Great Temple, the gods made obeisance to him, and
[001-043] took up their positions on each side of him, and informed him that they
[001-044] awaited his words. Addressing Nu, the personification of the World-
[001-045] ocean, Ra bade them to take notice of the fact that the men and women
[001-046] whom his Eye had created were murmuring against him. He then asked
[001-047] them to consider the matter and to devise a plan of action for him, for
[001-048] he was unwilling to slay the rebels without hearing what his gods had
[001-049] to say. In reply the gods advised Ra to send forth his Eye to destroy
[001-050] the blasphemers, for there was no eye on earth that could resist it,
[001-051] especially when it took the form of the goddess Hathor. Ra accepted
[001-052] their advice and sent forth his Eye in the form of Hathor to destroy
[001-053] them, and, though the rebels had fled to the mountains in fear, the Eye
[001-054] pursued them and overtook them and destroyed them. Hathor rejoiced in
[001-055] her work of destruction, and on her return was praised by Ra, for what
[001-056] she had done. The slaughter of men began at Suten-henen
[001-057] (Herakleopolis), and during the night Hathor waded about in the blood
[001-058] of men. Ra asserted his intention of being master of the rebels, and
[001-059] this is probably referred to in the Book of the Dead, Chapter XVII., in
[001-060] which it is said that Ra rose as king for the first time in Suten-
[001-061] henen. Osiris also was crowned at Suten-henen, and in this city lived
[001-062] the great Bennu bird, or Phoenix, and the "Crusher of Bones" mentioned
[001-063] in the Negative Confession.

[001-064] The legend now goes on to describe an act of Ra, the significance of
[001-065] which it is difficult to explain. The god ordered messengers to be
[001-066] brought to him, and when they arrived, he commanded them to run like
[001-067] the wind to Abu, or the city of Elephantine, and to bring him large
[001-068] quantities of the fruit called tataat. What kind of fruit this was is
[001-069] not clear, but Brugsch thought they were "mandrakes," the so-called
[001-070] "love-apples," and this translation of tataat may be used
[001-071] provisionally. The mandrakes were given to Sekti, a goddess of
[001-072] Heliopolis, to crush and grind up, and when this was done they were
[001-073] mixed with human blood, and put in a large brewing of beer which the
[001-074] women slaves had made from wheat. In all they made 7,000 vessels of
[001-075] beer. When Ra saw the beer he approved of it, and ordered it to be
[001-076] carried up the river to where the goddess Hathor was still, it seems,
[001-077] engaged in slaughtering men. During the night he caused this beer to
[001-078] be poured out into the meadows of the Four Heavens, and when Hathor
[001-079] came she saw the beer with human blood and mandrakes in it, and drank
[001-080] of it and became drunk, and paid no further attention to men and women.
[001-081] In welcoming the goddess, Ra, called her "Amit," i.e., "beautiful one,"
[001-082] and from this time onward "beautiful women were found in the city of
[001-083] Amit," which was situated in the Western Delta, near Lake
[001-084] Mareotis.[FN#15] Ra also ordered that in future at every one of his
[001-085] festivals vessels of "sleep-producing beer" should be made, and that
[001-086] their number should be the same as the number of the handmaidens of Ra.
[001-087] Those who took part in these festivals of Hathor and Ra drank beer in
[001-088] very large quantities, and under the influence of the "beautiful
[001-089] women," i.e., the priestesses, who were supposed to resemble Hathor in
[001-090] their physical attractions, the festal celebrations degenerated into
[001-091] drunken and licentious orgies.

[FN#15] It was also called the "City of Apis," (Brugsch, Dict. Geog.,
[001-092] p. 491), and is the Apis city of classical writers. It is, perhaps,
[001-093] represented by the modern Kom al-Hisn.

[001-094] Soon after this Ra complained that he was smitten with pain, and that
[001-095] he was weary of the, children of men. He thought them a worthless
[001-096] remnant, and wished that more of them had been slain. The gods about
[001-097] him begged him to endure, and reminded him that his power was in
[001-098] proportion to his will. Ra was, however, unconsoled, and he complained
[001-099] that his limbs were weak for the first time in his life. Thereupon the
[001-100] god Nu told Shu to help Ra, and he ordered Nut to take the great god Ra
[001-101] on her back. Nut changed herself into a cow, and with the help of Shu
[001-102] Ra got on her back. As soon as men saw that Ra was on the back of the
[001-103] Cow of Heaven, and was about to leave them, they became filled with
[001-104] fear and repentance, and cried out to Ra to remain with them and to
[001-105] slay all those who had blasphemed against him. But the Cow moved on
[001-106] her way, and carried Ra to Het-Ahet, a town of the nome of Mareotis,
[001-107] where in later days the right leg of Osiris was said to be preserved.
[001-108] Meanwhile darkness covered the land. When day broke the men who had
[001-109] repented of their blasphemies appeared with their bows, and slew the
[001-110] enemies of Ra. At this result Ra was pleased, and he forgave those who
[001-111] had repented because of their righteous slaughter of his enemies. From
[001-112] this time onwards human sacrifices were offered up at the festivals of
[001-113] Ra celebrated in this place, and at Heliopolis and in other parts of
[001-114] Egypt.

[001-115] After these things Ra declared to Nut that he intended to leave this
[001-116] world, and to ascend into heaven, and that all those who would see his
[001-117] face must follow him thither. Then he went up into heaven and prepared
[001-118] a place to which all might come. Then he said, "Hetep sekhet aa,"
[001-119] i.e., "Let a great field be produced," and straightway "Sekhet-hetep,"
[001-120] or the "Field of peace," came into being. He next said, "Let there be
[001-121] reeds (aaru) in it," and straightway "Sekhet Aaru," or the "Field of
[001-122] Reeds," came into being. Sekhet-hetep was the Elysian Fields of the
[001-123] Egyptians, and the Field of Reeds was a well-known section of it.
[001-124] Another command of the god Ra resulted in the creation of the stars,
[001-125] which the legend compares to flowers. Then the goddess Nut trembled in
[001-126] all her body, and Ra, fearing that she might fall, caused to come into
[001-127] being the Four Pillars on which the heavens are supported. Turning to
[001-128] Shu, Ra entreated him to protect these supports, and to place himself
[001-129] under Nut, and to hold her up in position with his hands. Thus Shu
[001-130] became the new Sun-god in the place of Ra, and the heavens in which Ra
[001-131] lived were supported and placed beyond the risk of falling, and mankind
[001-132] would live and rejoice in the light of the new sun.

[001-133] At this place in the legend a text is inserted called the "Chapter of
[001-134] the Cow." It describes how the Cow of Heaven and the two Boats of the
[001-135] Sun shall be painted, and gives the positions of the gods who stand by
[001-136] the legs of the Cow, and a number of short magical names, or formulae,
[001-137] which are inexplicable. The general meaning of the picture of the Cow
[001-138] is quite clear. The Cow represents the sky in which the Boats of Ra,
[001-139] sail, and her four legs are the four cardinal points which cannot be
[001-140] changed. The region above her back is the heaven in which Ra reigns
[001-141] over the beings who pass thereto from this earth when they die, and
[001-142] here was situated the home of the gods and the celestial spirits who
[001-143] govern this world.

[001-144] When Ra had made a heaven for himself, and had arranged for a
[001-145] continuance of life on the earth, and the welfare of human beings, he
[001-146] remembered that at one time when reigning on earth he had been bitten
[001-147] by a serpent, and had nearly lost his life through the bite. Fearing
[001-148] that the same calamity might befall his successor, he determined to
[001-149] take steps to destroy the power of all noxious reptiles that dwelt on
[001-150] the earth. With this object in view he told Thoth to summon Keb, the
[001-151] Earth-god, to his presence, and this god having arrived, Ra told him
[001-152] that war must be made against the serpents that dwelt in his dominions.
[001-153] He further commanded him to go to the god Nu, and to tell him to set a
[001-154] watch over all the reptiles that were in the earth and in water, and to
[001-155] draw up a writing for every place in which serpents are known to be,
[001-156] containing strict orders that they are to bite, no one. Though these
[001-157] serpents knew that Ra was retiring from the earth, they were never to
[001-158] forget that his rays would fall upon them. In his place their father
[001-159] Keb was to keep watch over them, and he was their father for ever.

[001-160] As a further protection against them Ra promised to impart to magicians
[001-161] and snake-charmers the particular word of power, hekau, with which he
[001-162] guarded himself against the attacks of serpents, and also to transmit
[001-163] it to his son Osiris. Thus those who are ready to listen to the
[001-164] formulae of the snake-charmers shall always be immune from the bites of
[001-165] serpents, and their children also. From this we may gather that the
[001-166] profession of the snake-charmer is very ancient, and that this class of
[001-167] magicians were supposed to owe the foundation of their craft to a
[001-168] decree of Ra himself.

[001-169] Ra next sent for the god Thoth, and when he came into the presence of
[001-170] Ra, he invited him to go with him to a distance, to a place called
[001-171] "Tuat," i.e., hell, or the Other World, in which region he had
[001-172] determined to make his light to shine. When they arrived there he told
[001-173] Thoth, the Scribe of Truth, to write down on his tablets the names of
[001-174] all who were therein, and to punish those among them who had sinned
[001-175] against him, and he deputed to Thoth the power to deal absolutely as he
[001-176] pleased with all the beings in the Tuat. Ra loathed the wicked, and
[001-177] wished them to be kept at a distance from him. Thoth was to be his
[001-178] vicar, to fill his place, and "Place of Ra," was to be his name. He
[001-179] gave him power to send out a messenger (hab), so the Ibis (habi) came
[001-180] into being. All that Thoth would do would be good (khen), therefore
[001-181] the Tekni bird of Thoth came into being. He gave Thoth power to
[001-182] embrace (anh) the heavens, therefore the Moon-god (Aah) came into
[001-183] being. He gave Thoth power to turn back (anan) the Northern peoples,
[001-184] therefore the dog-headed ape of Thoth came into being. Finally Ra told
[001-185] Thoth that he would take his place in the sight of all those who were
[001-186] wont to worship Ra, and that all should praise him as God. Thus the
[001-187] abdication of Ra was complete.

[001-188] In the fragmentary texts which follow we are told how a man may benefit
[001-189] by the recital of this legend. He must proclaim that the soul which
[001-190] animated Ra was the soul of the Aged One, and that of Shu, Khnemu (?),
[001-191] Heh, &c., and then he must proclaim that he is Ra himself, and his word
[001-192] of power Heka. If he recites the Chapter correctly he shall have life
[001-193] in the Other World, and he will be held in greater fear there than
[001-194] here. A rubric adds that he must be dressed in new linen garments, and
[001-195] be well washed with Nile water; he must wear white sandals, and his
[001-196] body must be anointed with holy oil. He must burn incense in a censer,
[001-197] and a figure of Maat (Truth) must be painted on his tongue with green
[001-198] paint. These regulations applied to the laity as well as to the
[001-199] clergy.
