---
description: "VII."
id: ch04
label: "VII."
tags: ["[chapter]"]
type: "chapter"
---

### A LEGEND OF KHNEMU AND OF A SEVEN YEARS' FAMINE.

[004-001] The text of this most interesting legend is found in hieroglyphics on
[004-002] one side of a large rounded block of granite some eight or nine feet
[004-003] high, which stands on the south-east portion of Sahal, a little island
[004-004] lying in the First Cataract, two or three miles to the south of
[004-005] Elephantine Island and the modern town of Aswan. The inscription is
[004-006] not cut into the rock in the ordinary way, but was "stunned" on it with
[004-007] a blunted chisel, and is, in some lights, quite invisible to anyone
[004-008] standing near the rock, unless he is aware of its existence. It is in
[004-009] full view of the river-path which leads from Mahallah to Philae, and
[004-010] yet it escaped the notice of scores of travellers who have searched the
[004-011] rocks and islands in the Cataract for graffiti and inscriptions. The
[004-012] inscription, which covers a space six feet by five feet, was discovered
[004-013] accidentally on February 6th, 1889, by the late Mr. C. E. Wilbour, a
[004-014] distinguished American gentleman who spent many years in research in
[004-015] Egypt. He first copied the text, discovering in the course of his work
[004-016] the remarkable nature of its contents and then his friend Mr. Maudslay
[004-017] photographed it. The following year he sent prints from Mr. Maudslay's
[004-018] negatives to Dr. Brugsch, who in the course of 1891 published a
[004-019] transcript of the text with a German translation and notes in a work
[004-020] entitled Die biblischen sieben Jahre der Hungersnoth, Leipzig, 8vo.

[004-021] The legend contained in this remarkable text describes a terrible
[004-022] famine which took place in the reign of Tcheser, a king of the IIIrd
[004-023] Dynasty, and lasted for seven years. Insufficient Nile-floods were, of
[004-024] course, the physical cause of the famine, but the legend shows that the
[004-025] "low Niles" were brought about by the neglect of the Egyptians in
[004-026] respect of the worship of the god of the First Cataract, the great god
[004-027] Khnemu. When, according to the legend, king Tcheser had been made to
[004-028] believe that the famine took place because men had ceased to worship
[004-029] Khnemu in a manner appropriate to his greatness, and when he had taken
[004-030] steps to remove the ground of complaint, the Nile rose to its
[004-031] accustomed height, the crops became abundant once more, and all misery
[004-032] caused by scarcity of provisions ceased. In other words, when Tcheser
[004-033] restored the offerings of Khnemu, and re-endowed his sanctuary and his
[004-034] priesthood, the god allowed Hapi to pour forth his streams from the
[004-035] caverns in the Cataract, and to flood the land with abundance. The
[004-036] general character of the legend, as we have it here, makes it quite
[004-037] certain that it belongs to a late period, and the forms of the
[004-038] hieroglyphics and the spellings of the words indicate that the text was
[004-039] "stunned" on the rock in the reign of one of the Ptolemies, probably at
[004-040] a time when it was to the interest of some men to restore the worship
[004-041] of Khnemu, god of the First Cataract. These interested people could
[004-042] only have been the priests of Khnemu, and the probability that this was
[004-043] so becomes almost a certainty when we read in the latter part of the
[004-044] text the list of the tolls and taxes which they were empowered to levy
[004-045] on the merchants, farmers, miners, etc., whose goods passed down the
[004-046] Cataract into Egypt. Why, if this be the case, they should have chosen
[004-047] to connect the famine with the reign of Tcheser is not clear. They may
[004-048] have wished to prove the great antiquity of the worship of Khnemu, but
[004-049] it would have been quite easy to select the name of some king of the
[004-050] Ist Dynasty, and had they done this, they would have made the authority
[004-051] of Khnemu over the Nile coaeval with Dynastic civilization. It is
[004-052] impossible to assume that no great famine took place in Egypt between
[004-053] the reign of Tcheser and the period when the inscription was made, and
[004-054] when we consider this fact the choice by the editor of the legend of a
[004-055] famine which took place under the IIIrd Dynasty to illustrate the power
[004-056] of Khnemu seems inexplicable.

[004-057] Of the famines which must have taken place in the Dynastic period the
[004-058] inscriptions tell us nothing, but the story of the seven years' famine
[004-059] mentioned in the Book of Genesis shows that there is nothing improbable
[004-060] in a famine lasting so long in Egypt. Arab historians also mention
[004-061] several famines which lasted for seven years. That which took place in
[004-062] the years 1066-1072 nearly ruined the whole country. A cake of bread
[004-063] was sold for 15 dinanir, (the dinar = 10s.), a horse was sold for 20, a
[004-064] dog for 5, a cat for 3, and an egg for 1 dinar. When all the animals
[004-065] were eaten men began to eat each other, and human flesh was sold in
[004-066] public. "Passengers were caught in the streets by hooks let down from
[004-067] the windows, drawn up, killed, and cooked."[FN#45] During the famine
[004-068] which began in 1201 people ate human flesh habitually. Parents killed
[004-069] and cooked their own children, and a wife was found eating her husband
[004-070] raw. Baby fricassee and haggis of children's heads were ordinary
[004-071] articles of diet. The graves even were ransacked for food. An ox sold
[004-072] for 70 dinanir. [FN#46]

[FN#45] Lane Poole, Middle Ages, p. 146.

[FN#46] Ibid., p. 216.

[004-073] The legend begins with the statement that in the 18th year of the reign
[004-074] of King Tcheser, when Matar, the Erpa Prince and Ha, was the Governor
[004-075] of the temple properties of the South and North, and was also the
[004-076] Director of the Khenti men at Elephantine (Aswan), a royal despatch was
[004-077] delivered to him, in which the king said: "I am in misery on my throne.
[004-078] My heart is very sore because of the calamity which hath happened, for
[004-079] the Nile hath not come forth[FN#47] for seven years. There is no
[004-080] grain, there are no vegetables, there is no food, and every man is
[004-081] robbing his neighbour. Men wish to walk, but they are unable to move;
[004-082] the young man drags along his limbs, the hearts of the aged are crushed
[004-083] with despair, their legs fail them, they sink to the ground, and they
[004-084] clutch their bodies with their hands in pain. The councillors are
[004-085] dumb, and nothing but wind comes out of the granaries when they are
[004-086] opened. Everything is in a state of ruin." A more graphic picture of
[004-087] the misery caused by the famine could hardly be imagined. The king
[004-088] then goes on to ask Matar where the Nile is born? what god or goddess
[004-089] presides over it? and what is his [or her] form? He says he would like
[004-090] to go to the temple of Thoth to enquire of that god, to go to the
[004-091] College of the Magicians, and search through the sacred books in order
[004-092] to find out these things.

[FN#47] i.e., there have been insufficient Nile-floods.

[004-093] When Matar had read the despatch, he set out to go to the king, and
[004-094] explained to him the things which he wished to know. He told him that,
[004-095] the Nile rose near the city of Elephantine, that it flowed out of two
[004-096] caverns, which were the breasts of the Nile-god, that it rose to a
[004-097] height of twenty-eight cubits at Elephantine, and to the height of
[004-098] seven cubits at Sma-Behutet, or, Diospolis Parva in the Delta. He who
[004-099] controlled the Nile was Khnemu, and when this god drew the bolt of the
[004-100] doors which shut in the stream, and smote the earth with his sandals,
[004-101] the river rushed forth. Matar also described to the king the form of
[004-102] Khnemu, which was that of Shu, and the work which he did, and the
[004-103] wooden house in which he lived, and its exact position, which was near
[004-104] the famous granite quarries. The gods who dwelt with Khnemu were the
[004-105] goddess Sept (Sothis, or the Dog-star), the goddess Anqet, Hap (or
[004-106] Hep), the Nile-god, Shu, Keb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Nephthys, and Horus.
[004-107] Thus we see that the priests of Khnemu made him to be the head of a
[004-108] Company of Gods. Finally Matar gave the king a list of all the stones,
[004-109] precious and otherwise, which were found in and about Elephantine.

[004-110] When the king, who had, it seems, come to Elephantine, heard these
[004-111] things he rejoiced greatly, and he went into the temple of Khnemu.
[004-112] The priests drew back the curtains and sprinkled him with holy water,
[004-113] and then he passed into the shrine and offered up a great sacrifice of
[004-114] bread-cakes, beer, geese, oxen, and all kinds of good things, to the
[004-115] gods and goddesses who dwelt at Elephantine, in the place called "Couch
[004-116] of the heart in life and power." Suddenly he found himself standing
[004-117] face to face with the god Khnemu, whom he placated with a peace-
[004-118] offering and with prayer. Then the god opened his eyes, and bent his
[004-119] body towards the king, and spake to him mighty words, saying, "I am
[004-120] Khnemu, who made thee. My hands knitted together thy body and made it
[004-121] sound, and I gave thee thy heart." Khnemu then went on to complain
[004-122] that, although the ground under the king's feet was filled with stones
[004-123] and metal, men were too inert to work them and to employ them in
[004-124] repairing or rebuilding of the shrines of the gods, or in doing what
[004-125] they ought to do for him, their Lord and Creator. These words were, of
[004-126] course, meant as a rebuke for the king, who evidently, though it is not
[004-127] so stated in the text, was intended by Khnemu to undertake the
[004-128] rebuilding of his shrine without delay. The god then went on to
[004-129] proclaim his majesty and power, and declared himself to be Nu, the
[004-130] Celestial Ocean, and the Nile-god, "who came into being at the
[004-131] beginning, and riseth at his will to give health to him that laboureth
[004-132] for Khnemu." He described himself as the Father of the gods, the
[004-133] Governor of the earth and of men, and then he promised the king to make
[004-134] the Nile rise yearly, regularly, and unceasingly, to give abundant
[004-135] harvests, to give all people their heart's desire, to make misery to
[004-136] pass away, to fill the granaries, and to make the whole land of Egypt
[004-137] yellow with waving fields of full ripe grain. When the king, who had
[004-138] been in a dream, heard the god mention crops, he woke up, and his
[004-139] courage returned to him, and having cast away despair from his heart he
[004-140] issued a decree by which he made ample provision for the maintenance of
[004-141] the worship of the god in a fitting state. In this decree, the first
[004-142] copy of which was cut upon wood, the king endowed Khnemu with 20
[004-143] schoinoi of land on each side of the river, with gardens, etc. It was
[004-144] further enacted that every man who drew water from the Nile for his
[004-145] land should contribute a portion of his crops to the god. Fishermen,
[004-146] fowlers, and hunters were to pay an octroi duty of one-tenth of the
[004-147] value of their catches when they brought them into the city, and a
[004-148] tithe of the cattle was to be set apart for the daily sacrifice. The
[004-149] masters of caravans coming from the Sudan were to pay a tithe also, but
[004-150] they were not liable to any further tax in the country northwards.
[004-151] Every metal-worker, ore-crusher, miner, mason, and handicraftsman of
[004-152] every kind, was to pay to the temple of the god one-tenth of the value
[004-153] of the material produced or worked by his labour. The decree provided
[004-154] also for the appointment of an inspector whose duty it would be to
[004-155] weigh the gold, silver and copper which came into the town of
[004-156] Elephantine, and to assess the value both of these metals and of the
[004-157] precious stones, etc., which were to be devoted to the service of
[004-158] Khnemu. All materials employed in making the images of the gods, and
[004-159] all handicraftsmen employed in the work were exempted from tithing. In
[004-160] short, the worship of the god and his company was to be maintained
[004-161] according to ancient use and wont, and the people were to supply the
[004-162] temple with everything necessary in a generous spirit and with a
[004-163] liberal hand. He who failed in any way to comply with the enactments
[004-164] was to be beaten with the rope, and the name of Tcheser was to be
[004-165] perpetuated in the temple.
