---
description: "VIII."
id: ch05
label: "VIII."
tags: ["[chapter]"]
type: "chapter"
---

### THE LEGEND OF THE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF HORUS, AND OTHER MAGICAL TEXTS.

[005-001] The magical and religious texts of the Egyptians of all periods contain
[005-002] spells intended to be used against serpents, scorpions, and noxious
[005-003] reptiles of all kinds, and their number, and the importance which was
[005-004] attached to them, suggest that Egypt must always have produced these
[005-005] pests in abundance, and that the Egyptians were always horribly afraid
[005-006] of them. The text of Unas, which was written towards the close of the
[005-007] Vth Dynasty, contains many such spells, and in the Theban and Saite
[005-008] Books of the Dead several Chapters consist of nothing but spells and
[005-009] incantations, many of which are based on archaic texts, against
[005-010] crocodiles, serpents, and other deadly reptiles, and insects of all
[005-011] kinds. All such creatures were regarded as incarnations of evil
[005-012] spirits, which attack the dead as well as the living, and therefore it
[005-013] was necessary for the well-being of the former that copies of spells
[005-014] against them should be written upon the walls of tombs, coffins,
[005-015] funerary amulets, etc. The gods were just as open to the attacks of
[005-016] venomous reptiles as man, and Ra, himself, the king of the gods, nearly
[005-017] died from the poison of a snake-bite. Now the gods were, as a rule,
[005-018] able to defend themselves against the attacks of Set and his fiends,
[005-019] and the poisonous snakes and insects which were their emissaries, by
[005-020] virtue of the fluid of life, which was the peculiar attribute of
[005-021] divinity, and the efforts of Egyptians were directed to the acquisition
[005-022] of a portion of this magical power, which would protect their souls and
[005-023] bodies and their houses and cattle, and other property, each day and
[005-024] each night throughout the year. When a man cared for the protection of
[005-025] himself only he wore an amulet of some kind, in which the fluid of life
[005-026] was localized. When he wished to protect his house against invasion by
[005-027] venomous reptiles he placed statues containing the fluid of life in
[005-028] niches in the walls of various chambers, or in some place outside but
[005-029] near the house, or buried them in the earth with their faces turned in
[005-030] the direction from which he expected the attack to come.

[005-031] PLATE XVII.
[005-032] The Metternich Stele—Obverse.

[005-033] PLATE XVIII.
[005-034] The Metternich Stele—Reverse.

[005-035] Towards the close of the XXVIth Dynasty, when superstition in its most
[005-036] exaggerated form was general in Egypt, it became the custom to make
[005-037] house talismans in the form of small stone stelae, with rounded tops,
[005-038] which rested on bases having convex fronts. On the front of such a
[005-039] talisman was sculptured in relief a figure of Horus the Child
[005-040] (Harpokrates), standing on two crocodiles, holding in his hands figures
[005-041] of serpents, scorpions, a lion, and a horned animal, each of these
[005-042] being a symbol of an emissary or ally of Set, the god of Evil. Above
[005-043] his head was the head of Bes, and on each side of him were: solar
[005-044] symbols, i.e., the lily of Nefer-Tem, figures of Ra and Harmakhis, the
[005-045] Eyes of Ra (the Sun and Moon), etc. The reverse of the stele and the
[005-046] whole of the base were covered with magical texts and spells, and when
[005-047] a talisman of this kind was placed in a house, it was supposed to be
[005-048] directly under the protection of Horus and his companion gods, who had
[005-049] vanquished all the hosts of darkness and all the powers of physical and
[005-050] moral evil. Many examples of this talisman are to be seen in the great
[005-051] Museums of Europe, and there are several fine specimens in the Third
[005-052] Egyptian Room in the British Museum. They are usually called "Cippi of
[005-053] Horus." The largest and most important of all these "cippi" is that
[005-054] which is commonly known as the "Metternich Stele," because it was given
[005-055] to Prince Metternich by Muhammad `Ali Pasha; it was dug up in 1828
[005-056] during the building of a cistern in a Franciscan Monastery in
[005-057] Alexandria, and was first published, with a translation of a large part
[005-058] of the text, by Professor Golenischeff.[FN#48] The importance of the
[005-059] stele is enhanced by the fact that it mentions the name of the king in
[005-060] whose reign it was made, viz., Nectanebus I., who reigned from B.C. 378
[005-061] to B.C. 360.

[FN#48] See Metternichstele, Leipzig, 1877. The Stele was made for
[005-062] Ankh-Psemthek, son of the lady Tent-Het-nub, prophet of Nebun, overseer
[005-063] of Temt and scribe of Het (see line 87).

[005-064] The obverse, reverse, and two sides of the Metternich Stele have cut
[005-065] upon them nearly three hundred figures of gods and celestial beings.
[005-066] These include figures of the great gods of heaven, earth, and the Other
[005-067] World, figures of the gods of the planets and the Dekans, figures of
[005-068] the gods of the days of the week, of the weeks, and months, and seasons
[005-069] of the year, and of the year. Besides these there are a number of
[005-070] figures of local forms of the gods which it is difficult to identify.
[005-071] On the rounded portion of the obverse the place of honour is held by
[005-072] the solar disk, in which is seen a figure of Khnemu with four ram's
[005-073] heads, which rests between a pair of arms, and is supported on a lake
[005-074] of celestial water; on each side of it are four of the spirits of the
[005-075] dawn, and on the right stands the symbol of the rising sun, Nefer-Temu,
[005-076] and on the left stands Thoth. Below this are five rows of small
[005-077] figures of gods. Below these is Harpokrates in relief, in the attitude
[005-078] already described. He stands on two crocodiles under a kind of canopy,
[005-079] the sides of which are supported by Thoth and Isis, and holds Typhonic
[005-080] animals and reptiles. Above the canopy are the two Eyes of Ra, each
[005-081] having a pair of human arms and hands. On the right of Harpokrates are
[005-082] Seker and Horus, and on his left the symbol of Nefer-Temu. On the left
[005-083] and right are the goddesses Nekhebet and Uatchet, who guard the South
[005-084] of Egypt and the North respectively. On the reverse and sides are
[005-085] numerous small figures of gods. This stele represented the power to
[005-086] protect man possessed by all the divine beings in the universe, and,
[005-087] however it was placed, it formed an impassable barrier to every spirit
[005-088] of evil and to every venomous reptile. The spells, which are cut in
[005-089] hieroglyphics on all the parts of the stele not occupied by figures of
[005-090] gods, were of the most potent character, for they contained the actual
[005-091] words by which the gods vanquished the powers of darkness and evil.
[005-092] These spells form the texts which are printed on p. 142 ff., and may be
[005-093] thus summarized:—

[005-094] The first spell is an incantation directed against reptiles and noxious
[005-095] creatures in general. The chief of these was Apep, the great enemy of
[005-096] Ra, who took the form of a huge serpent that "resembled the
[005-097] intestines," and the spell doomed him to decapitation, and burning and
[005-098] backing in pieces. These things would be effected by Serqet, the
[005-099] Scorpion-goddess. The second part of the spell was directed against
[005-100] the poison of Apep, and was to be recited over anyone who was bitten by
[005-101] a snake. When uttered by Horus it made Apep to vomit, and when used by
[005-102] a magician properly qualified would make the bitten person to vomit,
[005-103] and so free his body from the poison.

[005-104] The next spell is directed to be said to the Cat, i.e., a symbol of the
[005-105] daughter of Ra, or Isis, who had the head of Ra, the eyes of the
[005-106] uraeus, the nose of Thoth, the ears of Neb-er-tcher, the mouth of Tem,
[005-107] the neck of Neheb-ka, the breast of Thoth, the heart of Ra, the hands
[005-108] of the gods, the belly of Osiris, the thighs of Menthu, the legs of
[005-109] Khensu, the feet of Amen-Horus, the haunches of Horus, the soles of the
[005-110] feet of Ra, and the bowels of Meh-urit. Every member of the Cat
[005-111] contained a god or goddess, and she was able to destroy the poison of
[005-112] any serpent, or scorpion, or reptile, which might be injected into her
[005-113] body. The spell opens with an address to Ra, who is entreated to come
[005-114] to his daughter, who has been stung by a scorpion on a lonely road, and
[005-115] to cause the poison to leave her body. Thus it seems as if Isis, the
[005-116] great magician, was at some time stung by a scorpion.

[005-117] The next section is very difficult to understand. Ra-Harmakhis is
[005-118] called upon to come to his daughter, and Shu to his wife, and Isis to
[005-119] her sister, who has been poisoned. Then the Aged One, i.e., Ra, is
[005-120] asked to let Thoth turn back Neha-her, or Set. "Osiris is in the
[005-121] water, but Horus is with him, and the Great Beetle overshadows him,"
[005-122] and every evil spirit which dwells in the water is adjured to allow
[005-123] Horus to proceed to Osiris. Ra, Sekhet, Thoth, and Heka, this last-
[005-124] named being the spell personified, are the four great gods who protect
[005-125] Osiris, and who will blind and choke his enemies, and cut out their
[005-126] tongues. The cry of the Cat is again referred to, and Ra is asked if
[005-127] he does not remember the cry which came from the bank of Netit. The
[005-128] allusion here is to the cries which Isis uttered when she arrived at
[005-129] Netit near Abydos, and found lying there the dead body of her husband.

[005-130] At this point on the Stele the spells are interrupted by a long
[005-131] narrative put into the mouth of Isis, which supplies us with some
[005-132] account of the troubles that she suffered, and describes the death of
[005-133] Horus through the sting of a scorpion. Isis, it seems, was shut up in
[005-134] some dwelling by Set after he murdered Osiris, probably with the
[005-135] intention of forcing her to marry him, and so assist him to legalize
[005-136] his seizure of the kingdom. Isis, as we have already seen, had been
[005-137] made pregnant by her husband after his death, and Thoth now appeared to
[005-138] her, and advised her to hide herself with her unborn child, and to
[005-139] bring him forth in secret, and he promised her that her son should
[005-140] succeed in due course to his father's throne. With the help of Thoth
[005-141] she escaped from her captivity, and went forth accompanied by the Seven
[005-142] Scorpion-goddesses, who brought her to the town of Per-Sui, on the edge
[005-143] of the Reed Swamps. She applied to a woman for a night's shelter, but
[005-144] the woman shut her door in her face. To punish her one of the
[005-145] Scorpion-goddesses forced her way into the woman's house, and stung her
[005-146] child to death. The grief of the woman was so bitter and sympathy-
[005-147] compelling that Isis laid her hands on the child, and, having uttered
[005-148] one of her most potent spells over him, the poison of the scorpion ran
[005-149] out of his body, and the child came to life again. The words of the
[005-150] spell are cut on the Stele, and they were treasured by the Egyptians as
[005-151] an infallible remedy for scorpion stings. When the woman saw that her
[005-152] son had been brought back to life by Isis, she was filled with joy and
[005-153] gratitude, and, as a mark of her repentance, she brought large
[005-154] quantities of things from her house as gifts for Isis, and they were so
[005-155] many that they filled the house of the kind, but poor, woman who had
[005-156] given Isis shelter.

[005-157] Now soon after Isis had restored to life the son of the woman who had
[005-158] shown churlishness to her, a terrible calamity fell upon her, for her
[005-159] beloved son Horus was stung by a scorpion and died. The news of this
[005-160] event was conveyed to her by the gods, who cried out to her to come to
[005-161] see her son Horus, whom the terrible scorpion Uhat had killed. Isis,
[005-162] stabbed with pain at the news, as if a knife had been driven into her
[005-163] body, ran out distraught with grief. It seems that she had gone to
[005-164] perform a religious ceremony in honour of Osiris in a temple near
[005-165] Hetep-hemt, leaving her child carefully concealed in Sekhet-An. During
[005-166] her absence the scorpion Uhat, which had been sent by Set, forced its
[005-167] way into the biding-place of Horus, and there stung him to death. When
[005-168] Isis came and found the dead body, she burst forth in lamentations, the
[005-169] sound of which brought all the people from the neighbouring districts
[005-170] to her side. As she related to them the history of her sufferings they
[005-171] endeavoured to console her, and when they found this to be impossible
[005-172] they lifted up their voices and wept with her. Then Isis placed her
[005-173] nose in the mouth of Horus so that she might discover if he still
[005-174] breathed, but there was no breath in his throat; and when she examined
[005-175] the wound in his body made by the fiend Aun-Ab she saw in it traces of
[005-176] poison. No doubt about his death then remained in her mind, and
[005-177] clasping him in her arms she lifted him up, and in her transports of
[005-178] grief leaped about like fish when they are laid on red-hot coals. Then
[005-179] she uttered a series of heartbreaking laments, each of which begins
[005-180] with the words "Horus is bitten." The heir of heaven, the son of Un-
[005-181] Nefer, the child of the gods, he who was wholly fair, is bitten! He
[005-182] for whose wants I provided, he who was to avenge his father, is bitten!
[005-183] He for whom I cared and suffered when he was being fashioned in my
[005-184] womb, is bitten! He whom I tended so that I might gaze upon him, is
[005-185] bitten! He whose life I prayed for is bitten! Calamity hath overtaken
[005-186] the child, and he hath perished.

[005-187] Whilst Isis was saying these and many similar words, her sister
[005-188] Nephthys, who had been weeping bitterly for her nephew Horus as she
[005-189] wandered about among the swamps, came, in company with the Scorpion-
[005-190] goddess Serqet, and advised Isis to pray to heaven for help. Pray that
[005-191] the sailors in the Boat of Ra may cease from rowing, for the Boat
[005-192] cannot travel onwards whilst Horus lies dead. Then Isis cried out to
[005-193] heaven, and her voice reached the Boat of Millions of Years, and the
[005-194] Disk ceased to move onward, and came to a standstill. From the Boat
[005-195] Thoth descended, being equipped with words of power and spells of all
[005-196] kinds, and bearing with him the "great command of maa-kheru," i.e., the
[005-197] WORD, whose commands were performed, instantly and completely, by every
[005-198] god, spirit, fiend, human being and by every thing, animate and
[005-199] inanimate, in heaven, earth, and the Other World. Then he came to Isis
[005-200] and told her that no harm could possibly have happened to Horus, for he
[005-201] was under the protection of the Boat of Ra; but his words failed to
[005-202] comfort Isis, and though she acknowledged the greatness of his designs,
[005-203] she complained that they savoured of delay. "What is the good," she
[005-204] asks, "of all thy spells, and incantations, and magical formulae, and
[005-205] the great command of maa-kheru, if Horus is to perish by the poison of
[005-206] a scorpion, and to lie here in the arms of Death? Evil, evil is his
[005-207] destiny, for it hath entailed the deepest misery for him and death."

[005-208] In answer to these words Thoth, turning to Isis and Nephthys, bade them
[005-209] to fear not, and to have no anxiety about Horus, "For," said he, "I
[005-210] have come from heaven to heal the child for his mother." He then
[005-211] pointed out that Horus was under protection as the Dweller in his Disk
[005-212] (Aten), the Great Dwarf, the Mighty Ram, the Great Hawk, the Holy
[005-213] Beetle, the Hidden Body, the Divine Bennu, etc., and proceeded to utter
[005-214] the great spell which restored Horus to life. By his words of power
[005-215] Thoth transferred the fluid of life of Ra, and as soon as this came
[005-216] upon the child's body the poison of the scorpion flowed out of him, and
[005-217] he once more breathed and lived. When this was done Thoth returned to
[005-218] the Boat of Ra, the gods who formed its crew resumed their rowing, and
[005-219] the Disk passed on its way to make its daily journey across the sky.
[005-220] The gods in heaven, who were amazed and uttered cries of terror when
[005-221] they heard of the death of Horus, were made happy once more, and sang
[005-222] songs of joy over his recovery. The happiness of Isis in her child's
[005-223] restoration to life was very great, for she could again hope that he
[005-224] would avenge his father's murder, and occupy his throne. The final
[005-225] words of Thoth comforted her greatly, for he told her that he would
[005-226] take charge of the case of Horus in the Judgment Hall of Anu, wherein
[005-227] Osiris had been judged, and that as his advocate he would make any
[005-228] accusations which might be brought against Horus to recoil on him that
[005-229] brought them. Furthermore, he would give Horus power to repulse any
[005-230] attacks which might be made upon him by beings in the heights above, or
[005-231] fiends in the depths below, and would ensure his succession to the
[005-232] Throne of the Two Lands, i.e., Egypt. Thoth also promised Isis that Ra
[005-233] himself should act as the advocate of Horus, even as he had done for
[005-234] his father Osiris. He was also careful to allude to the share which
[005-235] Isis had taken in the restoration of Horus to life, saying, "It is the
[005-236] words of power of his mother which have lifted up his face, and they
[005-237] shall enable him to journey wheresoever he pleaseth, and to put fear
[005-238] into the powers above. I myself hasten [to obey them]." Thus
[005-239] everything turned on the power of the spells of Isis, who made the sun
[005-240] to stand still, and caused the dead to be raised.

[005-241] Such are the contents of the texts on the famous Metternich Stele.
[005-242] There appears to be some confusion in their arrangement, and some of
[005-243] them clearly are misplaced, and, in places, the text is manifestly
[005-244] corrupt. It is impossible to explain several passages, for we do not
[005-245] understand all the details of the system of magic which they represent.
[005-246] Still, the general meaning of the texts on the Stele is quite clear,
[005-247] and they record a legend of Isis and Horus which is not found so fully
[005-248] described on any other monument.
