---
description: "IX."
id: ch06
label: "IX."
tags: ["[chapter]"]
type: "chapter"
---

### THE HISTORY OF ISIS AND OSIRIS.

[006-001] The history of Isis and Osiris given on pp. 248 is taken from the
[006-002] famous treatise of Plutarch entitled De Iside et Osiride, and forms a
[006-003] fitting conclusion to this volume of Legends of the Gods. It contains
[006-004] all the essential facts given in Plutarch's work, and the only things
[006-005] omitted are his derivations and mythological speculations, which are
[006-006] really unimportant for the Egyptologist. Egyptian literature is full
[006-007] of allusions to events which took place in the life of Osiris, and to
[006-008] his persecution, murder, and resurrection, and numerous texts of all
[006-009] periods describe the love and devotion of his sister and wife Isis, and
[006-010] the filial piety of Horus. Nowhere, however, have we in Egyptian a
[006-011] connected account of the causes which led to the murder by Set of
[006-012] Osiris, or of the subsequent events which resulted in his becoming the
[006-013] king of heaven and judge of the dead. However carefully we piece
[006-014] together the fragments of information which we can extract from native
[006-015] Egyptian literature, there still remains a series of gaps which can
[006-016] only be filled by guesswork. Plutarch, as a learned man and a student
[006-017] of comparative religion and mythology was most anxious to understand
[006-018] the history of Isis and Osiris, which Greek and Roman scholars talked
[006-019] about freely, and which none of them comprehended, and he made
[006-020] enquiries of priests and others, and examined critically such
[006-021] information as he could obtain, believing and hoping that he would
[006-022] penetrate the mystery in which these gods were wrapped. As a result of
[006-023] his labours he collected a number of facts about the form of the Legend
[006-024] of Isis and Osiris as it was known to the learned men of his day, but
[006-025] there is no evidence that he had the slightest knowledge of the details
[006-026] of the original African Legend of these gods as it was known to the
[006-027] Egyptians, say, under the VIth Dynasty. Moreover, he never realized
[006-028] that the characteristics and attributes of both Isis and Osiris changed
[006-029] several times during the long history of Egypt, and that a thousand
[006-030] years before he lived the Egyptians themselves had forgotten what the
[006-031] original form of the legend was. They preserved a number of
[006-032] ceremonies, and performed very carefully all the details of an ancient
[006-033] ritual at the annual commemoration festival of Osiris which was held in
[006-034] November and December, but the evidence of the texts makes it quite
[006-035] clear that the meaning and symbolism of nearly all the details were
[006-036] unknown alike to priests and people.

[006-037] An important modification of the cult of Isis and Osiris took place in
[006-038] the third century before Christ, when the Ptolemies began to
[006-039] consolidate their rule in Egypt. A form of religion which would be
[006-040] acceptable both to Egyptians and Greeks had to be provided, and this
[006-041] was produced by modifying the characteristics of Osiris and calling him
[006-042] Sarapis, and identifying him with the Greek Pluto. To Isis were added
[006-043] many of the attributes of the great Greek goddesses, and into her
[006-044] worship were introduced "mysteries" derived from non-Egyptian cults,
[006-045] which made it acceptable to the people everywhere. Had a high priest
[006-046] of Osiris who lived at Abydos under the XVIIIth Dynasty witnessed the
[006-047] celebration of the great festival of Isis and Osiris in any large town
[006-048] in the first century before Christ, it is tolerably certain that he
[006-049] would have regarded it as a lengthy act of worship of strange gods, in
[006-050] which there appeared, here and there, ceremonies and phrases which
[006-051] reminded him of the ancient Abydos ritual. When the form of the cult
[006-052] of Isis and Osiris introduced by the Ptolemies into Egypt extended to
[006-053] the great cities of Greece and Italy, still further modifications took
[006-054] place in it, and the characters of Isis and Osiris were still further
[006-055] changed. By degrees Osiris came to be regarded as the god of death
[006-056] pure and simple, or as the personification of Death, and he ceased to
[006-057] be regarded as the great protecting ancestral spirit, and the all-
[006-058] powerful protecting Father of his people. As the importance of Osiris
[006-059] declined that of Isis grew, and men came to regard her as the great
[006-060] Mother-goddess of the world. The priests described from tradition the
[006-061] great facts of her life according to the Egyptian legends, how she had
[006-062] been a loving and devoted wife, how she had gone forth after her
[006-063] husband's murder by Set to seek for his body, how she had found it and
[006-064] brought it home, how she revivified it by her spells and had union with
[006-065] Osiris and conceived by him, and how in due course she brought forth
[006-066] her son, in pain and sorrow and loneliness in the Swamps of the Delta,
[006-067] and how she reared him and watched over him until he was old enough to
[006-068] fight and vanquish his father's murderer, and how at length she seated
[006-069] him in triumph on his father's throne. These things endeared Isis to
[006-070] the people everywhere, and as she herself had not suffered death like
[006-071] Osiris, she came to be regarded as the eternal mother of life and of
[006-072] all living things. She was the creatress of crops, she produced fruit,
[006-073] vegetables, plants of all kinds and trees, she made cattle prolific,
[006-074] she brought men and women together and gave them offspring, she was the
[006-075] authoress of all love, virtue, goodness and happiness. She made the
[006-076] light to shine, she was the spirit of the Dog-star which heralded the
[006-077] Nile-flood, she was the source of the power in the beneficent light of
[006-078] the moon; and finally she took the dead to her bosom and gave them
[006-079] peace, and introduced them to a life of immortality and happiness
[006-080] similar to that which she had bestowed upon Osiris.

[006-081] The message of the cult of Isis as preached by her priests was one of
[006-082] hope and happiness, and coming to the Greeks and Romans, as it did, at
[006-083] a time when men were weary of their national cults, and when the
[006-084] speculations of the philosophers carried no weight with the general
[006-085] public, the people everywhere welcomed it with the greatest enthusiasm.
[006-086] From Egypt it was carried to the Islands of Greece and to the mainland,
[006-087] to Italy, Germany, France, Spain and Portugal, and then crossing the
[006-088] western end of the Mediterranean it entered North Africa, and with
[006-089] Carthage as a centre spread east and west along the coast. Wherever
[006-090] the cult of Isis came men accepted it as something which supplied what
[006-091] they thought to be lacking in their native cults; rich and poor, gentle
[006-092] and simple, all welcomed it, and the philosopher as well as the
[006-093] ignorant man rejoiced in the hope of a future life which it gave to
[006-094] them. Its Egyptian origin caused it to be regarded with the
[006-095] profoundest interest, and its priests were most careful to make the
[006-096] temples of Isis quite different from those of the national gods, and to
[006-097] decorate them with obelisks, sphinxes, shrines, altars, etc., which
[006-098] were either imported from temples in Egypt, or were copied from
[006-099] Egyptian originals. In the temples of Isis services were held at
[006-100] daybreak and in the early afternoon daily, and everywhere these were
[006-101] attended by crowds of people. The holy water used in the libations and
[006-102] for sprinkling the people was Nile water, specially imported from
[006-103] Egypt, and to the votaries of the goddess it symbolized the seed of the
[006-104] god Osiris, which germinated and brought forth fruit through the spells
[006-105] of the goddess Isis. The festivals and processions of Isis were
[006-106] everywhere most popular, and were enjoyed by learned and unlearned
[006-107] alike. In fact, the Isis-play which was acted annually in November,
[006-108] and the festival of the blessing of the ship, which took place in the
[006-109] spring, were the most important festivals of the year. Curiously
[006-110] enough, all the oldest gods and goddesses of Egypt passed into absolute
[006-111] oblivion, with the exception of Osiris (Sarapis), Isis, Anubis the
[006-112] physician, and Harpokrates, the child of Osiris and Isis, and these,
[006-113] from being the ancestral spirits of a comparatively obscure African
[006-114] tribe in early dynastic times, became for several hundreds of years the
[006-115] principal objects of worship of some of the most cultured and
[006-116] intellectual nations. The treatise of Plutarch De Iside helps to
[006-117] explain how this came about, and for those who study the Egyptian
[006-118] Legend of Isis and Osiris the work has considerable importance.

---
