---
description: Defeat, utter and overwhelming, followed the Catalpas to Bluford, where
id: ch08-a-turn-of-the-tide
label: 'Chapter 8: A Turn of the Tide'
tags: []
type: chapter
---

[008-001] Defeat, utter and overwhelming, followed the [[catalpa-nine|Catalpas]] to [[bluford|Bluford]], where they played the “[[zoo-zoo-nine|Zoo-Zoo Nine]]” of that city. The “Zoo-Zoos” were picked players, the lineal descendants of a company of Illinois Zouaves renowned in the Civil War for their bravery, dash, and skill as skirmishers. The original founders of the club had long since disappeared from the field of action, but their successors bore up the banner of their illustrious namesakes with infinite credit. None of the Catalpa people had gone to Bluford to witness the game, [[al-heaton|Al Heaton]] being sick at home and the other immediate friends of the Nine being too busy with their farms and merchandise. And so it happened that the only news that came to the town from Bluford dribbled in from the Keokuck evening papers, sent by wire to the editor of *[[the-catalpa-leaf|The Catalpa Leaf]]*, late at night. Mr. [[editor-downey|Downey]] did not think it worth while to post on his bulletin board the discouraging news that the “Zoo-Zoo Nine” had beaten the Catalpas by a [[scoring-baseball|score]] of eleven to one. But the news got out, of course, for the whole town was on the alert to hear the result from Bluford.

[008-002] Albert Heaton was sitting up in bed, alternately shaken with ague and parched with fever, when his little sister brought him the unwelcome tidings. He groaned aloud and asked if [[alice-howell|Alice Howell]] had heard the news. Mrs. Heaton, a motherly woman who had no patience with [[national-game|baseball]] players that go about the country, like circus-riders, remarked, with some asperity, that she should suppose that [[judge-howell|Judge Howell]] would put a stop to Alice’s giving so much time and attention to baseball. For herself, if she had a grown-up daughter, she would try and put something else into her head than baseball and such mannish and vulgar doings. If Alice’s mother was alive, it would be mighty different in the Howell family. As it was, the Judge allowed Alice to do just about as she pleased, and it was a shame, so it was, for a nice young girl like Alice to be permitted to make a tomboy of herself. Flirting with that young Irish fellow from Sugar Grove! Did anybody ever hear of the like?

[008-003] “Oh, mother,” sighed poor Albert. “If you only knew how sick and sore I am for the boys, you would let up on [[larry-boyne|Larry]]. If you had let me go with the Nine, perhaps I might have helped them out of the defeat. At any rate, it might have been less of a clean-out than it is. Dear me! How cold I am! Cover me up and let me be.”

[008-004] With a pang of remorse at having added unwittingly to Albert’s sufferings, his mother soothed the sick boy and left him to sorrowful meditations. “And I was fool enough to think that the boys would be able to challenge the [[calumets|Calumets]].” With these repentant meditations, Albert sunk into a feverish and uneasy sleep. He might have dreamed (perhaps he did) that at that very moment, Alice Howell was looking out into the gloom of the moist summer night and lamenting with bitterness the defeat of “our nine.”

[008-005] Next day, when *The Leaf* came out, and fuller particulars of the game were made known in a despatch from [[charlie-king|Charlie King]], there was nothing to mitigate the gloom of the friends of the Catalpas. Singularly enough, some of the [[dean-county-nine|Dean County Nine]], who had been among the most enthusiastic boomers of the Catalpa Nine, now assumed a most discouraging attitude. They were sure, so they said, that the Catalpas would be defeated all along the line. They had won the game at [[sandy-key|Sandy Key]] by a scratch. They had found their true level in Bluford. They would be beaten along the river, for it was well known that the nines in the river towns were far ahead of those in the interior of the state.

[008-006] Something of this talk reached the ears of Al Heaton, who was still suffering from fever-and-ague. He took up his bottle of cholagogue and shook it at his terrified little brother (who had retailed the gossip of the drug store, where he had been sent on an errand), and said, “If you hear any such infernal nonsense as that, downtown, Dan, you go and tell [[tom-selby|Tom Selby]] that I want him to lick the first fellow that says anything against our nine. Do you mind me?”

[008-007] Little Dan promised stoutly that he would give [[tom-shoff|Tom]] the message. Whether he did or not, it came to pass that Henry Jackson and Thomas Selby had a discussion, that very night, and that Dr. Selby sent his son home with strict injunctions to cover his face with brown paper and vinegar, while the big-fisted Henry went to bed with a bit of raw beef on his eye.

[008-008] There is nothing like news from the field of battle to bring out the partisan feelings of a community far from the scene of strife. Catalpa was stirred to its very depths by the ill tidings brought from Bluford. Those who disapproved of baseball asserted themselves in the most unexpected and exasperating manner. Nobody had suspected that there were in Catalpa so many who sympathized not with the home nine and who secretly wished that they might be defeated. But the fact that [[baseball-positions|the nine]] had met with disaster only stimulated their friends to new courage and stronger hopes for the future. This was a time, they said, for the friends of the nine to show themselves. Mr. Heaton sent an encouraging despatch to Larry Boyne, assuring him that the temporary reverse had only strengthened the confidence of home friends of the club. Even Judge Howell, who was greatly concerned lest the nine should be unduly depressed by their reverses, authorized [[lew-morris|Lewis Morris]] to write to [[hiram-porter|Hiram Porter]], as Captain of the club, and say to him that the club must be prepared for occasional defeats and that the next news from “the front” would undoubtedly be inspiring to the many supporters of the Catalpas.

[008-009] “The Judge is a brick!” said Larry Boyne, when this message was read to the members of the club, as they lounged in one of the bedrooms of [[galena|Quapaw House]], in Galena, where the boys were waiting to begin the [[championship-baseball|championship series]] of games with the [[red-stockings|Red Stockings]].

[008-010] “That’s just what he is!” exclaimed “The Lily,” bringing his somewhat battered fist down with emphasis on a convenient pillow. [[bill-van-orman|Bill]] had had hard luck in the late [[baseball-match|contest]]. His fingers had been badly sprained and twisted, and he had played with infinite difficulty on account of the battering that he had received in a game played with the Fulton City Nine, when the Catalpas were on their way to Bluford from Sandy Key. But he was still confident and determined.

[008-011] “I suppose some of the folks at home think that we are going to get beaten right along, every day from this out,” he continued, with a scornful laugh. “They don’t know us, do they, Larry? They don’t know what we had to contend with in Bluford, what with being used up with that hard ride on the strap-iron railroad and the lame fingers of your humble servant. Oh, yes, I suppose there is downheartedness among the boys at home.”

[008-012] “But I know one chap who is not downhearted,” said Larry Boyne, cheerfully, “and that is Al Heaton. He will never get discouraged, whatever happens. And then there is his father, his despatch shows where he stands. Al is clear grit and so is his father; you may depend on that, boys.”

[008-013] [[ben-burton|Ben Burton]], who had virtually lost the game in Bluford by his repeated muffing of the [[baseball-equipment|ball]], as well as by his failure at the bat, sneered as he said, “I suppose a certain young lady in [[north-catalpa|North Catalpa]] prompted the Judge’s despatch, didn’t she, Larry?”

[008-014] Larry, with reddening cheeks, protested that he had no idea that Judge Howell needed any prompting from anybody to send a good word to the boys when they were away from home; he was too kindhearted a man, although a little stiff, to require any hint from outsiders to do the fair thing by the Baseball Club in whose welfare he had already shown great interest.

[008-015] “I didn’t say ‘outsiders,’ Larry,” replied Burton, persistently. “I said that he was probably prompted by a young lady.”

[008-016] At this, Larry deliberately rose and walked out of the room, without a word.

[008-017] “I say, Ben, can’t you quit your everlasting nagging of Larry,” broke in Hiram Porter, as the door closed with a bang behind that indignant young man. “What’s the use of your getting into a debate, every day or two, about some mysterious young lady that you two fellows are thinking about? Let up! I wish you would.”

[008-018] Ben muttered something about the Captain’s showing his little brief authority in matters that did not concern the club, when, by general consent, the meeting was broken up for the more important business of [[baseball-training|practice]] on the Galena Baseball Grounds, placed at the disposal of the visitors by the managers of the championship series.
