---
description: The Lord of Vauparfond
id: ch15
label: "Chapter 15: The Lord of Vauparfond"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## XV

The Lord of Vauparfond

[015-001] [[thibault|Thibault]], on arriving at the Dauphin d’Or, ordered himself as fine a dinner as he could think of. It would have been quite easy for him to have engaged a private room, but he would not then have enjoyed the personal sense of superiority. He wished the company of ordinary diners to see him eat his pullet, and his eel in its delicate sauce. He wished the other drinkers to envy him his three different wines, drunk out of three different shaped glasses. He wished everybody to hear him give his orders in a haughty voice, to hear the ring of his money.

[015-002] As he gave his first order, a man in a grey coat, seated in the darkest corner of the room with a half bottle of wine before him, turned round, as if recognising a voice he knew. And, as it turned out, this was one of Thibault’s acquaintances﻿—it is scarcely necessary to add, a tavern acquaintance.

[015-003] Thibault, since he had given up making shoes by day and, instead, had his wolves about at night, had made many such acquaintances. On seeing that it was Thibault, the other man turned his face away quickly, but not so quickly but that Thibault had time to recognise Auguste François Levasseur, valet to Raoul the Lord of Vauparfond.

[015-004] “Halloa! François!” Thibault called out, “what are you doing sitting there in the corner, and sulking like a Monk in Lent, instead of taking your dinner openly and cheerfully as I am doing, in full view of everybody?”

[015-005] François made no reply to this interrogation, but signed to Thibault to hold his tongue.

[015-006] “I am not to speak? not to speak?” said Thibault, “and supposing it does not suit me to hold my tongue, supposing I wish to talk, and that I am bored at having to dine alone? and that it pleases me to say; ‘Friend François, come here; I invite you to dine with me?’ You will not? no? very well, then I shall come and fetch you.” And Thibault rose from his seat, and followed by all eyes, went up to his friend and gave him a slap on the shoulder vigorous enough to dislocate it.

[015-007] “Pretend that you have made a mistake, Thibault, or you will lose me my place; do you not see that I am not in livery, but am only wearing my drab greatcoat! I am here as proxy in a love affair for my master, and I am waiting for a letter from a lady to carry back to him.”

[015-008] “That’s another matter altogether, and I understand now and am sorry for my indiscretion. I should like, however, to have dined in your company.”

[015-009] “Well, nothing is easier; order your dinner to be served in a separate room, and I will give word to our host, that if another man dressed in grey like me comes in, he is to show him upstairs; he and I are old cronies, and understand one another.”

[015-010] “Good,” said Thibault; and he therewith ordered his dinner to be taken up to a room on the first floor, which looked out upon the street.

[015-011] François seated himself so as to be able to see the person he was expecting, while some distance off, as he came down the hill of Ferté-Milon. The dinner which Thibault had ordered was quite sufficient for the two; all that he did was to send for another bottle or so of wine. Thibault had only taken two lessons from Maître Magloire, but he had been an apt pupil, and they had done their work; moreover Thibault had something which he wished to forget, and he counted on the wine to accomplish this for him. It was good fortune, he felt, to have met a friend with whom he could talk, for, in the state of mind and heart in which he was, talking was as good a help towards oblivion as drinking. Accordingly, he was no sooner seated, and the door shut, and his hat stuck well down on to his head so that François might not notice the change in the colour of his hair, than he burst at once into conversation, boldly taking the bull by the horns.

[015-012] “And now, friend François,” he said, “you are going to explain to me some of your words which I did not quite understand.”

[015-013] “I am not surprised at that,” replied François, leaning back in his chair with an air of conceited impertinence, “we attendants on fashionable lords learn to speak court language, which everyone of course does not understand.”

[015-014] “Perhaps not, but if you explain it to your friends, they may possibly understand.”

[015-015] “Quite so! ask what you like and I will answer.”

[015-016] “I look to your doing so the more, that I will undertake to supply you with what will help to loosen your tongue. First, let me ask, why do you call yourself a *grey-coat*? I thought *grey-coat* another name for a jackass.”

[015-017] “Jackass yourself, friend Thibault,” said François, laughing at the shoemaker’s ignorance. “No, a *grey-coat* is a liveried servant, who puts on a grey overall to hide his livery, while he stands sentinel behind a pillar, or mounts guard inside a doorway.”

[015-018] “So you mean that at this moment then, my good François, you are on sentry go? And who is coming to relieve you?”

[015-019] “Champagne, who is in the Comtesse de Mont-Gobert’s service.”

[015-020] “I see; I understand exactly. Your master, the Lord of Vauparfond, is in love with the Comtesse de Mont-Gobert, and you are now awaiting a letter which Champagne is to bring from the lady.”

[015-021] “*Optimé!* as the tutor to Monsieur Raoul’s young brother says.”

[015-022] “My Lord Raoul is a lucky fellow!”

[015-023] “Yes indeed,” said François, drawing himself up.

[015-024] “And what a beautiful creature the Countess is!”

[015-025] “You know her then?”

[015-026] “I have seen her out [[hunt|hunting]] with his Highness the Duke of Orleans and Madame de Montesson.”

[015-027] Thibault in speaking had said *out hunting*.

[015-028] “My friend, let me tell you that in society we do not say *hunting* and *shooting*, but *huntin’* and *shootin’*.”

[015-029] “Oh!” said Thibault, “I am not so particular to a letter as all that. To the health of my Lord Raoul!”

[015-030] As François put down his glass on the table, he uttered an exclamation; he had that moment caught sight of Champagne.

[015-031] They threw open the window and called to this third comer, and Champagne, with all the ready intuition of the well-bred servant, understood at once, and went upstairs. He was dressed, like François, in a long grey coat, and had brought a letter with him.

[015-032] “Well,” asked François, as he caught sight of the letter in his hand, “and is there to be a meeting tonight?”

[015-033] “Yes,” answered Champagne, with evident delight.

[015-034] “That’s all right,” said François cheerfully.

[015-035] Thibault was surprised at these expressions of apparent sympathy on the part of the servants with their master’s happiness.

[015-036] “Is it your master’s good luck that you are so pleased about?” he asked of François.

[015-037] “Oh, dear me no!” replied the latter, “but when my master is engaged, I am at liberty!”

[015-038] “And do you make use of your liberty?”

[015-039] “One may be a valet, and yet have one’s own share of good luck, and also know how to spend the time more or less profitably,” answered François, bridling as he spoke.

[015-040] “And you, Champagne?”

[015-041] “Oh, I,” replied the last comer, holding his wine up to the light, “yes, I too hope to make good use of it.”

[015-042] “Well, then, here’s to all your love affairs! since everybody seems to have one or more on hand,” said Thibault.

[015-043] “The same to yours!” replied the two other men in chorus.

[015-044] “As to myself,” said the shoemaker, a look of hatred to his fellow creatures passing over his face, “I am the only person who loves nobody, and whom nobody loves.”

[015-045] His companion looked at him with a certain surprised curiosity.

[015-046] “Ah! ah!” said François, “is the report that is whispered abroad about you in the countryside a true tale then?”

[015-047] “Report about me?”

[015-048] “Yes, about you,” put in Champagne.

[015-049] “Oh, then they say the same thing about me at Mont-Gobert as they do at Vauparfond?”

[015-050] Champagne nodded his head.

[015-051] “Well, and what is it they do say?”

[015-052] “That you are a werewolf,” said François.

[015-053] Thibault laughed aloud. “Tell me, now, have I a tail?” he said, “have I a wolf’s claws, have I a wolf’s snout?”

[015-054] “We only repeat what other people say,” rejoined Champagne, “we do not say that it is so.”

[015-055] “Well, anyhow, you must acknowledge,” said Thibault, “that werewolves have excellent wine.”

[015-056] “By my faith, yes!” exclaimed both the valets.

[015-057] “To the health of the devil who provides it, gentlemen.”

[015-058] The two men who were holding their glasses in their hand, put both glasses down on the table.

[015-059] “What is that for?” asked Thibault.

[015-060] “You must find someone else to drink that health with you,” said François, “I won’t, that’s flat!”

[015-061] “Nor I,” added Champagne.

[015-062] “Well and good then! I will drink all three glasses myself,” and he immediately proceeded to do so.

[015-063] “Friend Thibault,” said the Baron’s valet, “it is time we separated.”

[015-064] “So soon?” said Thibault.

[015-065] “My master is awaiting me, and no doubt with some impatience﻿ ﻿… the letter, Champagne?”

[015-066] “Here it is.”

[015-067] “Let us take farewell then of your friend Thibault, and be off to our business and our pleasures, and leave him to his pleasures and business.” And so saying, François winked at his friend, who responded with a similar sign of understanding between them.

[015-068] “We must not separate,” said Thibault, “without drinking a stirrup-cup together.”

[015-069] “But not in those glasses,” said François, pointing to the three from which Thibault had drunk to the enemy of mankind.

[015-070] “You are very particular, gentlemen; better call the sacristan and have them washed in holy water.”

[015-071] “Not quite that, but rather than refuse the polite invitation of a friend, we will call for the waiter, and have fresh glasses brought.”

[015-072] “These three, then,” said Thibault, who was beginning to feel the effects of the wine he had drunk, “are fit for nothing more than to be thrown out of window? To the devil with you!” he exclaimed as he took up one of them and sent it flying. As the glass went through the air it left a track of light behind it, which blazed and went out like a flash of lightning. Thibault took up the two remaining glasses and threw them in turn, and each time the same thing happened, but the third flash was followed by a loud peal of thunder.

[015-073] Thibault shut the window, and was thinking, as he turned to his seat again, how he should explain this strange occurrence to his companions; but his two companions had disappeared.

[015-074] “Cowards!” he muttered. Then he looked for a glass, but found none left.

[015-075] “Hum! that’s awkward,” he said. “I must drink out of the bottle, that’s all!”

[015-076] And suiting the action to the word, Thibault finished up his dinner by draining the bottle, which did not help to steady his brain, already somewhat shaky.

[015-077] At nine o’clock, Thibault called the innkeeper, paid his account, and departed.

[015-078] He was in an angry disposition of enmity against all the world; the thoughts from which he had hoped to escape possessed him more and more. [[agnette|Agnelette]] was being taken farther and farther from him as the time went by; everyone, wife or mistress, had someone to love them. This day which had been one of hatred and despair to him, had been one full of the promise of joy and happiness for everybody else; the lord of Vauparfond, the two wretched valets, François and Champagne, each of them had a bright star of hope to follow; while he, he alone, went stumbling along in the darkness. Decidedly there was a curse upon him. “But,” he went on thinking to himself, “if so, the pleasures of the damned belong to me, and I have a right to claim them.”

[015-079] As these thoughts went surging through his brain, as he walked along cursing aloud, shaking his fist at the sky, he was on the way to his hut and had nearly reached it, when he heard a horse coming up behind him at a gallop.

[015-080] “Ah!” said Thibault, “here comes the Lord of Vauparfond, hastening to the meeting with his love. I should laugh, my fine Sir Raoul, if my Lord of Mont-Gobert managed just to catch you! You would not get off quite so easily as if it were Maître Magloire; there would be swords out, and blows given and received!”

[015-081] Thus engaged in thinking what would happen if the Comte de Mont-Gobert were to surprise his rival, Thibault, who was walking in the road, evidently did not get out of the way quickly enough, for the horseman, seeing a peasant of some kind barring his passage, brought his whip down upon him in a violent blow, calling out at the same time: “Get out of the way, you beggar, if you don’t wish to be trampled under the horse’s feet!”

[015-082] Thibault, still half drunk, was conscious of a crowd of mingled sensations, of the lashing of the whip, the collision with the horse, and the rolling through cold water and mud, while the horseman passed on.

[015-083] He rose to his knees, furious with anger, and shaking his fist at the retreating figure:

[015-084] “Would the devil,” he exclaimed, “I might just for once have my turn at being one of you great lords, might just for twenty-four hours take your place, Monsieur Raoul de Vauparfond, instead of being only Thibault, the shoemaker, so that I might know what it was to have a fine horse to ride, instead of tramping on foot; might be able to whip the peasants I met on the road, and have the opportunity of paying court to these beautiful women, who deceive their husbands, as the Comtesse de Mont-Gobert does!”

[015-085] The words were hardly out of his mouth, when the Baron’s horse shied, throwing the rider over its head.
