---
description: "Section 30 of A Voyage to Arcturus"
id: ch30
label: "Section 30"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 30

[030-001]Then he saw Earthrid’s body, lying quite close to him. It was on its

[030-002]back. Both legs had been violently torn off and he could not see them

[030-003]anywhere. Earthrid’s teeth were buried in the flesh of his right

[030-004]forearm, indicating that the man had died in unreasoning physical agony.

[030-005]The skin gleamed green in the moonlight, but it was stained by darker

[030-006]discolourations, which were wounds. The sand about him was dyed by the

[030-007]pool of blood which had long since filtered through.

[030-008]Maskull left the corpse in dismay, and walked a long way along the

[030-009]sweet-smelling shore. Sitting down on a rock, he waited for daybreak.

[030-010]Chapter 16. LEEHALLFAE

[030-011]At midnight, when Teargeld was in the south, throwing his shadow

[030-012]straight toward the sea and making everything nearly as bright as day,

[030-013]he saw a great tree floating in the water, not far out. It was thirty

[030-014]feet out of the water, upright, and alive, and its roots must have been

[030-015]enormously deep and wide. It was drifting along the coast, through the

[030-016]heavy seas. Maskull eyed it incuriously for a few minutes. Then it

[030-017]dawned on him that it might be a good thing to investigate its nature.

[030-018]Without stopping to weigh the danger, he immediately swam out, caught

[030-019]hold of the lowest branch, and swung himself up.

[030-020]He looked aloft and saw that the main stem was thick to the very top,

[030-021]terminating in a knob that somewhat resembled a human head. He made his

[030-022]way toward this knob, through the multitude of boughs, which were

[030-023]covered with tough, slippery, marine leaves, like seaweed. Arriving at

[030-024]the crown, he found that it actually was a sort of head, for there were

[030-025]membranes like rudimentary eyes all the way around it, denoting some

[030-026]form of low intelligence.

[030-027]At that moment the tree touched bottom, though some way from the shore,

[030-028]and began to bump heavily. To steady himself, Maskull put his hand out,

[030-029]and, in doing so, accidentally covered some of the membranes. The tree

[030-030]sheered off the land, as if by an act of will. When it was steady again,

[030-031]Maskull removed his hand; they at once drifted back to shore. He thought

[030-032]a bit, and then started experimenting with the eyelike membranes. It was

[030-033]as he had guessed—these eyes were stimulated by the light of the moon,

[030-034]and whichever way the light came from, the tree would travel.

[030-035]A rather defiant smile crossed Maskull’s face as it struck him that it

[030-036]might be possible to navigate this huge plant-animal as far as

[030-037]Matterplay. He lost no time in putting the conception into execution.

[030-038]Tearing off some of the long, tough leaves, he bound up all the

[030-039]membranes except the ones that faced the north. The tree instantly left

[030-040]the island, and definitely put out to sea. It travelled due north. It

[030-041]was not moving at more than a mile an hour, however, while Matterplay

[030-042]was possibly forty miles distant.

[030-043]The great spout waves fell against the trunk with mighty thuds; the

[030-044]breaking seas hissed through the lower branches—Maskull rested high and

[030-045]dry, but was more than a little apprehensive about their slow rate of

[030-046]progress. Presently he sighted a current racing along toward the north-

[030-047]west, and that put another idea into his head. He began to juggle with

[030-048]the membranes again, and before long had succeeded in piloting his tree

[030-049]into the fast-running stream. As soon as they were fairly in its rapids,

[030-050]he blinded the crown entirely, and thenceforward the current acted in

[030-051]the double capacity of road and steed.

[030-052]Maskull made himself secure among the branches and slept for the

[030-053]remainder of the night.

[030-054]When his eyes opened again, the island was out of sight. Teargeld was

[030-055]setting in the western sea. The sky in the east was bright with the

[030-056]colours of the approaching day. The air was cool and fresh; the light

[030-057]over the sea was beautiful, gleaming, and mysterious. Land—probably

[030-058]Matterplay—lay ahead, a long, dark line of low cliffs, perhaps a mile

[030-059]away. The current no longer ran toward the shore, but began to skirt the

[030-060]coast without drawing any closer to it. As soon as Maskull realised the

[030-061]fact, he manoeuvred the tree out of its channel and started drifting it

[030-062]inshore. The eastern sky blazed up suddenly with violent dyes, and the

[030-063]outer rim of Branchspell lifted itself above the sea. The moon had

[030-064]already sunk.

[030-065]The shore loomed nearer and nearer. In physical character it was like

[030-066]Swaylone’s Island—the same wide sands, small cliffs, and rounded,

[030-067]insignificant hills inland, without vegetation. In the early-morning

[030-068]sunlight, however, it looked romantic. Maskull, hollow-eyed and morose,

[030-069]cared nothing for all that, but the moment the tree grounded, clambered

[030-070]swiftly down through the branches and dropped into the sea. By the time

[030-071]he had swam ashore, the white, stupendous sun was high above the

[030-072]horizon.

[030-073]He walked along the sands toward the east for a considerable distance,

[030-074]without having any special intention in his mind. He thought he would go

[030-075]on until he came to some creek or valley, and then turn up it. The sun’s

[030-076]rays were cheering, and began to relieve him of his oppressive night

[030-077]weight. After strolling along the beach for about a mile, he was stopped

[030-078]by a broad stream that flowed into the sea out of a kind of natural

[030-079]gateway in the line of cliffs. Its water was of a beautiful, limpid

[030-080]green, all filled with bubbles. So ice-cold, aerated, and enticing did

[030-081]it look that he flung himself face downward on the ground and took a

[030-082]prolonged draught. When he got up again his eyes started to play

[030-083]pranks—they became alternately blurred and clear.... It may have been

[030-084]pure imagination, but he fancied that Digrung was moving inside him.

[030-085]He followed the bank of the stream through the gap in the cliffs, and

[030-086]then for the first time saw the real Matterplay. A valley appeared, like

[030-087]a jewel enveloped by naked rock. All the hill country was bare and

[030-088]lifeless, but this valley lying in the heart of it was extremely

[030-089]fertile; he had never seen such fertility. It wound up among the hills,

[030-090]and all that he was looking at was its broad lower end. The floor of the

[030-091]valley was about half a mile wide; the stream that ran down its middle

[030-092]was nearly a hundred feet across, but was exceedingly shallow—in most

[030-093]places not more than a few inches deep. The sides of the valley were

[030-094]about seventy feet high, but very sloping; they were clothed from top to

[030-095]bottom with little, bright-leaved trees—not of varied tints of one

[030-096]colour, like Earth trees, but of widely diverse colours, most of which

[030-097]were brilliant and positive.

[030-098]The floor itself was like a magician’s garden. Densely interwoven trees,

[030-099]shrubs, and parasitical climbers fought everywhere for possession of it.

[030-100]The forms were strange and grotesque, and each one seemed different; the

[030-101]colours of leaf, flower, sexual organs, and stem were equally

[030-102]peculiar—all the different combinations of the five primary colours of

[030-103]Tormance seemed to be represented, and the result, for Maskull was a

[030-104]sort of eye chaos. So rank was the vegetation that he could not fight

[030-105]his way through it; he was obliged to take to the riverbed. The contact

[030-106]of the water created an odd tingling sensation throughout his body, like

[030-107]a mild electric shock. There were no birds, but a few extraordinary-

[030-108]looking winged reptiles of small size kept crossing the valley from hill

[030-109]to hill. Swarms of flying insects clustered around him, threatening

[030-110]mischief, but in the end it turned out that his blood was disagreeable

[030-111]to them, for he was not bitten once. Repulsive crawling creatures

[030-112]resembling centipedes, scorpions, snakes, and so forth were in myriads

[030-113]on the banks of the stream, but they also made no attempt to use their

[030-114]weapons on his bare legs and feet, as he passed through them into the

[030-115]water.... Presently however, he was confronted in midstream by a hideous

[030-116]monster, of the size of a pony, but resembling in shape—if it resembled

[030-117]anything—a sea crustacean; and then he came to a halt. They stared at

[030-118]one another, the beast with wicked eyes, Maskull with cool and wary

[030-119]ones. While he was staring, a singular thing happened to him.

[030-120]His eyes blurred again. But when in a minute or two this blurring passed

[030-121]away and he saw clearly once more, his vision had changed in character.

[030-122]He was looking right through the animal’s body and could distinguish all

[030-123]its interior parts. The outer crust, however, and all the hard tissues

[030-124]were misty and semi-transparent; through them a luminous network of

[030-125]blood-red veins and arteries stood out in startling distinctness. The

[030-126]hard parts faded away to nothingness, and the blood system alone was

[030-127]left. Not even the fleshy ducts remained. The naked blood alone was

[030-128]visible, flowing this way and that like a fiery, liquid skeleton, in the

[030-129]shape of the monster. Then this blood began to change too. Instead of a

[030-130]continuous liquid stream, Maskull perceived that it was composed of a

[030-131]million individual points. The red colour had been an illusion caused by

[030-132]the rapid motion of the points; he now saw clearly that they resembled

[030-133]minute suns in their scintillating brightness. They seemed like a double

[030-134]drift of stars, streaming through space. One drift was travelling toward

[030-135]a fixed point in the centre, while the other was moving away from it. He

[030-136]recognised the former as the veins of the beast, the latter as the

[030-137]arteries, and the fixed point as the heart.

[030-138]While he was still looking, lost in amazement, the starry network went

[030-139]out suddenly like an extinguished flame. Where the crustacean had stood,

[030-140]there was nothing. Yet through this “nothing” he could not see the

[030-141]landscape. Something was standing there that intercepted the light,

[030-142]though it possessed neither shape, colour, nor substance. And now the

[030-143]object, which could no longer be perceived by vision, began to be felt

[030-144]by emotion. A delightful, springlike sense of rising sap, of quickening

[030-145]pulses of love, adventure, mystery, beauty, femininity—took possession

[030-146]of his being, and, strangely enough, he identified it with the monster.

[030-147]Why that invisible brute should cause him to feel young, sexual, and

[030-148]audacious, he did not ask himself, for he was fully occupied with the

[030-149]effect. But it was as if flesh, bones, and blood had been discarded, and

[030-150]he were face to face with naked Life itself, which slowly passed into

[030-151]his own body.

[030-152]The sensations died away. There was a brief interval, and then the

[030-153]streaming, starlike skeleton rose up again out of space. It changed to

[030-154]the red-blood system. The hard parts of the body reappeared, with more

[030-155]and more distinctness, and at the same time the network of blood grew

[030-156]fainter. Presently the interior parts were entirely concealed by the

[030-157]crust—the creature stood opposite Maskull in its old formidable

[030-158]ugliness, hard, painted, and concrete.

[030-159]Disliking something about him, the crustacean turned aside and stumbled

[030-160]awkwardly away on its six legs, with laborious and repulsive movements,

[030-161]toward the other bank of the stream.

[030-162]Maskull’s apathy left him after this adventure. He became uneasy and

[030-163]thoughtful. He imagined that he was beginning to see things through

[030-164]Digrung’s eyes, and that there were strange troubles immediately ahead.

[030-165]The next time his eyes started to blur, he fought it down with his will,

[030-166]and nothing happened.

[030-167]The valley ascended with many windings toward the hills. It narrowed

[030-168]considerably, and the wooded slopes on either side grew steeper and

[030-169]higher. The stream shrunk to about twenty feet across, but it was

[030-170]deeper—it was alive with motion, music, and bubbles. The electric

[030-171]sensations caused by its water became more pronounced, almost

[030-172]disagreeably so; but there was nowhere else to walk. With its deafening

[030-173]confusion of sounds from the multitude of living creatures, the little

[030-174]valley resembled a vast conversation hall of Nature. The life was still

[030-175]more prolific than before; every square foot of space was a tangle of

[030-176]struggling wills, both animal and vegetable. For a naturalist it would

[030-177]have been paradise, for no two shapes were alike, and all were

[030-178]fantastic, with individual character.
