---
description: "Section 31 of A Voyage to Arcturus"
id: ch31
label: "Section 31"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 31

[031-001]It looked as if life forms were being coined so fast by Nature that

[031-002]there was not physical room for all. Nevertheless it was not as on

[031-003]Earth, where a hundred seeds are scattered in order that one may be

[031-004]sown. Here the young forms seemed to survive, while, to find

[031-005]accommodation for them, the old ones perished; everywhere he looked they

[031-006]were withering and dying, without any ostensible cause—they were simply

[031-007]being killed by new life.

[031-008]Other creatures sported so wildly, in front of his very eyes, that they

[031-009]became of different “kingdoms” altogether. For example, a fruit was

[031-010]lying on the ground, of the size and shape of a lemon, but with a

[031-011]tougher skin. He picked it up, intending to eat the contained pulp; but

[031-012]inside it was a fully formed young tree, just on the point of bursting

[031-013]its shell. Maskull threw it away upstream. It floated back toward him;

[031-014]by the time he was even with it, its downward motion had stopped and it

[031-015]was swimming against the current. He fished it out and discovered that

[031-016]it had sprouted six rudimentary legs.

[031-017]Maskull sang no paeans of praise in honour of the gloriously overcrowded

[031-018]valley. On the contrary, he felt deeply cynical and depressed. He

[031-019]thought that the unseen power—whether it was called Nature, Life, Will,

[031-020]or God—that was so frantic to rush forward and occupy this small,

[031-021]vulgar, contemptible world, could not possess very high aims and was not

[031-022]worth much. How this sordid struggle for an hour or two of physical

[031-023]existence could ever be regarded as a deeply earnest and important

[031-024]business was beyond his comprehension The atmosphere choked him, he

[031-025]longed for air and space. Thrusting his way through to the side of the

[031-026]ravine, he began to climb the overhanging cliff, swinging his way up

[031-027]from tree to tree.

[031-028]When he arrived at the top, Branchspell beat down on him with such

[031-029]brutal, white intensity that he saw that there was no staying there. He

[031-030]looked around, to ascertain what part of the country he had come to. He

[031-031]had travelled about ten miles from the sea, as the crow flies. The bare,

[031-032]undulating wolds sloped straight down toward it; the water glittered in

[031-033]the distance; and on the horizon he was just able to make out Swaylone’s

[031-034]Island. Looking north, the land continued sloping upward as far as he

[031-035]could see. Over the crest—that is to say, some miles away—a line of

[031-036]black, fantastic-shaped rocks of quite another character showed

[031-037]themselves; this was probably Threal. Behind these again, against the

[031-038]sky, perhaps fifty or even a hundred miles off, were the peaks of

[031-039]Lichstorm, most of them covered with greenish snow that glittered in the

[031-040]sunlight.

[031-041]They were stupendously high and of weird contours. Most of them were

[031-042]conical to the top, but from the top, great masses of mountain balanced

[031-043]themselves at what looked like impossible angles—overhanging without

[031-044]apparent support. A land like that promised something new, he thought:

[031-045]extraordinary inhabitants. The idea took shape in his mind to go there,

[031-046]and to travel as swiftly as possible, it might even be feasible to get

[031-047]there before sunset. It was less the mountains themselves that attracted

[031-048]him than the country which lay beyond—the prospect of setting eyes on

[031-049]the blue sun, which he judged to be the wonder of wonders in Tormance.

[031-050]The direct route was over the hills, but that was out of the question,

[031-051]because of the killing heat and the absence of shade. He guessed,

[031-052]however, that the valley would not take him far out of his way, and

[031-053]decided to keep to that for the time being, much as he hated and feared

[031-054]it. Into the hotbed of life, therefore, he once more swung himself.

[031-055]Once down, he continued to follow the windings of the valley for several

[031-056]miles through sunlight and shadow. The path became increasingly

[031-057]difficult. The cliffs closed in on either side until they were less than

[031-058]a hundred yards apart, while the bed of the ravine was blocked by

[031-059]boulders, great and small, so that the little stream, which was now

[031-060]diminished to the proportions of a brook, had to come down where and how

[031-061]it could. The forms of life grew stranger. Pure plants and pure animals

[031-062]disappeared by degrees, and their place was filled by singular creatures

[031-063]that seemed to partake of both characters. They had limbs, faces, will,

[031-064]and intelligence, but they remained for the greater part of their time

[031-065]rooted in the ground by preference, and they fed only on soil and air.

[031-066]Maskull saw no sexual organs and failed to understand how the young came

[031-067]into existence.

[031-068]Then he witnessed an astonishing sight. A large and fully developed

[031-069]plant-animal appeared suddenly in front of him, out of empty space. He

[031-070]could not believe his eyes, but stared at the creature for a long time

[031-071]in amazement. It went on calmly moving and burrowing before him, as

[031-072]thought it had been there all its life. Giving up the puzzle, Maskull

[031-073]resumed his striding from rock to rock up the gorge, and then, quietly

[031-074]and without warning, the same phenomenon occurred again. No longer could

[031-075]he doubt that he was seeing miracles—that Nature was precipitating its

[031-076]shapes into the world without making use of the medium of parentage....

[031-077]No solution of the problem presented itself.

[031-078]The brook too had altered in character. A trembling radiance came up

[031-079]from its green water, like some imprisoned force escaping into the air.

[031-080]He had not walked in it for some time; now he did so, to test its

[031-081]quality. He felt new life entering his body, from his feet upward; it

[031-082]resembled a slowly moving cordial, rather than mere heat. The sensation

[031-083]was quite new in his experience, yet he knew by instinct what it was.

[031-084]The energy emitted by the brook was ascending his body neither as friend

[031-085]nor foe but simply because it happened to be the direct road to its

[031-086]objective elsewhere. But, although it had no hostile intentions, it was

[031-087]likely to prove a rough traveller—he was clearly conscious that its

[031-088]passage through his body threatened to bring about some physical

[031-089]transformation, unless he could do something to prevent it. Leaping

[031-090]quickly out of the water, he leaned against a rock, tightened his

[031-091]muscles, and braced himself against the impending change. At that very

[031-092]moment the blurring again attacked his sight, and, while he was guarding

[031-093]against that, his forehead sprouted out into a galaxy of new eyes. He

[031-094]put his hand up and counted six, in addition to his old ones.

[031-095]The danger was past and Maskull laughed, congratulating himself on

[031-096]having got off so easily. Then he wondered what the new organs were

[031-097]for—whether they were a good or a bad thing. He had not taken a dozen

[031-098]steps up the ravine before he found out. Just as he was in the act of

[031-099]jumping down from the top of a boulder, his vision altered and he came

[031-100]to an automatic standstill. He was perceiving two worlds simultaneously.

[031-101]With his own eyes he saw the gorge as before, with its rocks, brook,

[031-102]plant-animals, sunshine, and shadows. But with his acquired eyes he saw

[031-103]differently. All the details of the valley were visible, but the light

[031-104]seemed turned down, and everything appeared faint, hard, and uncoloured.

[031-105]The sun was obscured by masses of cloud which filled the whole sky. This

[031-106]vapour was in violent and almost living motion. It was thick in

[031-107]extension, but thin in texture; some parts, however, were far denser

[031-108]than others, as the particles were crushed together or swept apart by

[031-109]the motion. The green sparks from the brook, when closely watched, could

[031-110]be distinguished individually, each one wavering up toward the clouds,

[031-111]but the moment they got within them a fearful struggle seemed to begin.

[031-112]The spark endeavoured to escape through to the upper air, while the

[031-113]clouds concentrated around it whichever way it darted, trying to create

[031-114]so dense a prison that further movement would be impossible. As far as

[031-115]Maskull could detect, most of the sparks succeeded eventually in finding

[031-116]their way out after frantic efforts; but one that he was looking at was

[031-117]caught, and what happened was this. A complete ring of cloud surrounded

[031-118]it, and, in spite of its furious leaps and flashes in all directions—as

[031-119]if it were a live, savage creature caught in a net—nowhere could it find

[031-120]an opening, but it dragged the enveloping cloud stuff with it, wherever

[031-121]it went. The vapours continued to thicken around it, until they

[031-122]resembled the black, heavy, compressed sky masses seen before a bad

[031-123]thunderstorm. Then the green spark, which was still visible in the

[031-124]interior, ceased its efforts, and remained for a time quite quiescent.

[031-125]The cloud shape went on consolidating itself, and became nearly

[031-126]spherical; as it grew heavier and stiller, it started slowly to descend

[031-127]toward the valley floor. When it was directly opposite Maskull, with its

[031-128]lower end only a few feet off the ground, its motion stopped altogether

[031-129]and there was a complete pause for at least two minutes. Suddenly, like

[031-130]a stab of forked lightning, the great cloud shot together, became small,

[031-131]indented, and coloured, and as a plant-animal started walking around on

[031-132]legs and rooting up the ground in search of food. The concluding stage

[031-133]of the phenomenon he witnessed with his normal eyesight. It showed him

[031-134]the creature’s appearing miraculously out of nowhere.

[031-135]Maskull was shaken. His cynicism dropped from him and gave place to

[031-136]curiosity and awe. “That was exactly like the birth of a thought,” he

[031-137]said to himself, “but who was the thinker? Some great Living Mind is at

[031-138]work in this spot. He has intelligence, for all his shapes are

[031-139]different, and he has character, for all belong to the same general

[031-140]type.... If I’m not wrong, and if it’s the force called Shaping or

[031-141]Crystalman, I’ve seen enough to make me want to find out something more

[031-142]about him.... It would be ridiculous to go on to other riddles before I

[031-143]have solved these.”

[031-144]A voice called out to him from behind, and, turning around, he saw a

[031-145]human figure hastening toward him from some distance down the ravine. It

[031-146]looked more like a man than a woman. He was rather tall, but nimble, and

[031-147]was clothed in a dark, frocklike garment that reached from the neck to

[031-148]below the knees. Around his head was rolled a turban. Maskull waited for

[031-149]him, and when he was nearer went a little way to meet him.

[031-150]Then he experienced another surprise, for this person, although clearly

[031-151]a human being, was neither man nor woman, nor anything between the two,

[031-152]but was unmistakably of a third positive sex, which was remarkable to

[031-153]behold and difficult to understand. In order to translate into words the

[031-154]sexual impression produced in Maskull’s mind by the stranger’s physical

[031-155]aspect, it is necessary to coin a new pronoun, for none in earthly use

[031-156]would be applicable. Instead of “he,” “she,” or “it,” therefore “ae”

[031-157]will be used.

[031-158]He found himself incapable of grasping at first why the bodily

[031-159]peculiarities of this being should strike him as springing from sex, and

[031-160]not from race, and yet there was no doubt about the fact itself. Body,

[031-161]face, and eyes were absolutely neither male nor female, but something

[031-162]quite different. Just as one can distinguish a man from a woman at the

[031-163]first glance by some indefinable difference of expression and

[031-164]atmospheres altogether apart from the contour of the figure, so the

[031-165]stranger was separated in appearance from both. As with men and women,

[031-166]the whole person expressed a latent sensuality, which gave body and face

[031-167]alike their peculiar character.... Maskull decided that it was love—but

[031-168]what love—love for whom? It was neither the shame-carrying passion of a

[031-169]male, nor the deep-rooted instinct of a female to obey her destiny. It

[031-170]was as real and irresistible as these, but quite different.
