---
description: "WHEREIN ELNORA HAS MORE FINANCIAL TROUBLES, AND MRS. COMSTOCK AGAIN"
id: ch10
label: "Chapter 10: Wherein Elnora Returns Home and Learns More of Life"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# CHAPTER X

[010-001]WHEREIN ELNORA HAS MORE FINANCIAL TROUBLES, AND MRS. COMSTOCK AGAIN

[010-002]HEARS THE SONG OF THE LIMBERLOST

[010-003]The following night [[elnora-comstock|Elnora]] hurried to Sintons’. She threw open the back

[010-004]door and with anxious eyes searched Margaret’s face.

[010-005]“You got it!” panted Elnora. “You got it! I can see by your face that

[010-006]you did. Oh, give it to me!”

[010-007]“Yes, I got it, honey, I got it all right, but don’t be so fast. It had

[010-008]been kept in such a damp place it needed glueing, it had to have

[010-009]strings, and a key was gone. I knew how much you wanted it, so I sent

[010-010]Wesley right to town with it. They said they could fix it good as new,

[010-011]but it should be varnished, and that it would take several days for the

[010-012]glue to set. You can have it Saturday.”

[010-013]“You found it where you thought it was? You know it’s his?”

[010-014]“Yes, it was just where I thought, and it’s the same violin I’ve seen

[010-015]him play hundreds of times. It’s all right, only laying so long it

[010-016]needs fixing.”

[010-017]“Oh [[margaret-sinton|Aunt Margaret]]! Can I ever wait?”

[010-018]“It does seem a long time, but how could I help it? You couldn’t do

[010-019]anything with it as it was. You see, it had been hidden away in a

[010-020]garret, and it needed cleaning and drying to make it fit to play again.

[010-021]You can have it Saturday sure. But Elnora, you’ve got to promise me

[010-022]that you will leave it here, or in town, and not let your mother get a

[010-023]hint of it. I don’t know what she’d do.”

[010-024]“[[wesley-sinton|Uncle Wesley]] can bring it here until Monday. Then I will take it to

[010-025]school so that I can practise at noon. Oh, I don’t know how to thank

[010-026]you. And there’s more than the violin for which to be thankful. You’ve

[010-027]given me my father. Last night I saw him plainly as life.”

[010-028]“Elnora you were dreaming!”

[010-029]“I know I was dreaming, but I saw him. I saw him so closely that a tiny

[010-030]white scar at the corner of his eyebrow showed. I was just reaching out

[010-031]to touch him when he disappeared.”

[010-032]“Who told you there was a scar on his forehead?”

[010-033]“No one ever did in all my life. I saw it last night as he went down.

[010-034]And oh, Aunt Margaret! I saw what she did, and I heard his cries! No

[010-035]matter what she does, I don’t believe I ever can be angry with her

[010-036]again. Her heart is broken, and she can’t help it. Oh, it was terrible,

[010-037]but I am glad I saw it. Now, I will always understand.”

[010-038]“I don’t know what to make of that,” said Margaret. “I don’t believe in

[010-039]such stuff at all, but you couldn’t make it up, for you didn’t know.”

[010-040]“I only know that I played the violin last night, as he played it, and

[010-041]while I played he came through the woods from the direction of

[010-042]Carneys’. It was summer and all the flowers were in bloom. He wore gray

[010-043]trousers and a blue shirt, his head was bare, and his face was

[010-044]beautiful. I could almost touch him when he sank.”

[010-045]Margaret stood perplexed. “I don’t know what to think of that!” she

[010-046]ejaculated. “I was next to the last person who saw him before he was

[010-047]drowned. It was late on a June afternoon, and he was dressed as you

[010-048]describe. He was bareheaded because he had found a quail’s nest before

[010-049]the bird began to brood, and he gathered the eggs in his hat and left

[010-050]it in a fence corner to get on his way home; they found it afterward.”

[010-051]“Was he coming from Carneys’?”

[010-052]“He was on that side of the quagmire. Why he ever skirted it so close

[010-053]as to get caught is a mystery you will have to dream out. I never could

[010-054]understand it.”

[010-055]“Was he doing something he didn’t want my mother to know?”

[010-056]“Why?”

[010-057]“Because if he had been, he might have cut close [[limberlost-swamp|the swamp]] so he

[010-058]couldn’t be seen from [[comstock-garden|the garden]]. You know, the whole path straight to

[010-059][[limberlost-pool|the pool]] where he sank can be seen from our back door. It’s firm on our

[010-060]side. The danger is on the north and east. If he didn’t want mother to

[010-061]know, he might have tried to pass on either of those sides and gone too

[010-062]close. Was he in a hurry?”

[010-063]“Yes, he was,” said Margaret. “He had been away longer than he

[010-064]expected, and he almost ran when he started home.”

[010-065]“And he’d left his violin somewhere that you knew, and you went and got

[010-066]it. I’ll wager he was going to play, and didn’t want mother to find it

[010-067]out!”

[010-068]“It wouldn’t make any difference to you if you knew every little thing,

[010-069]so quit thinking about it, and just be glad you are to have what he

[010-070]loved best of anything.”

[010-071]“That’s true. Now I must hurry home. I am dreadfully late.”

[010-072]Elnora sprang up and ran down the road, but when she approached the

[010-073]cabin she climbed the fence, crossed the open woods pasture diagonally

[010-074]and entered at the back garden gate. As she often came that way when

[010-075]she had been looking for cocoons her mother asked no questions.

[010-076]Elnora lived by the minute until Saturday, when, contrary to his usual

[010-077]custom, Wesley went to town in the forenoon, taking her along to buy

[010-078]some groceries. Wesley drove straight to the music store, and asked for

[010-079]the violin he had left to be mended.

[010-080]In its new coat of varnish, with new keys and strings, it seemed much

[010-081]like any other violin to Sinton, but to Elnora it was the most

[010-082]beautiful instrument ever made, and a priceless treasure. She held it

[010-083]in her arms, touched the strings softly and then she drew the bow

[010-084]across them in whispering measure. She had no time to think what a

[010-085]remarkably good bow it was for sixteen years’ disuse. The tan leather

[010-086]case might have impressed her as being in fine condition also, had she

[010-087]been in a state to question anything. She did remember to ask for the

[010-088]bill and she was gravely presented with a slip calling for four

[010-089]strings, one key, and a coat of varnish, total, one dollar fifty. It

[010-090]seemed to Elnora she never could put the precious instrument in the

[010-091]case and start home. Wesley left her in the music store where the

[010-092]proprietor showed her all he could about tuning, and gave her several

[010-093]beginners’ sheets of notes and scales. She carried the violin in her

[010-094]arms as far as the crossroads at the corner of their land, then

[010-095]reluctantly put it under the carriage seat.

[010-096]As soon as her work was done she ran down to Sintons’ and began to

[010-097]play, and on Monday the violin went to school with her. She made

[010-098]arrangements with the superintendent to leave it in his office and

[010-099]scarcely took time for her food at noon, she was so eager to practise.

[010-100]Often one of the girls asked her to stay in town all night for some

[010-101]lecture or entertainment. She could take the violin with her, practise,

[010-102]and secure help. Her skill was so great that the leader of the

[010-103]orchestra offered to give her lessons if she would play to pay for

[010-104]them, so her progress was rapid in technical work. But from the first

[010-105]day the instrument became hers, with perfect faith that she could play

[010-106]as her father did, she spent half her practice time in imitating the

[010-107]sounds of all outdoors and improvising the songs her happy heart sang

[010-108]in those days.

[010-109]So the first year went, and the second and third were a repetition; but

[010-110]the fourth was different, for that was the close of the course, ending

[010-111]with graduation and all its attendant ceremonies and expenses. To

[010-112]Elnora these appeared mountain high. She had hoarded every cent,

[010-113]thinking twice before she parted with a penny, but teaching natural

[010-114]history in the grades had taken time from her studies in school which

[010-115]must be made up outside. She was a conscientious student, ranking first

[010-116]in most of her classes, and standing high in all branches. Her interest

[010-117]in her violin had grown with the years. She went to school early and

[010-118]practised half an hour in the little room adjoining the stage, while

[010-119]the orchestra gathered. She put in a full hour at noon, and remained

[010-120]another half hour at night. She carried the violin to Sintons’ on

[010-121]Saturday and practised all the time she could there, while Margaret

[010-122]watched the road to see that [[katharine-comstock|Mrs. Comstock]] was not coming. She had

[010-123]become so skilful that it was a delight to hear her play music of any

[010-124]composer, but when she played her own, that was joy inexpressible, for

[010-125]then the wind blew, the water rippled, [[limberlost-as-symbol|the Limberlost]] sang her songs of

[010-126]sunshine, shadow, black storm, and white night.

[010-127]Since her dream Elnora had regarded her mother with peculiar

[010-128]tenderness. The girl realized, in a measure, what had happened. She

[010-129]avoided anything that possibly could stir bitter memories or draw

[010-130]deeper a line on the hard, white face. This cost many sacrifices, much

[010-131]work, and sometimes delayed progress, but the horror of that awful

[010-132]dream remained with Elnora. She worked her way cheerfully, doing all

[010-133]she could to interest her mother in things that happened in school, in

[010-134]the city, and by carrying books that were entertaining from the public

[010-135]library.

[010-136]Three years had changed Elnora from the girl of sixteen to the very

[010-137]verge of womanhood. She had grown tall, round, and her face had the

[010-138]loveliness of perfect complexion, beautiful eyes and hair and an added

[010-139]touch from within that might have been called comprehension. It was a

[010-140]compound of [[work-and-self-reliance|self-reliance]], hard knocks, heart hunger, unceasing work,

[010-141]and generosity. There was no form of suffering with which the girl

[010-142]could not sympathize, no work she was afraid to attempt, no subject she

[010-143]had investigated she did not understand. These things combined to

[010-144]produce a breadth and depth of character altogether unusual. She was so

[010-145]absorbed in her classes and her music that she had not been able to

[010-146]gather many specimens. When she realized this and hunted assiduously,

[010-147]she soon found that changing natural conditions had affected such work.

[010-148]Men all around were clearing available land. The trees fell wherever

[010-149]corn would grow. The swamp was broken by several gravel roads, dotted

[010-150]in places around the edge with little frame houses, and the machinery

[010-151]of oil wells; one especially low place around the region of [[freckles|Freckles]]’s

[010-152]room was nearly all that remained of the original. Wherever the trees

[010-153]fell the moisture dried, the creeks ceased to flow, the river ran low,

[010-154]and at times the bed was dry. With unbroken sweep the winds of the west

[010-155]came, gathering force with every mile and howled and raved; threatening

[010-156]to tear the shingles from the roof, blowing the surface from the soil

[010-157]in clouds of fine dust and rapidly changing everything. From coming in

[010-158]with two or three dozen rare moths in a day, in three years’ time

[010-159]Elnora had grown to be delighted with finding two or three. Big pursy

[010-160]caterpillars could not be picked from their favourite bushes, when

[010-161]there were no bushes. Dragonflies would not hover over dry places, and

[010-162]butterflies became scarce in proportion to the flowers, while no land

[010-163]yields over three crops of Indian relics.

[010-164]All the time the expense of books, [[social-class-and-appearance|clothing]] and incidentals had

[010-165]continued. Elnora added to her bank account whenever she could, and

[010-166]drew out when she was compelled, but she omitted the important feature

[010-167]of calling for a balance. So, one early spring morning in the last

[010-168]quarter of the fourth year, she almost fainted when she learned that

[010-169]her funds were gone. Commencement with its extra expense was coming,

[010-170]she had no money, and very few cocoons to open in June, which would be

[010-171]too late. She had one collection for the [[bird-woman|Bird Woman]] complete to a pair

[010-172]of Imperialis moths, and that was her only asset. On the day she added

[010-173]these big Yellow Emperors she had been promised a check for three

[010-174]hundred dollars, but she would not get it until these specimens were

[010-175]secured. She remembered that she never had found an Emperor before

[010-176]June.

[010-177]Moreover, that sum was for her first year in college. Then she would be

[010-178]of age, and she meant to sell enough of her share of her father’s land

[010-179]to finish. She knew her mother would oppose her bitterly in that, for

[010-180]Mrs. Comstock had clung to every acre and tree that belonged to her

[010-181]husband. Her land was almost complete forest where her neighbours owned

[010-182]cleared farms, dotted with wells that every hour sucked oil from

[010-183]beneath her holdings, but she was too absorbed in the grief she nursed

[010-184]to know or care. The Brushwood road and the redredging of the big

[010-185]Limberlost ditch had been more than she could pay from her income, and

[010-186]she had trembled before the wicket as she asked the banker if she had

[010-187]funds to pay it, and wondered why he laughed when he assured her she

[010-188]had. For Mrs. Comstock had spent no time on compounding interest, and

[010-189]never added the sums she had been depositing through nearly twenty

[010-190]years. Now she thought her funds were almost gone, and every day she

[010-191]worried over expenses. She could see no reason in going through the

[010-192]forms of graduation when pupils had all in their heads that was

[010-193]required to graduate. Elnora knew she had to have her diploma in order

[010-194]to enter the college she wanted to attend, but she did not dare utter

[010-195]the word, until [[education-as-liberation|high school]] was finished, for, instead of softening as

[010-196]she hoped her mother had begun to do, she seemed to remain very much

[010-197]the same.

[010-198]When the girl reached the swamp she sat on a log and thought over the

[010-199]expense she was compelled to meet. Every member of her particular set

[010-200]was having a large photograph taken to exchange with the others. Elnora

[010-201]loved these girls and boys, and to say she could not have their

[010-202]pictures to keep was more than she could endure. Each one would give to

[010-203]all the others a handsome graduation present. She knew they would

[010-204]prepare gifts for her whether she could make a present in return or

[010-205]not. Then it was the custom for each graduating class to give a great

[010-206]entertainment and use the funds to present the school with a statue for

[010-207]the entrance hall. Elnora had been cast for and was practising a part

[010-208]in that performance. She was expected to furnish her dress and personal

[010-209]necessities. She had been told that she must have a green gauze dress,

[010-210]and where was it to come from?

[010-211]Every girl of the class would have three beautiful new frocks for

[010-212]Commencement: one for the baccalaureate sermon, another, which could be

[010-213]plain, for graduation exercises, and a handsome one for the banquet and

[010-214]ball. Elnora faced the past three years and wondered how she could have

[010-215]spent so much money and not kept account of it. She did not realize

[010-216]where it had gone. She did not know what she could do now. She thought

[010-217]over the photographs, and at last settled that question to her

[010-218]satisfaction. She studied longer over the gifts, ten handsome ones

[010-219]there must be, and at last decided she could arrange for them. The

[010-220]green dress came first. The lights would be dim in the scene, and the

[010-221]setting deep woods. She could manage that. She simply could not have

[010-222]three dresses. She would have to get a very simple one for the sermon

[010-223]and do the best she could for graduation. Whatever she got for that

[010-224]must be made with a guimpe that could be taken out to make it a little

[010-225]more festive for the ball. But where could she get even two pretty

[010-226]dresses?

[010-227]The only hope she could see was to break into the collection of the man

[010-228]from India, sell some moths, and try to replace them in June. But in

[010-229]her soul she knew that never would do. No June ever brought just the

[010-230]things she hoped it would. If she spent the college money she knew she

[010-231]could not replace it. If she did not, the only way was to secure a room

[010-232]in the grades and teach a year. Her work there had been so appreciated

[010-233]that Elnora felt with the recommendation she knew she could get from

[010-234]the superintendent and teachers she could secure a position. She was

[010-235]sure she could pass the examinations easily. She had once gone on

[010-236]Saturday, taken them and secured a license for a year before she left

[010-237]the Brushwood school.

[010-238]She wanted to start to college when the other girls were going. If she

[010-239]could make the first year alone, she could manage the remainder. But

[010-240]make that first year herself, she must. Instead of selling any of her

[010-241]collection, she must hunt as she never before had hunted and find a

[010-242]Yellow Emperor. She had to have it, that was all. Also, she had to have

[010-243]those dresses. She thought of Wesley and dismissed it. She thought of

[010-244]the Bird Woman, and knew she could not tell her. She thought of every

[010-245]way in which she ever had hoped to earn money and realized that with

[010-246]the play, committee meetings, practising, and final examinations she

[010-247]scarcely had time to live, much less to do more than the work required

[010-248]for her pictures and gifts. Again Elnora was in trouble, and this time

[010-249]it seemed the worst of all.

[010-250]It was dark when she arose and went home.

[010-251]“Mother,” she said, “I have a piece of news that is decidedly not

[010-252]cheerful.”

[010-253]“Then keep it to yourself!” said Mrs. Comstock. “I think I have enough

[010-254]to bear without a great girl like you piling trouble on me.”

[010-255]“My money is all gone!” said Elnora.

[010-256]“Well, did you think it would last forever? It’s been a marvel to me

[010-257]that it’s held out as well as it has, the way you’ve dressed and gone.”

[010-258]“I don’t think I’ve spent any that I was not compelled to,” said

[010-259]Elnora. “I’ve dressed on just as little as I possibly could to keep

[010-260]going. I am heartsick. I thought I had over fifty dollars to put me

[010-261]through Commencement, but they tell me it is all gone.”

[010-262]“Fifty dollars! To put you through Commencement! What on earth are you

[010-263]proposing to do?”

[010-264]“The same as the rest of them, in the very cheapest way possible.”

[010-265]“And what might that be?”

[010-266]Elnora omitted the photographs, the gifts and the play. She told only

[010-267]of the sermon, graduation exercises, and the ball.

[010-268]“Well, I wouldn’t trouble myself over that,” sniffed Mrs. Comstock. “If

[010-269]you want to go to a sermon, put on the dress you always use for

[010-270]meeting. If you need white for the exercises wear the new dress you got

[010-271]last spring. As for the ball, the best thing for you to do is to stay a

[010-272]mile away from such folly. In my opinion you’d best bring home your

[010-273]books, and quit right now. You can’t be fixed like the rest of them,

[010-274]don’t be so foolish as to run into it. Just stay here and let these

[010-275]last few days go. You can’t learn enough more to be of any account.”

[010-276]“But, mother,” gasped Elnora. “You don’t understand!”

[010-277]“Oh, yes, I do!” said Mrs. Comstock. “I understand perfectly. So long

[010-278]as the money lasted, you held up your head, and went sailing without

[010-279]even explaining how you got it from the stuff you gathered. Goodness

[010-280]knows I couldn’t see. But now it’s gone, you come whining to me. What

[010-281]have I got? Have you forgot that the ditch and the road completely

[010-282]strapped me? I haven’t any money. There’s nothing for you to do but get

[010-283]out of it.”

[010-284]“I can’t!” said Elnora desperately. “I’ve gone on too long. It would

[010-285]make a break in everything. They wouldn’t let me have my diploma!”

[010-286]“What’s the difference? You’ve got the stuff in your head. I wouldn’t

[010-287]give a rap for a scrap of paper. That don’t mean anything!”

[010-288]“But I’ve worked four years for it, and I can’t enter—I ought to have

[010-289]it to help me get a school, when I want to teach. If I don’t have my

[010-290]grades to show, people will think I quit because I couldn’t pass my

[010-291]examinations. I must have my diploma!”

[010-292]“Then get it!” said Mrs. Comstock.

[010-293]“The only way is to graduate with the others.”

[010-294]“Well, graduate if you are bound to!”

[010-295]“But I can’t, unless I have things enough like the class, that I don’t

[010-296]look as I did that first day.”

[010-297]“Well, please remember I didn’t get you into this, and I can’t get you

[010-298]out. You are set on having your own way. Go on, and have it, and see

[010-299]how you like it!”

[010-300]Elnora went upstairs and did not come down again that night, which her

[010-301]mother called pouting.

[010-302]“I’ve thought all night,” said the girl at breakfast, “and I can’t see

[010-303]any way but to borrow the money of Uncle Wesley and pay it back from

[010-304]some that the Bird Woman will owe me, when I get one more specimen. But

[010-305]that means that I can’t go to—that I will have to teach this winter, if

[010-306]I can get a city grade or a country school.”

[010-307]“Just you dare go dinging after Wesley Sinton for money,” cried Mrs.

[010-308]Comstock. “You won’t do any such a thing!”

[010-309]“I can’t see any other way. I’ve got to have the money!”

[010-310]“Quit, I tell you!”

[010-311]“I can’t quit!—I’ve gone too far!”

[010-312]“Well then, let me get your clothes, and you can pay me back.”

[010-313]“But you said you had no money!”

[010-314]“Maybe I can borrow some at the bank. Then you can return it when the

[010-315]Bird Woman pays you.”

[010-316]“All right,” said Elnora. “I don’t need expensive things. Just some

[010-317]kind of a pretty cheap white dress for the sermon, and a white one a

[010-318]little better than I had last summer, for Commencement and the ball. I

[010-319]can use the white gloves and shoes I got myself for last year, and you

[010-320]can get my dress made at the same place you did that one. They have my

[010-321]measurements, and do perfect work. Don’t get expensive things. It will

[010-322]be warm so I can go bareheaded.”

[010-323]Then she started to school, but was so tired and discouraged she

[010-324]scarcely could walk. Four years’ plans going in one day! For she felt

[010-325]that if she did not start to college that fall she never would. Instead

[010-326]of feeling relieved at her mother’s offer, she was almost too ill to go

[010-327]on. For the thousandth time she groaned: “Oh, why didn’t I keep account

[010-328]of my money?”

[010-329]After that the days passed so swiftly she scarcely had time to think,

[010-330]but several trips her mother made to town, and the assurance that

[010-331]everything was all right, satisfied Elnora. She worked very hard to

[010-332]pass good final examinations and perfect herself for the play. For two

[010-333]days she had remained in town with the Bird Woman in order to spend

[010-334]more time practising and at her work.

[010-335]Often Margaret had asked about her dresses for graduation, and Elnora

[010-336]had replied that they were with a woman in the city who had made her a

[010-337]white dress for last year’s Commencement when she was a junior usher,

[010-338]and they would be all right. So Margaret, Wesley, and [[billy|Billy]] concerned

[010-339]themselves over what they would give her for a present. Margaret

[010-340]suggested a beautiful dress. Wesley said that would look to every one

[010-341]as if she needed dresses. The thing was to get a handsome gift like all

[010-342]the others would have. Billy wanted to present her a five-dollar gold

[010-343]piece to buy music for her violin. He was positive Elnora would like

[010-344]that best of anything.

[010-345]It was toward the close of the term when they drove to town one evening

[010-346]to try to settle this important question. They knew Mrs. Comstock had

[010-347]been alone several days, so they asked her to accompany them. She had

[010-348]been more lonely than she would admit, filled with unusual unrest

[010-349]besides, and so she was glad to go. But before they had driven a mile

[010-350]Billy had told that they were going to buy Elnora a graduation present,

[010-351]and Mrs. Comstock devoutly wished that she had remained at home. She

[010-352]was prepared when Billy asked: “Aunt Kate, what are you going to give

[010-353]Elnora when she graduates?”

[010-354]“Plenty to eat, a good bed to sleep in, and do all the work while she

[010-355]trollops,” answered Mrs. Comstock dryly.

[010-356]Billy reflected. “I guess all of them have that,” he said. “I mean a

[010-357]present you buy at the store, like Christmas?”

[010-358]“It is only rich folks who buy presents at stores,” replied Mrs.

[010-359]Comstock. “I can’t afford it.”

[010-360]“Well, we ain’t rich,” he said, “but we are going to buy Elnora

[010-361]something as fine as the rest of them have if we sell a corner of the

[010-362]farm. Uncle Wesley said so.”

[010-363]“A fool and his land are soon parted,” said Mrs. Comstock tersely.

[010-364]Wesley and Billy laughed, but Margaret did not enjoy the remark.

[010-365]While they were searching the stores for something on which all of them

[010-366]could decide, and Margaret was holding Billy to keep him from saying

[010-367]anything before Mrs. Comstock about the music on which he was

[010-368]determined, [[mr-brownlee|Mr. Brownlee]] met Wesley and stopped to shake hands.

[010-369]“I see your boy came out finely,” he said.

[010-370]“I don’t allow any boy anywhere to be finer than Billy,” said Wesley.

[010-371]“I guess you don’t allow any girl to surpass Elnora,” said Mr.

[010-372]Brownlee. “She comes home with [[ellen-brownlee|Ellen]] often, and my wife and I love her.

[010-373]Ellen says she is great in her part to-night. Best thing in the whole

[010-374]play! Of course, you are in to see it! If you haven’t reserved seats,

[010-375]you’d better start pretty soon, for [[onabasha-high-school|the high school]] auditorium only

[010-376]seats a thousand. It’s always jammed at these home-talent plays. All of

[010-377]us want to see how our children perform.”

[010-378]“Why yes, of course,” said the bewildered Wesley. Then he hurried to

[010-379]Margaret. “Say,” he said, “there is going to be a play at the high

[010-380]school to-night; and Elnora is in it. Why hasn’t she told us?”

[010-381]“I don’t know,” said Margaret, “but I’m going.”

[010-382]“So am I,” said Billy.

[010-383]“Me too!” said Wesley, “unless you think for some reason she doesn’t

[010-384]want us. Looks like she would have told us if she had. I’m going to ask

[010-385]her mother.”

[010-386]“Yes, that’s what’s she’s been staying in town for,” said Mrs.

[010-387]Comstock. “It’s some sort of a swindle to raise money for her class to

[010-388]buy some silly thing to stick up in the school house hall to remember

[010-389]them by. I don’t know whether it’s now or next week, but there’s

[010-390]something of the kind to be done.”

[010-391]“Well, it’s to-night,” said Wesley, “and we are going. It’s my treat,

[010-392]and we’ve got to hurry or we won’t get in. There are reserved seats,

[010-393]and we have none, so it’s the gallery for us, but I don’t care so I get

[010-394]to take one good peep at Elnora.”

[010-395]“S’pose she plays?” whispered Margaret in his ear.

[010-396]“Aw, tush! She couldn’t!” said Wesley.

[010-397]“Well, she’s been doing it three years in the orchestra, and working

[010-398]like a slave at it.”

[010-399]“Oh, well that’s different. She’s in the play to-night. Brownlee told

[010-400]me so. Come on, quick! We’ll drive and hitch closest place we can find

[010-401]to the building.”

[010-402]Margaret went in the excitement of the moment, but she was troubled.

[010-403]When they reached the building Wesley tied the team to a railing and

[010-404]Billy sprang out to help Margaret. Mrs. Comstock sat still.

[010-405]“Come on, Kate,” said Wesley, reaching his hand.

[010-406]“I’m not going anywhere,” said Mrs. Comstock, settling comfortably back

[010-407]against the cushions.

[010-408]All of them begged and pleaded, but it was no use. Not an inch would

[010-409]Mrs. Comstock budge. The night was warm and the carriage comfortable,

[010-410]the horses were securely hitched. She did not care to see what idiotic

[010-411]thing a pack of school children were doing, she would wait until the

[010-412]Sintons returned. Wesley told her it might be two hours, and she said

[010-413]she did not care if it were four, so they left her.

[010-414]“Did you ever see such——?”

[010-415]“Cookies!” cried Billy.

[010-416]“Such blamed stubbornness in all your life?” demanded Wesley. “Won’t

[010-417]come to see as fine a girl as Elnora in a stage performance. Why, I

[010-418]wouldn’t miss it for fifty dollars!

[010-419]“I think it’s a blessing she didn’t,” said Margaret placidly. “I begged

[010-420]unusually hard so she wouldn’t. I’m scared of my life for fear Elnora

[010-421]will play.”

[010-422]They found seats near the door where they could see fairly well. Billy

[010-423]stood at the back of the hall and had a good view. By and by, a great

[010-424]volume of sound welled from the orchestra, but Elnora was not playing.

[010-425]“Told you so!” said Sinton. “Got a notion to go out and see if Kate

[010-426]won’t come now. She can take my seat, and I’ll stand with Billy.”

[010-427]“You sit still!” said Margaret emphatically. “This is not over yet.”

[010-428]So Wesley remained in his seat. The play opened and progressed very

[010-429]much as all high school plays have gone for the past fifty years. But

[010-430]Elnora did not appear in any of the scenes.

[010-431]Out in the warm summer night a sour, grim woman nursed an aching heart

[010-432]and tried to justify herself. The effort irritated her intensely. She

[010-433]felt that she could not afford the things that were being done. The old

[010-434]fear of losing the land that she and [[robert-comstock|Robert Comstock]] had purchased and

[010-435]started clearing was strong upon her. She was thinking of him, how she

[010-436]needed him, when the orchestra music poured from the open windows near

[010-437]her. Mrs. Comstock endured it as long as she could, and then slipped

[010-438]from the carriage and fled down the street.

[010-439]She did not know how far she went or how long she stayed, but

[010-440]everything was still, save an occasional raised voice when she wandered

[010-441]back. She stood looking at the building. Slowly she entered the wide

[010-442]gates and followed up the walk. Elnora had been coming here for almost

[010-443]four years. When Mrs. Comstock reached the door she looked inside. The

[010-444]wide hall was lighted with electricity, and the statuary and the

[010-445]decorations of the walls did not seem like pieces of foolishness. The

[010-446]marble appeared pure, white, and the big pictures most interesting. She

[010-447]walked the length of the hall and slowly read the titles of the statues

[010-448]and the names of the pupils who had donated them. She speculated on

[010-449]where the piece Elnora’s class would buy could be placed to advantage.

[010-450]Then she wondered if they were having a large enough audience to buy

[010-451]marble. She liked it better than the bronze, but it looked as if it

[010-452]cost more. How white the broad stairway was! Elnora had been climbing

[010-453]those stairs for years and never told her they were marble. Of course,

[010-454]she thought they were wood. Probably the upper hall was even grander

[010-455]than this. She went over to the fountain, took a drink, climbed to the

[010-456]first landing and looked around her, and then without thought to the

[010-457]second. There she came opposite the wide-open doors and the entrance to

[010-458]the auditorium packed with people and a crowd standing outside. When

[010-459]they noticed a tall woman with white face and hair and black dress, one

[010-460]by one they stepped a little aside, so that Mrs. Comstock could see the

[010-461]stage. It was covered with curtains, and no one was doing anything.

[010-462]Just as she turned to go a sound so faint that every one leaned forward

[010-463]and listened, drifted down the auditorium. It was difficult to tell

[010-464]just what it was; after one instant half the audience looked toward the

[010-465]windows, for it seemed only a breath of wind rustling freshly opened

[010-466]leaves; merely a hint of stirring air.

[010-467]Then the curtains were swept aside swiftly. The stage had been

[010-468]transformed into a lovely little corner of creation, where trees and

[010-469]flowers grew and moss carpeted the earth. A soft wind blew and it was

[010-470]the gray of dawn. Suddenly a robin began to sing, then a song sparrow

[010-471]joined him, and then several orioles began talking at once. The light

[010-472]grew stronger, the dew drops trembled, flower perfume began to creep

[010-473]out to the audience; the air moved the branches gently and a rooster

[010-474]crowed. Then all the scene was shaken with a babel of bird notes in

[010-475]which you could hear a cardinal whistling, and a blue finch piping.

[010-476]Back somewhere among the high branches a dove cooed and then a horse

[010-477]neighed shrilly. That set a blackbird crying, “T’check,” and a whole

[010-478]flock answered it. The crows began to caw and a lamb bleated. Then the

[010-479]grosbeaks, chats, and vireos had something to say, and the sun rose

[010-480]higher, the light grew stronger and the breeze rustled the treetops

[010-481]loudly; a cow bawled and the whole barnyard answered. The guineas were

[010-482]clucking, the turkey gobbler strutting, the hens calling, the chickens

[010-483]cheeping, the light streamed down straight overhead and the bees began

[010-484]to hum. The air stirred strongly, and away in an unseen field a reaper

[010-485]clacked and rattled through ripening wheat while the driver whistled.

[010-486]An uneasy mare whickered to her colt, the colt answered, and the light

[010-487]began to decline. Miles away a rooster crowed for twilight, and dusk

[010-488]was coming down. Then a catbird and a brown thrush sang against a

[010-489]grosbeak and a hermit thrush. The air was tremulous with heavenly

[010-490]notes, the lights went out in the hall, dusk swept across the stage, a

[010-491]cricket sang and a katydid answered, and a wood pewee wrung the heart

[010-492]with its lonesome cry. Then a night hawk screamed, a whip-poor-will

[010-493]complained, a belated killdeer swept the sky, and the night wind sang a

[010-494]louder song. A little screech owl tuned up in the distance, a barn owl

[010-495]replied, and a great horned owl drowned both their voices. The moon

[010-496]shone and the scene was warm with mellow light. The bird voices died

[010-497]and soft exquisite melody began to swell and roll. In the centre of the

[010-498]stage, piece by piece the grasses, mosses and leaves dropped from an

[010-499]embankment, the foliage softly blew away, while plainer and plainer

[010-500]came the outlines of a lovely girl figure draped in soft clinging

[010-501]green. In her shower of bright hair a few green leaves and white

[010-502]blossoms clung, and they fell over her robe down to her feet. Her white

[010-503]throat and arms were bare, she leaned forward a little and swayed with

[010-504]the melody, her eyes fast on the clouds above her, her lips parted, a

[010-505]pink tinge of exercise in her cheeks as she drew her bow. She played as

[010-506]only a peculiar chain of circumstances puts it in the power of a very

[010-507]few to play. All nature had grown still, the violin sobbed, sang,

[010-508]danced and quavered on alone, no voice in particular; the soul of the

[010-509]melody of all nature combined in one great outpouring.

[010-510]At the doorway, a white-faced woman endured it as long as she could and

[010-511]then fell senseless. The men nearest carried her down the hall to the

[010-512]fountain, revived her, and then placed her in the carriage to which she

[010-513]directed them. The girl played on and never knew. When she finished,

[010-514]the uproar of applause sounded a block down the street, but the

[010-515]half-senseless woman scarcely realized what it meant. Then the girl

[010-516]came to the front of the stage, bowed, and lifting the violin she

[010-517]played her conception of an invitation to dance. Every living soul

[010-518]within sound of her notes strained their nerves to sit still and let

[010-519]only their hearts dance with her. When that began the woman ran toward

[010-520]the country. She never stopped until the carriage overtook her half-way

[010-521]to her cabin. She said she had grown tired of sitting, and walked on

[010-522]ahead. That night she asked Billy to remain with her and sleep on

[010-523]Elnora’s bed. Then she pitched headlong upon her own, and suffered

[010-524]agony of soul such as she never before had known. The swamp had sent

[010-525]back the soul of her loved dead and put it into the body of the

[010-526]daughter she resented, and it was almost more than she could endure and

[010-527]live.
