---
description: "WHEREIN ELNORA GRADUATES, AND FRECKLES AND THE ANGEL SEND GIFTS"
id: ch11
label: "Chapter 11: Wherein Elnora Meets Philip Ammon and a New Interest Comes Into Her Life"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# CHAPTER XI

[011-001]WHEREIN ELNORA GRADUATES, AND FRECKLES AND THE ANGEL SEND GIFTS

[011-002]That was Friday night. [[elnora-comstock|Elnora]] came home Saturday morning and began

[011-003]work. [[katharine-comstock|Mrs. Comstock]] asked no questions, and the girl only told her that

[011-004]the audience had been large enough to more than pay for the piece of

[011-005]statuary the class had selected for the hall. Then she inquired about

[011-006]her dresses and was told they would be ready for her. She had been

[011-007]invited to go to the [[bird-woman|Bird Woman]]’s to prepare for both the sermon and

[011-008]Commencement exercises. Since there was so much practising to do, it

[011-009]had been arranged that she should remain there from the night of the

[011-010]sermon until after she was graduated. If Mrs. Comstock decided to

[011-011]attend she was to drive in with the Sintons. When Elnora begged her to

[011-012]come she said she cared nothing about such silliness.

[011-013]It was almost time for Wesley to come to take Elnora to the city, when

[011-014]fresh from her bath, and dressed to her outer garment, she stood with

[011-015]expectant face before her mother and cried: “Now my dress, mother!”

[011-016]Mrs. Comstock was pale as she replied: “It’s on my bed. Help yourself.”

[011-017]Elnora opened the door and stepped into her mother’s room with never a

[011-018]misgiving. Since the night Margaret and Wesley had brought her

[011-019][[social-class-and-appearance|clothing]], when she first started to school, her mother had selected all

[011-020]of her dresses, with Mrs. Sinton’s help made most of them, and Elnora

[011-021]had paid the bills. The white dress of the previous spring was the

[011-022]first made at a dressmaker’s. She had worn that as junior usher at

[011-023]Commencement; but her mother had selected the material, had it made,

[011-024]and it had fitted perfectly and had been suitable in every way. So with

[011-025]her heart at rest on that point, Elnora hurried to the bed to find only

[011-026]her last summer’s white dress, freshly washed and ironed. For an

[011-027]instant she stared at it, then she picked up the garment, looked at the

[011-028]bed beneath it, and her gaze slowly swept the room.

[011-029]It was unfamiliar. Perhaps this was the third time she had been in it

[011-030]since she was a very small child. Her eyes ranged over the beautiful

[011-031]walnut dresser, the tall bureau, the big chest, inside which she never

[011-032]had seen, and the row of masculine attire hanging above it. Somewhere a

[011-033]dainty lawn or mull dress simply must be hanging: but it was not.

[011-034]Elnora dropped on the chest because she felt too weak to stand. In less

[011-035]than two hours she must be in the church, at [[onabasha|Onabasha]]. She could not

[011-036]wear a last year’s washed dress. She had nothing else. She leaned

[011-037]against the wall and her father’s overcoat brushed her face. She caught

[011-038]the folds and clung to it with all her might.

[011-039]“Oh father! Father!” she moaned. “I need you! I don’t believe you would

[011-040]have done this!” At last she opened the door.

[011-041]“I can’t find my dress,” she said.

[011-042]“Well, as it’s the only one there I shouldn’t think it would be much

[011-043]trouble.”

[011-044]“You mean for me to wear an old washed dress to-night?”

[011-045]“It’s a good dress. There isn’t a hole in it! There’s no reason on

[011-046]earth why you shouldn’t wear it.”

[011-047]“Except that I will not,” said Elnora. “Didn’t you provide any dress

[011-048]for Commencement, either?”

[011-049]“If you soil that to-night, I’ve plenty of time to wash it again.”

[011-050]Wesley’s voice called from the gate.

[011-051]“In a minute,” answered Elnora.

[011-052]She ran upstairs and in an incredibly short time came down wearing one

[011-053]of her gingham school dresses. Her face cold and hard, she passed her

[011-054]mother and went into the night. Half an hour later Margaret and [[billy|Billy]]

[011-055]stopped for Mrs. Comstock with the carriage. She had determined fully

[011-056]that she would not go before they called. With the sound of their

[011-057]voices a sort of horror of being left seized her, so she put on her

[011-058]hat, locked the door and went out to them.

[011-059]“How did Elnora look?” inquired Margaret anxiously.

[011-060]“Like she always does,” answered Mrs. Comstock curtly.

[011-061]“I do hope her dresses are as pretty as the others,” said Margaret.

[011-062]“None of them will have prettier faces or nicer ways.”

[011-063]Wesley was waiting before [[onabasha-church|the big church]] to take care of the team. As

[011-064]they stood watching the people enter the building, Mrs. Comstock felt

[011-065]herself growing ill. When they went inside among the lights, saw the

[011-066]flower-decked stage, and the masses of finely dressed people, she grew

[011-067]no better. She could hear Margaret and Billy softly commenting on what

[011-068]was being done.

[011-069]“That first chair in the very front row is Elnora’s,” exulted Billy,

[011-070]“cos she’s got the highest grades, and so she gets to lead the

[011-071]procession to the platform.”

[011-072]“The first chair!” “Lead the procession!” Mrs. Comstock was

[011-073]dumbfounded. The notes of the pipe organ began to fill the building in

[011-074]a slow rolling march. Would Elnora lead the procession in a gingham

[011-075]dress? Or would she be absent and her chair vacant on this great

[011-076]occasion? For now, Mrs. Comstock could see that it was a great

[011-077]occasion. Every one would remember how Elnora had played a few nights

[011-078]before, and they would miss her and pity her. Pity? Because she had no

[011-079]one to care for her. Because she was worse off than if she had no

[011-080]mother. For the first time in her life, Mrs. Comstock began to study

[011-081]herself as she would appear to others. Every time a junior girl came

[011-082]fluttering down the aisle, leading some one to a seat, and Mrs.

[011-083]Comstock saw a beautiful white dress pass, a wave of positive illness

[011-084]swept over her. What had she done? What would become of Elnora?

[011-085]As Elnora rode to the city, she answered Wesley’s questions in

[011-086]monosyllables so that he thought she was nervous or rehearsing her

[011-087]speech and did not care to talk. Several times the girl tried to tell

[011-088]him and realized that if she said the first word it would bring

[011-089]uncontrollable tears. The Bird Woman opened the screen and stared

[011-090]unbelievingly.

[011-091]“Why, I thought you would be ready; you are so late!” she said. “If you

[011-092]have waited to dress here, we must hurry.”

[011-093]“I have nothing to put on,” said Elnora.

[011-094]In bewilderment the Bird Woman drew her inside.

[011-095]“Did—did—” she faltered. “Did you think you would wear that?”

[011-096]“No. I thought I would telephone [[ellen-brownlee|Ellen]] that there had been an accident

[011-097]and I could not come. I don’t know yet how to explain. I’m too sick to

[011-098]think. Oh, do you suppose I can get something made by Tuesday, so that

[011-099]I can graduate?”

[011-100]“Yes; and you’ll get something on you to-night, so that you can lead

[011-101]your class, as you have done for four years. Go to my room and take off

[011-102]that gingham, quickly. Anna, drop everything, and come help me.”

[011-103]The Bird Woman ran to the telephone and called Ellen [[mr-brownlee|Brownlee]].

[011-104]“Elnora has had an accident. She will be a little late,” she said. “You

[011-105]have got to make them wait. Have them play extra music before the

[011-106]march.”

[011-107]Then she turned to the maid. “Tell Benson to have the carriage at the

[011-108]gate, just as soon as he can get it there. Then come to my room. Bring

[011-109]the thread box from the sewing-room, that roll of wide white ribbon on

[011-110]the cutting table, and gather all the white pins from every dresser in

[011-111]the house. But first come with me a minute.”

[011-112]“I want that trunk with the [[angel|Swamp Angel]]’s stuff in it, from the cedar

[011-113]closet,” she panted as they reached the top of the stairs.

[011-114]They hurried down the hall together and dragged the big trunk to the

[011-115]Bird Woman’s room. She opened it and began tossing out white stuff.

[011-116]“How lucky that she left these things!” she cried. “Here are white

[011-117]shoes, gloves, stockings, fans, everything!”

[011-118]“I am all ready but a dress,” said Elnora.

[011-119]The Bird Woman began opening closets and pulling out drawers and boxes.

[011-120]“I think I can make it this way,” she said.

[011-121]She snatched up a creamy lace yoke with long sleeves that recently had

[011-122]been made for her and held it out. Elnora slipped into it, and the Bird

[011-123]Woman began smoothing out wrinkles and sewing in pins. It fitted very

[011-124]well with a little lapping in the back. Next, from among the Angel’s

[011-125]clothing she caught up a white silk waist with low neck and elbow

[011-126]sleeves, and Elnora put it on. It was large enough, but distressingly

[011-127]short in the waist, for the Angel had worn it at a party when she was

[011-128]sixteen. The Bird Woman loosened the sleeves and pushed them to a puff

[011-129]on the shoulders, catching them in places with pins. She began on the

[011-130]wide draping of the yoke, fastening it front, back and at each

[011-131]shoulder. She pulled down the waist and pinned it. Next came a soft

[011-132]white dress skirt of her own. By pinning her waist band quite four

[011-133]inches above Elnora’s, the Bird Woman could secure a perfect Empire

[011-134]sweep, with the clinging silk. Then she began with the wide white

[011-135]ribbon that was to trim a new frock for herself, bound it three times

[011-136]around the high waist effect she had managed, tied the ends in a knot

[011-137]and let them fall to the floor in a beautiful sash.

[011-138]“I want four white roses, each with two or three leaves,” she cried.

[011-139]Anna ran to bring them, while the Bird Woman added pins.

[011-140]“Elnora,” she said, “forgive me, but tell me truly. Is your mother so

[011-141]poor as to make this necessary?”

[011-142]“No,” answered Elnora. “Next year I am heir to my share of over three

[011-143]hundred acres of land covered with almost as valuable timber as was in

[011-144][[limberlost-as-symbol|the Limberlost]]. We adjoin it. There could be thirty oil wells drilled

[011-145]that would yield to us the thousands our neighbours are draining from

[011-146]under us, and the bare land is worth over one hundred dollars an acre

[011-147]for farming. She is not poor, she is—I don’t know what she is. A great

[011-148]trouble soured and warped her. It made her peculiar. She does not in

[011-149]the least understand, but it is because she doesn’t care to, instead of

[011-150]ignorance. She does not——”

[011-151]Elnora stopped.

[011-152]“She is—is different,” finished the girl.

[011-153]Anna came with the roses. The Bird Woman set one on the front of the

[011-154]draped yoke, one on each shoulder and the last among the bright masses

[011-155]of brown hair. Then she turned the girl facing the tall mirror.

[011-156]“Oh!” panted Elnora. “You are a genius! Why, I will look as well as any

[011-157]of them.”

[011-158]“Thank goodness for that!” cried the Bird Woman. “If it wouldn’t do, I

[011-159]should have been ill. You are lovely; altogether lovely! Ordinarily I

[011-160]shouldn’t say that; but when I think of how you are carpentered, I’m

[011-161]admiring the result.”

[011-162]The organ began rolling out the march as they came in sight. Elnora

[011-163]took her place at the head of the procession, while every one wondered.

[011-164]Secretly they had hoped that she would be dressed well enough, that she

[011-165]would not appear poor and neglected. What this radiant young creature,

[011-166]gowned in the most recent style, her smooth skin flushed with

[011-167]excitement, and a rose-set coronet of red gold on her head, had to do

[011-168]with the girl they knew was difficult to decide. The signal was given

[011-169]and Elnora began the slow march across the vestry and down the aisle.

[011-170]The music welled softly, and Margaret began to sob without knowing why.

[011-171]Mrs. Comstock gripped her hands together and shut her eyes. It seemed

[011-172]an eternity to the suffering woman before Margaret caught her arm and

[011-173]whispered, “Oh, Kate! For any sake look at her! Here! The aisle

[011-174]across!”

[011-175]Mrs. Comstock opened her eyes and directing them where she was told,

[011-176]gazed intently, and slid down in her seat close to collapse. She was

[011-177]saved by Margaret’s tense clasp and her command: “Here! Idiot! Stop

[011-178]that!”

[011-179]In the blaze of light Elnora climbed the steps to the palm-embowered

[011-180]platform, crossed it and took her place. Sixty young men and women,

[011-181]each of them dressed the best possible, followed her. There were manly,

[011-182]fine-looking men in that class which Elnora led. There were girls of

[011-183]beauty and grace, but not one of them was handsomer or clothed in

[011-184]better taste than she.

[011-185]Billy thought the time never would come when Elnora would see him, but

[011-186]at last she met his eye, then Margaret and Wesley had faint signs of

[011-187]recognition in turn, but there was no softening of the girl’s face and

[011-188]no hint of a smile when she saw her mother.

[011-189]Heartsick, Katharine Comstock tried to prove to herself that she was

[011-190]justified in what she had done, but she could not. She tried to blame

[011-191]Elnora for not saying that she was to lead a procession and sit on a

[011-192]platform in the sight of hundreds of people; but that was impossible,

[011-193]for she realized that she would have scoffed and not understood if she

[011-194]had been told. Her heart pained until she suffered with every breath.

[011-195]When at last the exercises were over she climbed into the carriage and

[011-196]rode home without a word. She did not hear what Margaret and Billy were

[011-197]saying. She scarcely heard Wesley, who drove behind, when he told her

[011-198]that Elnora would not be home until Wednesday. Early the next morning

[011-199]Mrs. Comstock was on her way to Onabasha. She was waiting when the

[011-200]Brownlee store opened. She examined ready-made white dresses, but they

[011-201]had only one of the right size, and it was marked forty dollars. Mrs.

[011-202]Comstock did not hesitate over the price, but whether the dress would

[011-203]be suitable. She would have to ask Elnora. She inquired her way to the

[011-204]home of the Bird Woman and knocked.

[011-205]“Is Elnora Comstock here?” she asked the maid.

[011-206]“Yes, but she is still in bed. I was told to let her sleep as long as

[011-207]she would.”

[011-208]“Maybe I could sit here and wait,” said Mrs. Comstock. “I want to see

[011-209]about getting her a dress for to-morrow. I am her mother.”

[011-210]“Then you don’t need wait or worry,” said the girl cheerfully. “There

[011-211]are two women up in the sewing-room at work on a dress for her right

[011-212]now. It will be done in time, and it will be a beauty.”

[011-213]Mrs. Comstock turned and trudged back to [[limberlost-swamp|the Limberlost]]. The bitterness

[011-214]in her soul became a physical actuality, which water would not wash

[011-215]from her lips. She was too late! She was not needed. Another woman was

[011-216]mothering her girl. Another woman would prepare a beautiful dress such

[011-217]as Elnora had worn the previous night. The girl’s love and gratitude

[011-218]would go to her. Mrs. Comstock tried the old process of blaming some

[011-219]one else, but she felt no better. She nursed her grief as closely as

[011-220]ever in the long days of the girl’s absence. She brooded over Elnora’s

[011-221]possession of the forbidden violin and her ability to play it until the

[011-222]performance could not have been told from her father’s. She tried every

[011-223]refuge her mind could conjure, to quiet her heart and remove the fear

[011-224]that the girl never would come home again, but it persisted. Mrs.

[011-225]Comstock could neither eat nor sleep. She wandered around [[comstock-cabin|the cabin]] and

[011-226]garden. She kept far from [[limberlost-pool|the pool]] where [[robert-comstock|Robert Comstock]] had sunk from

[011-227]sight for she felt that it would entomb her also if Elnora did not come

[011-228]home Wednesday morning. The mother told herself that she would wait,

[011-229]but the waiting was as bitter as anything she ever had known.

[011-230]When Elnora awoke Monday another dress was in the hands of a seamstress

[011-231]and was soon fitted. It had belonged to the Angel, and was a soft white

[011-232]thing that with a little alteration would serve admirably for

[011-233]Commencement and the ball. All that day Elnora worked, helping prepare

[011-234]the auditorium for the exercises, rehearsing the march and the speech

[011-235]she was to make in behalf of the class. The following day was even

[011-236]busier. But her mind was at rest, for the dress was a soft delicate

[011-237]lace easy to change, and the marks of alteration impossible to detect.

[011-238]The Bird Woman had telephoned to Grand Rapids, explained the situation

[011-239]and asked the Angel if she might use it. The reply had been to give the

[011-240]girl the contents of the chest. When the Bird Woman told Elnora, tears

[011-241]filled her eyes.

[011-242]“I will write at once and thank her,” she said. “With all her beautiful

[011-243]gowns she does not need them, and I do. They will serve for me often,

[011-244]and be much finer than anything I could afford. It is lovely of her to

[011-245]give me the dress and of you to have it altered for me, as I never

[011-246]could.”

[011-247]The Bird Woman laughed. “I feel religious to-day,” she said. “You know

[011-248]the first and greatest rock of my salvation is ‘Do unto others.’ I’m

[011-249]only doing to you what there was no one to do for me when I was a girl

[011-250]very like you. Anna tells me your mother was here early this morning

[011-251]and that she came to see about getting you a dress.”

[011-252]“She is too late!” said Elnora coldly. “She had over a month to prepare

[011-253]my dresses, and I was to pay for them, so there is no excuse.”

[011-254]“Nevertheless, she is your mother,” said the Bird Woman, softly. “I

[011-255]think almost any kind of a mother must be better than none at all, and

[011-256]you say she has had great trouble.”

[011-257]“She loved my father and he died,” said Elnora. “The same thing, in

[011-258]quite as tragic a manner, has happened to thousands of other women, and

[011-259]they have gone on with calm faces and found happiness in life by loving

[011-260]others. There was something else I am afraid I never shall forget; this

[011-261]I know I shall not, but talking does not help. I must deliver my

[011-262]presents and photographs to the crowd. I have a picture and I made a

[011-263]present for you, too, if you would care for them.”

[011-264]“I shall love anything you give me,” said the Bird Woman. “I know you

[011-265]well enough to know that whatever you do will be beautiful.”

[011-266]Elnora was pleased over that, and as she tried on her dress for the

[011-267]last fitting she was really happy. She was lovely in the dainty gown:

[011-268]it would serve finely for the ball and many other like occasions, and

[011-269]it was her very own.

[011-270]The Bird Woman’s driver took Elnora in the carriage and she called on

[011-271]all the girls with whom she was especially intimate, and left her

[011-272]picture and the package containing her gift to them. By the time she

[011-273]returned parcels for her were arriving. Friends seemed to spring from

[011-274]everywhere. Almost every one she knew had some gift for her, while

[011-275]because they so loved her the members of her crowd had made her

[011-276]beautiful presents. There were books, vases, silver pieces,

[011-277]handkerchiefs, fans, boxes of flowers and candy. One big package

[011-278]settled the trouble at Sinton’s, for it contained a dainty dress from

[011-279]Margaret, a five-dollar gold piece, conspicuously labelled, “I earned

[011-280]this myself,” from Billy, with which to buy music; and a gorgeous

[011-281]cut-glass perfume bottle, it would have cost five dollars to fill with

[011-282]even a moderate-priced scent, from Wesley.

[011-283]In an expressed crate was a fine curly-maple dressing table, sent by

[011-284][[freckles|Freckles]]. The drawers were filled with wonderful toilet articles from

[011-285]the Angel. The Bird Woman added an embroidered linen cover and a small

[011-286]silver vase for a few flowers, so no girl of the class had finer gifts.

[011-287]Elnora laid her head on the table sobbing happily, and the Bird Woman

[011-288]was almost crying herself. [[professor-henley|Professor Henley]] sent a butterfly book, the

[011-289]grade rooms in which Elnora had taught gave her a set of volumes

[011-290]covering every phase of life afield, in the woods, and water. Elnora

[011-291]had no time to read so she carried one of these books around with her

[011-292]hugging it as she went. After she had gone to dress a queer-looking

[011-293]package was brought by a small boy who hopped on one foot as he handed

[011-294]it in and said: “Tell Elnora that is from her ma.”

[011-295]“Who are you?” asked the Bird Woman as she took the bundle.

[011-296]“I’m Billy!” announced the boy. “I gave her the five dollars. I earned

[011-297]it myself dropping corn, sticking onions, and pulling weeds. My, but

[011-298]you got to drop, and stick, and pull a lot before it’s five dollars’

[011-299]worth.”

[011-300]“Would you like to come in and see Elnora’s gifts?”

[011-301]“Yes, ma’am!” said Billy, trying to stand quietly.

[011-302]“Gee-mentley!” he gasped. “Does Elnora get all this?”

[011-303]“Yes.”

[011-304]“I bet you a thousand dollars I be first in my class when I graduate.

[011-305]Say, have the others got a lot more than Elnora?”

[011-306]“I think not.”

[011-307]“Well, [[wesley-sinton|Uncle Wesley]] said to find out if I could, and if she didn’t have

[011-308]as much as the rest, he’d buy till she did, if it took a hundred

[011-309]dollars. Say, you ought to know him! He’s just scrumptious! There ain’t

[011-310]anybody any where finer ’an he is. My, he’s grand!”

[011-311]“I’m very sure of it!” said the Bird Woman. “I’ve often heard Elnora

[011-312]say so.”

[011-313]“I bet you nobody can beat this!” he boasted. Then he stopped, thinking

[011-314]deeply. “I don’t know, though,” he began reflectively. “Some of them

[011-315]are awful rich; they got big families to give them things and wagon

[011-316]loads of friends, and I haven’t seen what they have. Now, maybe Elnora

[011-317]is getting left, after all!”

[011-318]“Don’t worry, Billy,” she said. “I will watch, and if I find Elnora is

[011-319]‘getting left’ I’ll buy her some more things myself. But I’m sure she

[011-320]is not. She has more beautiful gifts now than she will know what to do

[011-321]with, and others will come. Tell your Uncle Wesley his girl is

[011-322]bountifully remembered, very happy, and she sends her dearest love to

[011-323]all of you. Now you must go, so I can help her dress. You will be there

[011-324]to-night of course?”

[011-325]“Yes, sir-ee! She got me a seat, third row from the front, middle

[011-326]section, so I can see, and she’s going to wink at me, after she gets

[011-327]her speech off her mind. She kissed me, too! She’s a perfect lady,

[011-328]Elnora is. I’m going to marry her when I am big enough.”

[011-329]“Why isn’t that splendid!” laughed the Bird Woman as she hurried

[011-330]upstairs.

[011-331]“Dear!” she called. “Here is another gift for you.”

[011-332]Elnora was half disrobed as she took the package and, sitting on a

[011-333]couch, opened it. The Bird Woman bent over her and tested the fabric

[011-334]with her fingers.

[011-335]“Why, bless my soul!” she cried. “Hand-woven, hand-embroidered linen,

[011-336]fine as silk. It’s priceless! I haven’t seen such things in years. My

[011-337]mother had garments like those when I was a child, but my sisters had

[011-338]them cut up for collars, belts, and fancy waists while I was small.

[011-339]Look at the exquisite work!”

[011-340]“Where could it have come from?” cried Elnora.

[011-341]She shook out a petticoat, with a hand-wrought ruffle a foot deep, then

[011-342]an old-fashioned chemise the neck and sleeve work of which was

[011-343]elaborate and perfectly wrought. On the breast was pinned a note that

[011-344]she hastily opened.

[011-345]“I was married in these,” it read, “and I had intended to be buried in

[011-346]them, but perhaps it would be more sensible for you to graduate and get

[011-347]married in them yourself, if you like. Your mother.”

[011-348]“From my mother!” Wide-eyed, Elnora looked at the Bird Woman. “I never

[011-349]in my life saw the like. Mother does things I think I never can

[011-350]forgive, and when I feel hardest, she turns around and does something

[011-351]that makes me think she just must love me a little bit, after all. Any

[011-352]of the girls would give almost anything to graduate in hand-embroidered

[011-353]linen like that. Money can’t buy such things. And they came when I was

[011-354]thinking she didn’t care what became of me. Do you suppose she can be

[011-355]insane?”

[011-356]“Yes,” said the Bird Woman. “Wildly insane, if she does not love you

[011-357]and care what becomes of you.”

[011-358]Elnora arose and held the petticoat to her. “Will you look at it?” she

[011-359]cried. “Only imagine her not getting my dress ready, and then sending

[011-360]me such a petticoat as this! Ellen would pay fifty dollars for it and

[011-361]never blink. I suppose mother has had it all my life, and I never saw

[011-362]it before.”

[011-363]“Go take your bath and put on those things,” said the Bird Woman.

[011-364]“Forget everything and be happy. She is not insane. She is embittered.

[011-365]She did not understand how things would be. When she saw, she came at

[011-366]once to provide you a dress. This is her way of saying she is sorry she

[011-367]did not get the other. You notice she has not spent any money, so

[011-368]perhaps she is quite honest in saying she has none.”

[011-369]“Oh, she is honest!” said Elnora. “She wouldn’t care enough to tell an

[011-370]untruth. She’d say just how things were, no matter what happened.”

[011-371]Soon Elnora was ready for her dress. She never had looked so well as

[011-372]when she again headed the processional across the flower and palm

[011-373]decked stage of [[onabasha-high-school|the high school]] auditorium. As she sat there she could

[011-374]have reached over and dropped a rose she carried into the seat she had

[011-375]occupied that September morning when she entered the [[education-as-liberation|high school]]. She

[011-376]spoke the few words she had to say in behalf of the class beautifully,

[011-377]had the tiny wink ready for Billy, and the smile and nod of recognition

[011-378]for Wesley and Margaret. When at last she looked into the eyes of a

[011-379]white-faced woman next them, she slipped a hand to her side and raised

[011-380]her skirt the fraction of an inch, just enough to let the embroidered

[011-381]edge of a petticoat show a trifle. When she saw the look of relief

[011-382]which flooded her mother’s face, Elnora knew that [[forgiveness-and-redemption|forgiveness]] was in

[011-383]her heart, and that she would go home in the morning.

[011-384]It was late afternoon before she arrived, and a dray followed with a

[011-385]load of packages. Mrs. Comstock was overwhelmed. She sat half dazed and

[011-386]made Elnora show her each costly and beautiful or simple and useful

[011-387]gift, tell her carefully what it was and from where it came. She

[011-388]studied the faces of Elnora’s particular friends. The gifts from them

[011-389]had to be set in a group. Several times she started to speak and then

[011-390]stopped. At last, between her dry lips, came a harsh whisper.

[011-391]“Elnora, what did you give back for these things?”

[011-392]“I’ll show you,” said Elnora cheerfully. “I made the same gifts for the

[011-393]Bird Woman, [[margaret-sinton|Aunt Margaret]] and you if you care for it. But I have to run

[011-394]upstairs to get it.”

[011-395]When she returned she handed her mother an oblong frame, hand carved,

[011-396]enclosing Elnora’s picture, taken by a schoolmate’s camera. She wore

[011-397]her storm-coat and carried a dripping umbrella. From under it looked

[011-398]her bright face; her books and lunchbox were on her arm, and across the

[011-399]bottom of the frame was carved, “Your Country Classmate.”

[011-400]Then she offered another frame.

[011-401]“I am strong on frames,” she said. “They seemed to be the best I could

[011-402]do without money. I located the maple and the black walnut myself, in a

[011-403]little corner that had been overlooked between the river and the ditch.

[011-404]They didn’t seem to belong to any one so I just took them. Uncle Wesley

[011-405]said it was all right, and he cut and hauled them for me. I gave the

[011-406]mill half of each tree for sawing and curing the remainder. Then I gave

[011-407]the wood-carver half of that for making my frames. A photographer gave

[011-408]me a lot of spoiled plates, and I boiled off the emulsion, and took the

[011-409]specimens I framed from my stuff. The man said the white frames were

[011-410]worth three and a half, and the black ones five. I exchanged those

[011-411]little framed pictures for the photographs of the others. For presents,

[011-412]I gave each one of my crowd one like this, only a different moth. The

[011-413]Bird Woman gave me the birch bark. She got it up north last summer.”

[011-414]Elnora handed her mother a handsome black-walnut frame a foot and a

[011-415]half wide by two long. It finished a small, shallow glass-covered box

[011-416]of birch bark, to the bottom of which clung a big night moth with

[011-417]delicate pale green wings and long exquisite trailers.

[011-418]“So you see I did not have to be ashamed of my gifts,” said Elnora. “I

[011-419]made them myself and raised and mounted the moths.”

[011-420]“Moth, you call it,” said Mrs. Comstock. “I’ve seen a few of the things

[011-421]before.”

[011-422]“They are numerous around us every June night, or at least they used to

[011-423]be,” said Elnora. “I’ve sold hundreds of them, with butterflies,

[011-424]dragonflies, and other specimens. Now, I must put away these and get to

[011-425]work, for it is almost June and there are a few more I want dreadfully.

[011-426]If I find them I will be paid some money for which I have been

[011-427]working.”

[011-428]She was afraid to say college at that time. She thought it would be

[011-429]better to wait a few days and see if an opportunity would not come when

[011-430]it would work in more naturally. Besides, unless she could secure the

[011-431]Yellow Emperor she needed to complete her collection, she could not

[011-432]talk college until she was of age, for she would have no money.
