---
description: "WHEREIN THE LIMBERLOST SINGS FOR PHILIP, AND THE TALKING TREES TELL"
id: ch16
label: "Chapter 16: Wherein Philip Ammon Returns to the Limberlost and Learns the Truth"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# CHAPTER XVI

[016-001]WHEREIN THE LIMBERLOST SINGS FOR PHILIP, AND THE TALKING TREES TELL

[016-002]GREAT SECRETS

[016-003]A few days later Philip handed [[elnora-comstock|Elnora]] a sheet of paper and she read:

[016-004]“In your condition I should think the [[moth-collecting|moth hunting]] and life at that

[016-005]cabin would be very good for you, but for any sake keep away from that

[016-006]Grosbeak person, and don’t come home with your head full of granger

[016-007]ideas. No doubt he has a remarkable voice, but I can’t bear untrained

[016-008]singers, and don’t you get the idea that a June song is perennial. You

[016-009]are not hearing the music he will make when the four babies have the

[016-010]scarlet fever and the measles, and the gadding wife leaves him at home

[016-011]to care for them then. Poor soul, I pity her! How she exists where

[016-012]rampant cows bellow at you, frogs croak, mosquitoes consume you, the

[016-013]butter goes to oil in summer and bricks in winter, while the pump

[016-014]freezes every day, and there is no earthly amusement, and no society!

[016-015]Poor things! Can’t you influence him to move? No wonder she gads when

[016-016]she has a chance! I should die. If you are thinking of settling in the

[016-017]country, think also of a woman who is satisfied with white and brown to

[016-018]accompany you! Brown! Of all deadly colours! I should go mad in brown.”

[016-019]Elnora laughed while she read. Her face was dimpling, as she returned

[016-020]the sheet. “Who’s ahead?” she asked.

[016-021]“Who do you think?” he parried.

[016-022]“She is,” said Elnora. “Are you going to tell her in your next that R.

[016-023]B. Grosbeak is a bird, and that he probably will spend the winter in a

[016-024]wild plum thicket in Tennessee?”

[016-025]“No,” said Philip. “I shall tell her that I understand her ideas of

[016-026]life perfectly, and, of course, I never shall ask her to deal with oily

[016-027]butter and frozen pumps—”

[016-028]“—and measley babies,” interpolated Elnora.

[016-029]“Exactly!” said Philip. “At the same time I find so much to

[016-030]counterbalance those things, that I should not object to bearing them

[016-031]myself, in view of the recompense. Where do we go and what do we do

[016-032]to-day?”

[016-033]“We will have to hunt beside the roads and around the edge of the

[016-034]Limberlost to-day,” said Elnora. “Mother is making strawberry

[016-035]preserves, and she can’t come until she finishes. Suppose we go down to

[016-036][[limberlost-swamp|the swamp]] and I’ll show you what is left of the flower-room that

[016-037]Terence O’More, the big lumber man of Great Rapids, made when he was a

[016-038]homeless boy here. Of course, you have heard the story?”

[016-039]“Yes, and I’ve met the O’Mores who are frequently in Chicago society.

[016-040]They have friends there. I think them one ideal couple.”

[016-041]“That sounds as if they might be the only one,” said Elnora, “and,

[016-042]indeed, they are not. I know dozens. [[margaret-sinton|Aunt Margaret]] and [[wesley-sinton|Uncle Wesley]] are

[016-043]another, the Brownlees another, and my mathematics professor and his

[016-044]wife. The world is full of happy people, but no one ever hears of them.

[016-045]You must fight and make a scandal to get into the papers. No one knows

[016-046]about all the happy people. I am happy myself, and look how perfectly

[016-047]inconspicuous I am.”

[016-048]“You only need go where you will be seen,” began Philip, when he

[016-049]remembered and finished. “What do we take to-day?”

[016-050]“Ourselves,” said Elnora. “I have a vagabond streak in my blood and

[016-051]it’s in evidence. I am going to show you where real flowers grow, real

[016-052]birds sing, and if I feel quite right about it, perhaps I shall raise a

[016-053]note or two myself.”

[016-054]“Oh, do you sing?” asked Philip politely.

[016-055]“At times,” answered Elnora. “‘As do the birds; because I must,’ but

[016-056]don’t be scared. The mood does not possess me often. Perhaps I shan’t

[016-057]raise a note.”

[016-058]They went down the road to the swamp, climbed the snake fence, followed

[016-059]the path to [[limberlost-trail|the old trail]] and then turned south upon it. Elnora

[016-060]indicated to Philip the trail with remnants of sagging barbed wire.

[016-061]“It was ten years ago,” she said. “I was a little school girl, but I

[016-062]wandered widely even then, and no one cared. I saw him often. He had

[016-063]been in a city institution all his life, when he took the job of

[016-064]keeping timber thieves out of this swamp, before many trees had been

[016-065]cut. It was a strong man’s work, and he was a frail boy, but he grew

[016-066]hardier as he lived out of doors. This trail we are on is the path his

[016-067]feet first wore, in those days when he was insane with fear and eaten

[016-068]up with loneliness, but he stuck to his work and won out. I used to

[016-069]come down to the road and creep among the bushes as far as I dared, to

[016-070]watch him pass. He walked mostly, at times he rode a wheel.

[016-071]“Some days his face was dreadfully sad, others it was so determined a

[016-072]little child could see the force in it, and once he was radiant. That

[016-073]day the [[angel|Swamp Angel]] was with him. I can’t tell you what she was like. I

[016-074]never saw any one who resembled her. He stopped close here to show her

[016-075]a bird’s nest. Then they went on to a sort of flower-room he had made,

[016-076]and he sang for her. By the time he left, I had gotten bold enough to

[016-077]come out on the trail, and I met the big Scotchman [[freckles|Freckles]] lived with.

[016-078]He saw me catching moths and butterflies, so he took me to the

[016-079]flower-room and gave me everything there. I don’t dare come alone

[016-080]often, so I can’t keep it up as he did, but you can see something of

[016-081]how it was.”

[016-082]Elnora led the way and Philip followed. The outlines of the room were

[016-083]not distinct, because many of the trees were gone, but Elnora showed

[016-084]how it had been as nearly as she could.

[016-085]“The swamp is almost ruined now,” she said. “The maples, walnuts, and

[016-086]cherries are all gone. The talking trees are the only things left worth

[016-087]while.”

[016-088]“The ‘talking trees!’ I don’t understand,” commented Philip.

[016-089]“No wonder!” laughed Elnora. “They are my discovery. You know all trees

[016-090]whisper and talk during the summer, but there are two that have so much

[016-091]to say they keep on the whole winter, when the others are silent. The

[016-092]beeches and oaks so love to talk, they cling to their dead, dry leaves.

[016-093]In the winter the winds are stiffest and blow most, so these trees

[016-094]whisper, chatter, sob, laugh, and at times roar until the sound is

[016-095]deafening. They never cease until new leaves come out in the spring to

[016-096]push off the old ones. I love to stand beneath them with my ear to the

[016-097]trunks, interpreting what they say to fit my moods. The beeches branch

[016-098]low, and their leaves are small so they only know common earthly

[016-099]things; but the oaks run straight above almost all other trees before

[016-100]they branch, their arms are mighty, their leaves large. They meet the

[016-101]winds that travel around the globe, and from them learn the big

[016-102]things.”

[016-103]Philip studied the girls face. “What do the beeches tell you, Elnora?”

[016-104]he asked gently.

[016-105]“To be patient, to be unselfish, to do unto others as I would have them

[016-106]do to me.”

[016-107]“And the oaks?”

[016-108]“They say ‘be true,’ ‘live a clean life,’ ‘send your soul up here and

[016-109]the winds of the world will teach it what honour achieves.’”

[016-110]“Wonderful secrets, those!” marvelled Philip. “Are they telling them

[016-111]now? Could I hear?”

[016-112]“No. They are only gossiping now. This is play-time. They tell the big

[016-113]secrets to a white world, when the music inspires them.”

[016-114]“The music?”

[016-115]“All other trees are harps in the winter. Their trunks are the frames,

[016-116]their branches the strings, the winds the musicians. When the air is

[016-117]cold and clear, the world very white, and the harp music swelling, then

[016-118]the talking trees tell the strengthening, uplifting things.”

[016-119]“You wonderful girl!” cried Philip. “What a woman you will be!”

[016-120]“If I am a woman at all worth while, it will be because I have had such

[016-121]wonderful opportunities,” said Elnora. “Not every girl is driven to the

[016-122]forest to learn what God has to say there. Here are the remains of

[016-123]Freckles’s room. The time the Angel came here he sang to her, and I

[016-124]listened. I never heard music like that. No wonder she loved him. Every

[016-125]one who knew him did, and they do yet. Try that log, it makes a fairly

[016-126]good seat. This old store box was his treasure house, just as it’s now

[016-127]mine. I will show you my dearest possession. I do not dare take it home

[016-128]because mother can’t overcome her dislike for it. It was my father’s,

[016-129]and in some ways I am like him. This is the strongest.”

[016-130]Elnora lifted the violin and began to play. She wore a school dress of

[016-131]green gingham, with the sleeves rolled to the elbows. She seemed a part

[016-132]of the setting all around her. Her head shone like a small dark sun,

[016-133]and her face never had seemed so rose-flushed and fair. From the

[016-134]instant she drew the bow, her lips parted and her eyes turned toward

[016-135]something far away in the swamp, and never did she give more of that

[016-136]impression of feeling for her notes and repeating something audible

[016-137]only to her. Philip was too close to get the best effect. He arose and

[016-138]stepped back several yards, leaning against a large tree, looking and

[016-139]listening intently.

[016-140]As he changed positions he saw that [[katharine-comstock|Mrs. Comstock]] had followed them,

[016-141]and was standing on the trail, where she could not have helped hearing

[016-142]everything Elnora had said.

[016-143]So to Philip before her and the mother watching on the trail, Elnora

[016-144]played the Song of [[limberlost-as-symbol|the Limberlost]]. It seemed as if the swamp hushed all

[016-145]its other voices and spoke only through her dancing bow. The mother out

[016-146]on the trail had heard it all, once before from the girl, many times

[016-147]from her father. To the man it was a [[secrets-and-truth|revelation]]. He stood so stunned he

[016-148]forgot Mrs. Comstock. He tried to realize what a city audience would

[016-149]say to that music, from such a player, with a similar background, and

[016-150]he could not imagine.

[016-151]He was wondering what he dared say, how much he might express, when the

[016-152]last note fell and the girl laid the violin in the case, closed the

[016-153]door, locked it and hid the key in the rotting wood at the end of a

[016-154]log. Then she came to him. Philip stood looking at her curiously.

[016-155]“I wonder,” he said, “what people would say to that?”

[016-156]“I played that in public once,” said Elnora. “I think they liked it,

[016-157]fairly well. I had a note yesterday offering me the leadership of the

[016-158][[education-as-liberation|high school]] orchestra in [[onabasha|Onabasha]]. I can take it as well as not. None

[016-159]of my talks to the grades come the first thing in the morning. I can

[016-160]play a few minutes in the orchestra and reach the rooms in plenty of

[016-161]time. It will be more work that I love, and like finding the money. I

[016-162]would gladly play for nothing, merely to be able to express myself.”

[016-163]“With some people it makes a regular battlefield of the human

[016-164]heart—this struggle for self-expression,” said Philip. “You are going

[016-165]to do beautiful work in the world, and do it well. When I realize that

[016-166]your violin belonged to your father, that he played it before you were

[016-167]born, and it no doubt affected your mother strongly, and then couple

[016-168]with that the years you have roamed these fields and swamps finding in

[016-169]nature all you had to lavish your heart upon, I can see how you

[016-170]evolved. I understand what you mean by self-expression. I know

[016-171]something of what you have to express. The world never so wanted your

[016-172]message as it does now. It is hungry for the things you know. I can see

[016-173]easily how your position came to you. What you have to give is taught

[016-174]in no college, and I am not sure but you would spoil yourself if you

[016-175]tried to run your mind through a set groove with hundreds of others. I

[016-176]never thought I should say such a thing to any one, but I do say to

[016-177]you, and I honestly believe it; give up the college idea. Your mind

[016-178]does not need that sort of development. Stick close to your work in the

[016-179]woods. You are becoming so infinitely greater on it, than the best

[016-180]college girl I ever knew, that there is no comparison. When you have

[016-181]money to spend, take that violin and go to one of the world’s great

[016-182]masters and let the Limberlost sing to him; if he thinks he can improve

[016-183]it, very well. I have my doubts.”

[016-184]“Do you really mean that you would give up all idea of going to

[016-185]college, in my place?”

[016-186]“I really mean it,” said Philip. “If I now held the money in my hands

[016-187]to send you, and could give it to you in some way you would accept I

[016-188]would not. I do not know why it is the fate of the world always to want

[016-189]something different from what life gives them. If you only could

[016-190]realize it, my girl, you are in college, and have been always. You are

[016-191]in the school of experience, and it has taught you to think, and given

[016-192]you a heart. God knows I envy the man who wins it! You have been in the

[016-193]college of the Limberlost all your life, and I never met a graduate

[016-194]from any other institution who could begin to compare with you in

[016-195]sanity, clarity, and interesting knowledge. I wouldn’t even advise you

[016-196]to read too many books on your lines. You acquire your material first

[016-197]hand, and you know that you are right. What you should do is to begin

[016-198]early to practise self-expression. Don’t wait too long to tell us about

[016-199]the woods as you know them.”

[016-200]“Follow the course of the [[bird-woman|Bird Woman]], you mean?” asked Elnora.

[016-201]“In your own way; with your own light. She won’t live forever. You are

[016-202]younger, and you will be ready to begin where she ends. The swamp has

[016-203]given you all you need so far; now you give it to the world in payment.

[016-204]College be confounded! Go to work and show people what there is in

[016-205]you!”

[016-206]Not until then did he remember Mrs. Comstock.

[016-207]“Should we go out to the trail and see if your mother is coming?” he

[016-208]asked.

[016-209]“Here she is now,” said Elnora. “Gracious, it’s a mercy I got that

[016-210]violin put away in time! I didn’t expect her so soon,” whispered the

[016-211]girl as she turned and went toward her mother. Mrs. Comstock’s

[016-212]expression was peculiar as she looked at Elnora.

[016-213]“I forgot that you were making sun-preserves and they didn’t require

[016-214]much cooking,” she said. “We should have waited for you.”

[016-215]“Not at all!” answered Mrs. Comstock. “Have you found anything yet?”

[016-216]“Nothing that I can show you,” said Elnora. “I am almost sure I have

[016-217]found an idea that will revolutionize the whole course of my work,

[016-218]thought, and ambitions.”

[016-219]“‘Ambitions!’ My, what a hefty word!” laughed Mrs. Comstock. “Now who

[016-220]would suspect a little red-haired country girl of harbouring such a

[016-221]deadly germ in her body? Can you tell mother about it?”

[016-222]“Not if you talk to me that way, I can’t,” said Elnora.

[016-223]“Well, I guess we better let ambition lie. I’ve always heard it was

[016-224]safest asleep. If you ever get a bona fide attack, it will be time to

[016-225]attend it. Let’s hunt specimens. It is June. Philip and I are in the

[016-226]grades. You have an hour to put an idea into our heads that will stick

[016-227]for a lifetime, and grow for good. That’s the way I look at your job.

[016-228]Now, what are you going to give us? We don’t want any old silly stuff

[016-229]that has been hashed over and over, we want a big new idea to plant in

[016-230]our hearts. Come on, Miss Teacher, what is the boiled-down,

[016-231]double-distilled essence of June? Give it to us strong. We are large

[016-232]enough to furnish it developing ground. Hurry up! Time is short and we

[016-233]are waiting. What is the miracle of June? What one thing epitomizes the

[016-234]whole month, and makes it just a little different from any other?”

[016-235]“The birth of these big night moths,” said Elnora promptly.

[016-236]Philip clapped his hands. The tears started to Mrs. Comstock’s eyes.

[016-237]She took Elnora in her arms, and kissed her forehead.

[016-238]“You’ll do!” she said. “June is June, not because it has bloom, bird,

[016-239]fruit, or flower, exclusive to it alone.

[016-240]“It’s half May and half July in all of them. But to me, it’s just June,

[016-241]when it comes to these great, velvet-winged night moths which sweep its

[016-242]moonlit skies, consummating their scheme of creation, and dropping like

[016-243]a bloomed-out flower. Give them moths for June. Then make that the

[016-244]basis of your year’s work. Find the distinctive feature of each month,

[016-245]the one thing which marks it a time apart, and hit them squarely

[016-246]between the eyes with it. Even the babies of the lowest grades can

[016-247]comprehend moths when they see a few emerge, and learn their history,

[016-248]as it can be lived before them. You should show your specimens in

[016-249]pairs, then their eggs, the growing caterpillars, and then the cocoons.

[016-250]You want to dig out the red heart of every month in the year, and hold

[016-251]it pulsing before them.

[016-252]“I can’t name all of them off-hand, but I think of one more right now.

[016-253]February belongs to our winter birds. It is then the great horned owl

[016-254]of the swamp courts his mate, the big hawks pair, and even the crows

[016-255]begin to take notice. These are truly our birds. Like the poor we have

[016-256]them always with us. You should hear the musicians of this swamp in

[016-257]February, Philip, on a mellow night. Oh, but they are in earnest! For

[016-258]twenty-one years I’ve listened by night to the great owls, all the

[016-259]smaller sizes, the foxes, coons, and every resident left in these

[016-260]woods, and by day to the hawks, yellow-hammers, sap-suckers, titmice,

[016-261]crows, and other winter birds. Only just now it’s come to me that the

[016-262]distinctive feature of February is not linen bleaching, nor sugar

[016-263]making; it’s the love month of our very own birds. Give them hawks and

[016-264]owls for February, Elnora.”

[016-265]With flashing eyes the girl looked at Philip. “How’s that?” she said.

[016-266]“Don’t you think I will succeed, with such help? You should hear the

[016-267]concert she is talking about! It is simply indescribable when the

[016-268]ground is covered with snow, and the moonlight white.”

[016-269]“It’s about the best music we have,” said Mrs. Comstock. “I wonder if

[016-270]you couldn’t copy that and make a strong, original piece out of it for

[016-271]your violin, Elnora?”

[016-272]There was one tense breath, then—— “I could try,” said Elnora simply.

[016-273]Philip rushed to the rescue. “We must go to work,” he said, and began

[016-274]examining a walnut branch for Luna moth eggs. Elnora joined him while

[016-275]Mrs. Comstock drew her embroidery from her pocket and sat on a log. She

[016-276]said she was tired, they could come for her when they were ready to go.

[016-277]She could hear their voices around her until she called them at supper

[016-278]time. When they came to her she stood waiting on the trail, the sewing

[016-279]in one hand, the violin in the other. Elnora became very white, but

[016-280]followed the trail without a word. Philip, unable to see a woman carry

[016-281]a heavier load than he, reached for the instrument. Mrs. Comstock shook

[016-282]her head. She carried the violin home, took it into her room and closed

[016-283]the door. Elnora turned to Philip.

[016-284]“If she destroys that, I shall die!” cried the girl.

[016-285]“She won’t!” said Philip. “You misunderstand her. She wouldn’t have

[016-286]said what she did about the owls, if she had meant to. She is your

[016-287]mother. No one loves you as she does. Trust her! Myself—I think she’s

[016-288]simply great!”

[016-289]Mrs. Comstock returned with serene face, and all of them helped with

[016-290]the supper. When it was over [[love-and-courtship|Philip and Elnora]] sorted and classified

[016-291]the afternoon’s specimens, and made a trip to the woods to paint and

[016-292]light several trees for moths. When they came back Mrs. Comstock sat in

[016-293][[grape-arbour|the arbour]], and they joined her. The moonlight was so intense, print

[016-294]could have been read by it. The damp night air held odours near to

[016-295]earth, making flower and tree perfume strong. A thousand insects were

[016-296]serenading, and in the maple the grosbeak occasionally said a

[016-297]reassuring word to his wife, while she answered that all was well. A

[016-298]whip-poor-will wailed in the swamp and beside the blue-bordered pool a

[016-299]chat complained disconsolately. Mrs. Comstock went into [[comstock-cabin|the cabin]], but

[016-300]she returned immediately, laying the violin and bow across Elnora’s

[016-301]lap. “I wish you would give us a little music,” she said.
