---
description: "WHEREIN PHILIP AMMON GIVES A BALL IN HONOUR OF EDITH CARR, AND HART"
id: ch19
label: "Chapter 19: Wherein Philip Ammon Makes a Decision and Elnora Receives a Surprise"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# CHAPTER XIX

[019-001]WHEREIN PHILIP AMMON GIVES A BALL IN HONOUR OF EDITH CARR, AND HART

[019-002]HENDERSON APPEARS ON THE SCENE

[019-003][[edith-carr|Edith Carr]] stood in a vine-enclosed side veranda of the Lake Shore Club

[019-004]House waiting while [[philip-ammon|Philip Ammon]] gave some important orders. In a few

[019-005]days she would sail for Paris to select a wonderful trousseau she had

[019-006]planned for her marriage in October. To-night Philip was giving a club

[019-007]dance in her honour. He had spent days in devising new and exquisite

[019-008]effects in decorations, entertainment, and supper. Weeks before the

[019-009]favoured guests had been notified. Days before they had received the

[019-010]invitations asking them to participate in this entertainment by Philip

[019-011]Ammon in honour of Miss Carr. They spoke of it as “Phil’s dance for

[019-012]Edith!”

[019-013]She could hear the rumble of carriages and the panting of automobiles

[019-014]as in a steady stream they rolled to the front entrance. She could

[019-015]catch glimpses of floating draperies of gauze and lace, the flash of

[019-016]jewels, and the passing of exquisite colour. Every one was newly

[019-017]arrayed in her honour in the loveliest [[social-class-and-appearance|clothing]], and the most expensive

[019-018]jewels they could command. As she thought of it she lifted her head a

[019-019]trifle higher and her eyes flashed proudly.

[019-020]She was robed in a French creation suggested and designed by Philip. He

[019-021]had said to her: “I know a competent judge who says the distinctive

[019-022]feature of June is her exquisite big night moths. I want you to be the

[019-023]very essence of June that night, as you will be the embodiment of love.

[019-024]Be a moth. The most beautiful of them is either the pale-green Luna or

[019-025]the Yellow Imperialis. Be my moon lady, or my gold Empress.”

[019-026]He took her to the museum and showed her the moths. She instantly

[019-027]decided on the yellow. Because she knew the shades would make her more

[019-028]startlingly beautiful than any other colour. To him she said: “A moon

[019-029]lady seems so far away and cold. I would be of earth and very near on

[019-030]that night. I choose the Empress.”

[019-031]So she matched the colours exactly, wrote out the idea and forwarded

[019-032]the order to Paquin. To-night when Philip Ammon came for her, he stood

[019-033]speechless a minute and then silently kissed her hands.

[019-034]For she stood tall, lithe, of grace inborn, her dark waving hair high

[019-035]piled and crossed by gold bands studded with amethyst and at one side

[019-036]an enamelled lavender orchid rimmed with diamonds, which flashed and

[019-037]sparkled. The soft yellow robe of lightest weight velvet fitted her

[019-038]form perfectly, while from each shoulder fell a great velvet wing lined

[019-039]with lavender, and flecked with embroidery of that colour in imitation

[019-040]of the moth. Around her throat was a wonderful necklace and on her arms

[019-041]were bracelets of gold set with amethyst and rimmed with diamonds.

[019-042]Philip had said that her gloves, fan, and slippers must be lavender,

[019-043]because the feet of the moth were that colour. These accessories had

[019-044]been made to order and embroidered with gold. It had been arranged that

[019-045]her mother, Philip’s, and a few best friends should receive his guests.

[019-046]She was to appear when she led the grand march with Philip Ammon. Miss

[019-047]Carr was positive that she would be the most beautiful, and most

[019-048]exquisitely gowned woman present. In her heart she thought of herself

[019-049]as “Imperialis Regalis,” as the Yellow Empress. In a few moments she

[019-050]would stun her world into feeling it as Philip Ammon had done, for she

[019-051]had taken pains that the history of her costume should be whispered to

[019-052]a few who would give it circulation. She lifted her head proudly and

[019-053]waited, for was not Philip planning something unusual and unsurpassed

[019-054]in her honour? Then she smiled.

[019-055]But of all the fragmentary thoughts crossing her brain the one that

[019-056]never came was that of Philip Ammon as the Emperor. Philip the king of

[019-057]her heart; at least her equal in all things. She was the Empress—yes,

[019-058]Philip was but a mere man, to devise entertainments, to provide

[019-059]luxuries, to humour whims, to kiss hands!

[019-060]“Ah, my luck!” cried a voice behind her.

[019-061]Edith Carr turned and smiled.

[019-062]“I thought you were on the ocean,” she said.

[019-063]“I only reached the dock,” replied the man, “when I had a letter that

[019-064]recalled me by the first limited.”

[019-065]“Oh! Important business?”

[019-066]“The only business of any importance in all the world to me. I’m

[019-067]triumphant that I came. Edith, you are the most superb woman in every

[019-068]respect that I have ever seen. One glimpse is worth the whole journey.”

[019-069]“You like my dress?” She moved toward him and turned, lifting her arms.

[019-070]“Do you know what it is intended to represent?”

[019-071]“Yes, [[polly-ammon|Polly Ammon]] told me. I knew when I heard about it how you would

[019-072]look, so I started a sleuth hunt, to get the first peep. Edith, I can

[019-073]become intoxicated merely with looking at you to-night.”

[019-074]He half-closed his eyes and smilingly stared straight at her. He was

[019-075]taller than she, a lean man, with close-cropped light hair, steel-gray

[019-076]eyes, a square chin and “man of the world” written all over him.

[019-077]Edith Carr flushed. “I thought you realized when you went away that you

[019-078]were to stop that, [[hart-henderson|Hart Henderson]],” she cried.

[019-079]“I did, but this letter of which I tell you called me back to start it

[019-080]all over again.”

[019-081]She came a step closer. “Who wrote that letter, and what did it contain

[019-082]concerning me?” she demanded.

[019-083]“One of your most intimate chums wrote it. It contained the hazard that

[019-084]possibly I had given up too soon. It said that in a fit of petulance

[019-085]you had broken your engagement with Ammon twice this winter, and he had

[019-086]come back because he knew you did not really mean it. I thought deeply

[019-087]there on the dock when I read that, and my boat sailed without me. I

[019-088]argued that anything so weak as an engagement twice broken and patched

[019-089]up again was a mighty frail affair indeed, and likely to smash

[019-090]completely at any time, so I came on the run. I said once I would not

[019-091]see you marry any other man. Because I could not bear it, I planned to

[019-092]go into exile of any sort to escape that. I have changed my mind. I

[019-093]have come back to haunt you until the ceremony is over. Then I go, not

[019-094]before. I was insane!”

[019-095]The girl laughed merrily. “Not half so insane as you are now, Hart!”

[019-096]she cried gaily. “You know that Philip Ammon has been devoted to me all

[019-097]my life. Now I’ll tell you something else, because this looks serious

[019-098]for you. I love him with all my heart. Not while he lives shall he know

[019-099]it, and I will laugh at him if you tell him, but the fact remains: I

[019-100]intend to marry him, but no doubt I shall tease him constantly. It’s

[019-101]good for a man to be uncertain. If you could see Philip’s face at the

[019-102]quarterly return of his ring, you would understand the fun of it. You

[019-103]had better have taken your boat.”

[019-104]“Possibly,” said Henderson calmly. “But you are the only woman in the

[019-105]world for me, and while you are free, as I now see my light, I remain

[019-106]near you. You know the old adage.”

[019-107]“But I’m not ‘free!’” cried Edith Carr. “I’m telling you I am not. This

[019-108]night is my public acknowledgment that Phil and I are promised, as our

[019-109]world has surmised since we were children. That promise is an actual

[019-110]fact, because of what I just have told you. My little fits of temper

[019-111]don’t count with Phil. He’s been reared on them. In fact, I often

[019-112]invent one in a perfect calm to see him perform. He is the most amusing

[019-113]spectacle. But, please, please, do understand that I love him, and

[019-114]always shall, and that we shall be married.”

[019-115]“Just the same, I’ll wait and see it an accomplished fact,” said

[019-116]Henderson. “And Edith, because I love you, with the sort of love it is

[019-117]worth a woman’s while to inspire, I want your happiness before my own.

[019-118]So I am going to say this to you, for I never dreamed you were capable

[019-119]of the feeling you have displayed for Phil. If you do love him, and

[019-120]have loved him always, a disappointment would cut you deeper than you

[019-121]know. Go careful from now on! Don’t strain that patched engagement of

[019-122]yours any further. I’ve known Philip all my life. I’ve known him

[019-123]through boyhood, in college, and since. All men respect him. Where the

[019-124]rest of us confess our sins, he stands clean. You can go to his arms

[019-125]with nothing to forgive. Mark this thing! I have heard him say, ‘Edith

[019-126]is my slogan,’ and I have seen him march home strong in the strength of

[019-127]his love for you, in the face of temptations before which every other

[019-128]man of us fell. Before the gods! that ought to be worth something to a

[019-129]girl, if she really is the delicate, sensitive, refined thing she would

[019-130]have man believe. It would take a woman with the organism of an ostrich

[019-131]to endure some of the men here to-night, if she knew them as I do; but

[019-132]Phil is sound to the core. So this is what I would say to you: first,

[019-133]your instincts are right in loving him, why not let him feel it in the

[019-134]ways a woman knows? Second, don’t break your engagement again. As men

[019-135]know the man, any of us would be afraid to the soul. He loves you, yes!

[019-136]He is long-suffering for you, yes! But men know he has a limit. When

[019-137]the limit is reached, he will stand fast, and all the powers can’t move

[019-138]him. You don’t seem to think it, but you can go too far!”

[019-139]“Is that all?” laughed Edith Carr sarcastically.

[019-140]“No, there is one thing more,” said Henderson. “Here or here-after, now

[019-141]and so long as I breathe, I am your slave. You can do anything you

[019-142]choose and know that I will kneel before you again. So carry this in

[019-143]the depths of your heart; now or at any time, in any place or

[019-144]condition, merely lift your hand, and I will come. Anything you want of

[019-145]me, that thing will I do. I am going to wait; if you need me, it is not

[019-146]necessary to speak; only give me the faintest sign. All your life I

[019-147]will be somewhere near you waiting for it.”

[019-148]“Idjit! You rave!” laughed Edith Carr. “How you would frighten me! What

[019-149]a bugbear you would raise! Be sensible and go find what keeps Phil. I

[019-150]was waiting patiently, but my patience is going. I won’t look nearly so

[019-151]well as I do now when it is gone.”

[019-152]At that instant Philip Ammon entered. He was in full evening dress and

[019-153]exceptionally handsome. “Everything is ready,” he said; “they are

[019-154]waiting for us to lead the march. It is formed.”

[019-155]Edith Carr smiled entrancingly. “Do you think I am ready?”

[019-156]Philip looked what he thought, and offered his arm. Edith Carr nodded

[019-157]carelessly to Hart Henderson, and moved away. Attendants parted the

[019-158]curtains and the Yellow Empress bowing right and left, swept the length

[019-159]of the ballroom and took her place at the head of the formed

[019-160]procession. The large open dancing pavilion was draped with yellow silk

[019-161]caught up with lilac flowers. Every corner was filled with bloom of

[019-162]those colours. The music was played by harpers dressed in yellow and

[019-163]violet, so the ball opened.

[019-164]The midnight supper was served with the same colours and the last half

[019-165]of the programme was being danced. Never had girl been more

[019-166]complimented and petted in the same length of time than Edith Carr.

[019-167]Every minute she seemed to grow more worthy of praise. A partners’

[019-168]dance was called and the floor was filled with couples waiting for the

[019-169]music. Philip stood whispering delightful things to Edith facing him.

[019-170]From out of the night, in at the wide front entrance to the pavilion,

[019-171]there swept in slow wavering flight a large yellow moth and fluttered

[019-172]toward the centre cluster of glaring electric lights. Philip Ammon and

[019-173]Edith Carr saw it at the same instant.

[019-174]“Why, isn’t that——?” she began excitedly.

[019-175]“It’s a Yellow Emperor! This is fate!” cried Philip. “The last one

[019-176][[elnora-comstock|Elnora]] needs for her collection. I must have it! Excuse me!”

[019-177]He ran toward the light. “Hats! Handkerchiefs! Fans! Anything!” he

[019-178]panted. “Every one hold up something and stop that! It’s a moth; I’ve

[019-179]got to catch it!”

[019-180]“It’s yellow! He wants it for Edith!” ran in a murmur around the hall.

[019-181]The girl’s face flushed, while she bit her lips in vexation.

[019-182]Instantly every one began holding up something to keep the moth from

[019-183]flying back into the night. One fan held straight before it served, and

[019-184]the moth gently settled on it.

[019-185]“Hold steady!” cried Philip. “Don’t move for your life!” He rushed

[019-186]toward the moth, made a quick sweep and held it up between his fingers.

[019-187]“All right!” he called. “Thanks, every one! Excuse me a minute.”

[019-188]He ran to the office.

[019-189]“An ounce of gasolene, quick!” he ordered. “A cigar box, a cork, and

[019-190]the glue bottle.”

[019-191]He poured some glue into the bottom of the box, set the cork in it

[019-192]firmly, dashed the gasolene over the moth repeatedly, pinned it to the

[019-193]cork, poured the remainder of the liquid over it, closed the box, and

[019-194]fastened it. Then he laid a bill on the counter.

[019-195]“Pack that box with cork around it, in one twice its size, tie securely

[019-196]and express to this address at once.”

[019-197]He scribbled on a sheet of paper and shoved it over.

[019-198]“On your honour, will you do that faithfully as I say?” he asked the

[019-199]clerk.

[019-200]“Certainly,” was the reply.

[019-201]“Then keep the change,” called Philip as he ran back to the pavilion.

[019-202]Edith Carr stood where he left her, thinking rapidly. She heard the

[019-203]murmur that arose when Philip started to capture the exquisite golden

[019-204]creature she was impersonating. She saw the flash of surprise that went

[019-205]over unrestrained faces when he ran from the room, without even showing

[019-206]it to her. “The last one Elnora needs,” rang in her ears. He had told

[019-207]her that he helped collect moths the previous summer, but she had

[019-208]understood that the [[bird-woman|Bird Woman]], with whose work Miss Carr was familiar,

[019-209]wanted them to put in a book.

[019-210]He had spoken of a country girl he had met who played the violin

[019-211]wonderfully, and at times, he had shown a disposition to exalt her as a

[019-212]standard of womanhood. Miss Carr had ignored what he said, and talked

[019-213]of something else. But that girl’s name had been Elnora. It was she who

[019-214]was [[moth-collecting|collecting moths]]! No doubt she was the competent judge who was

[019-215]responsible for the yellow costume Philip had devised. Had Edith Carr

[019-216]been in her room, she would have torn off the dress at the thought.

[019-217]Being in a circle of her best friends, which to her meant her keenest

[019-218]rivals and harshest critics, she grew rigid with anger. Her breath hurt

[019-219]her paining chest. No one thought to speak to the musicians, and seeing

[019-220]the floor filled, they began the waltz. Only part of the guests could

[019-221]see what had happened, and at once the others formed and commenced to

[019-222]dance. Gay couples came whirling past her.

[019-223]Edith Carr grew very white as she stood alone. Her lips turned pale,

[019-224]while her dark eyes flamed with anger. She stood perfectly still where

[019-225]Philip had left her, and the approaching men guided their partners

[019-226]around her, while the girls, looking back, could be seen making

[019-227]exclamations of surprise.

[019-228]The idolized only daughter of the Carr family hoped that she would drop

[019-229]dead from mortification, but nothing happened. She was too perverse to

[019-230]step aside and say that she was waiting for Philip. Then came [[tom-levering|Tom]]

[019-231]Levering dancing with Polly Ammon. Being in the scales with the Ammon

[019-232]family, Tom scented trouble from afar, so he whispered to Polly: “Edith

[019-233]is standing in the middle of the floor, and she’s awful mad about

[019-234]something.”

[019-235]“That won’t hurt her,” laughed Polly. “It’s an old pose of hers. She

[019-236]knows she looks superb when she is angry, so she keeps herself furious

[019-237]half the time on purpose.”

[019-238]“She looks like the mischief!” answered Tom. “Hadn’t we better steer

[019-239]over and wait with her? She’s the ugliest sight I ever saw!”

[019-240]“Why, Tom!” cried Polly. “Stop, quickly!”

[019-241]They hurried to Edith.

[019-242]“Come dear,” said Polly. “We are going to wait with you until Phil

[019-243]returns. Let’s go after a drink. I am so thirsty!”

[019-244]“Yes, do!” begged Tom, offering his arm. “Let’s get out of here until

[019-245]Phil comes.”

[019-246]There was the opportunity to laugh and walk away, but Edith Carr would

[019-247]not accept it.

[019-248]“My betrothed left me here,” she said. “Here I shall remain until he

[019-249]returns for me, and then—he will be my betrothed no longer!”

[019-250]Polly grasped Edith’s arm.

[019-251]“Oh, Edith!” she implored. “Don’t make a scene here, and to-night.

[019-252]Edith, this has been the loveliest dance ever given at the club house.

[019-253]Every one is saying so. Edith! Darling, do come! Phil will be back in a

[019-254]second. He can explain! It’s only a breath since I saw him go out. I

[019-255]thought he had returned.”

[019-256]As Polly panted these disjointed ejaculations, Tom Levering began to

[019-257]grow angry on her account.

[019-258]“He has been gone just long enough to show every one of his guests that

[019-259]he will leave me standing alone, like a neglected fool, for any passing

[019-260]whim of his. Explain! His explanation would sound well! Do you know for

[019-261]whom he caught that moth? It is being sent to a girl he flirted with

[019-262]all last summer. It has just occurred to me that the dress I am wearing

[019-263]is her suggestion. Let him try to explain!”

[019-264]Speech unloosed the fountain. She stripped off her gloves to free her

[019-265]hands. At that instant the dancers parted to admit Philip.

[019-266]Instinctively they stopped as they approached and with wondering faces

[019-267]walled in Edith and Philip, Polly and Tom.

[019-268]“Mighty good of you to wait!” cried Philip, his face showing his

[019-269]delight over his success in capturing the Yellow Emperor. “I thought

[019-270]when I heard the music you were going on.”

[019-271]“How did you think I was going on?” demanded Edith Carr in frigid

[019-272]tones.

[019-273]“I thought you would step aside and wait a few seconds for me, or dance

[019-274]with Henderson. It was most important to have that moth. It completes a

[019-275]valuable collection for a person who needs the money. Come!”

[019-276]He held out his arms.

[019-277]“I ‘step aside’ for no one!” stormed Edith Carr. “I await no other

[019-278]girl’s pleasure! You may ‘complete the collection’ with that!”

[019-279]She drew her engagement ring from her finger and reached to place it on

[019-280]one of Philip’s outstretched hands. He saw and drew back. Instantly

[019-281]Edith dropped the ring. As it fell, almost instinctively Philip caught

[019-282]it in air. With amazed face he looked closely at Edith Carr. Her

[019-283]distorted features were scarcely recognizable. He held the ring toward

[019-284]her.

[019-285]“Edith, for the love of mercy, wait until I can explain,” he begged.

[019-286]“Put on your ring and let me tell you how it is.”

[019-287]“I know perfectly ‘how it is,’” she answered. “I never shall wear that

[019-288]ring again.”

[019-289]“You won’t even hear what I have to say? You won’t take back your

[019-290]ring?” he cried.

[019-291]“Never! Your conduct is infamous!”

[019-292]“Come to think of it,” said Philip deliberately, “it is ‘infamous’ to

[019-293]cut a girl, who has danced all her life, out of a few measures of a

[019-294]waltz. As for asking [[forgiveness-and-redemption|forgiveness]] for so black a sin as picking up a

[019-295]moth, and starting it to a friend who lives by collecting them, I don’t

[019-296]see how I could! I have not been gone three minutes by the clock,

[019-297]Edith. Put on your ring and finish the dance like a dear girl.”

[019-298]He thrust the glittering ruby into her fingers and again held out his

[019-299]arms. She dropped the ring, and it rolled some distance from them. Hart

[019-300]Henderson followed its shining course, and caught it before it was

[019-301]lost.

[019-302]“You really mean it?” demanded Philip in a voice as cold as hers ever

[019-303]had been.

[019-304]“You know I mean it!” cried Edith Carr.

[019-305]“I accept your decision in the presence of these witnesses,” said

[019-306]Philip Ammon. “Where is my father?” The elder Ammon with a distressed

[019-307]face hurried to him. “Father, take my place,” said Philip. “Excuse me

[019-308]to my guests. Ask all my friends to forgive me. I am going away for

[019-309]awhile.”

[019-310]He turned and walked from the pavilion. As he went Hart Henderson

[019-311]rushed to Edith Carr and forced the ring into her fingers. “Edith,

[019-312]quick. Come, quick!” he implored. “There’s just time to catch him. If

[019-313]you let him go that way, he never will return in this world. Remember

[019-314]what I told you.”

[019-315]“Great prophet! aren’t you, Hart?” she sneered. “Who wants him to

[019-316]return? If that ring is thrust upon me again I shall fling it into the

[019-317]lake. Signal the musicians to begin, and dance with me.”

[019-318]Henderson put the ring into his pocket, and began the dance. He could

[019-319]feel the muscular spasms of the girl in his arms, her face was cold and

[019-320]hard, but her breath burned with the scorch of fever. She finished the

[019-321]dance and all others, taking Phil’s numbers with Henderson, who had

[019-322]arrived too late to arrange a programme. She left with the others,

[019-323]merely inclining her head as she passed Ammon’s father taking his

[019-324]place, and entered the big touring car for which Henderson had

[019-325]telephoned. She sank limply into a seat and moaned softly.

[019-326]“Shall I drive awhile in the night air?” asked Henderson.

[019-327]She nodded. He instructed the chauffeur.

[019-328]She raised her head in a few seconds. “Hart, I’m going to pieces,” she

[019-329]said. “Won’t you put your arm around me a little while?”

[019-330]Henderson gathered her into his arms and her head fell on his shoulder.

[019-331]“Closer!” she cried.

[019-332]Henderson held her until his arms were numb, but he did not know it.

[019-333]The tricks of fate are cruel enough, but there scarcely could have been

[019-334]a worse one than that: To care for a woman as he loved Edith Carr and

[019-335]have her given into his arms because she was so numb with misery over

[019-336]her trouble with another man that she did not know or care what she

[019-337]did. Dawn was streaking the east when he spoke to her.

[019-338]“Edith, it is growing light.”

[019-339]“Take me home,” she said.

[019-340]Henderson helped her up the steps and rang the bell.

[019-341]“Miss Carr is ill,” he said to the footman. “Arouse her maid instantly,

[019-342]and have her prepare something hot as quickly as possible.”

[019-343]“Edith,” he cried, “just a word. I have been thinking. It isn’t too

[019-344]late yet. Take your ring and put it on. I will go find Phil at once and

[019-345]tell him you have, that you are expecting him, and he will come.”

[019-346]“Think what he said!” she cried. “He accepted my decision as final, ‘in

[019-347]the presence of witnesses,’ as if it were court. He can return it to

[019-348]me, if I ever wear it again.”

[019-349]“You think that now, but in a few days you will find that you feel very

[019-350]differently. Living a life of heartache is no joke, and no job for a

[019-351]woman. Put on your ring and send me to tell him to come.”

[019-352]“No.”

[019-353]“Edith, there was not a soul who saw that, but sympathized with Phil.

[019-354]It was ridiculous for you to get so angry over a thing which was never

[019-355]intended for the slightest offence, and by no logical reasoning could

[019-356]have been so considered.”

[019-357]“Do you think that?” she demanded.

[019-358]“I do!” said Henderson. “If you had laughed and stepped aside an

[019-359]instant, or laughed and stayed where you were, Phil would have been

[019-360]back; or, if he needed punishment in your eyes, to have found me having

[019-361]one of his dances would have been enough. I was waiting. You could have

[019-362]called me with one look. But to publicly do and say what you did, my

[019-363]lady—I know Phil, and I know you went too far. Put on that ring, and

[019-364]send him word you are sorry, before it is too late.”

[019-365]“I will not! He shall come to me.”

[019-366]“Then God help you!” said Henderson, “for you are plunging into misery

[019-367]whose depth you do not dream. Edith, I beg of you——”

[019-368]She swayed where she stood. Her maid opened the door and caught her.

[019-369]Henderson went down the hall and out to his car.
