---
description: "WHEREIN ELNORA REACHES A DECISION, AND FRECKLES AND THE ANGEL APPEAR"
id: ch23
label: "Chapter 23: Wherein Elnora and Philip Plan Their Future Together"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# CHAPTER XXIII

[023-001]WHEREIN ELNORA REACHES A DECISION, AND FRECKLES AND THE ANGEL APPEAR

[023-002]“Well, she came, didn’t she?” remarked [[katharine-comstock|Mrs. Comstock]] to [[elnora-comstock|Elnora]] as they

[023-003]watched the automobile speed down the road. As it turned [[limberlost-as-symbol|the Limberlost]]

[023-004]corner, Philip arose and waved to them.

[023-005]“She hasn’t got him yet, anyway,” said Mrs. Comstock, taking heart.

[023-006]“What’s that on your finger, and what did she say to you?”

[023-007]Elnora explained about the ring as she drew it off.

[023-008]“I have several letters to write, then I am going to change my dress

[023-009]and walk down toward [[margaret-sinton|Aunt Margaret]]’s for a little exercise. I may meet

[023-010]some of them, and I don’t want them to see this ring. You keep it until

[023-011]Philip comes,” said Elnora. “As for what [[edith-carr|Miss Carr]] said to me, many

[023-012]things, two of importance: one, that I lacked every social requirement

[023-013]necessary for the happiness of [[philip-ammon|Philip Ammon]], and that if I married him

[023-014]I would see inside a month that he was ashamed of me——”

[023-015]“Aw, shockins!” scorned Mrs. Comstock. “Go on!”

[023-016]“The other was that she has been engaged to him for years, that he

[023-017]belongs to her, and she refuses to give him up. She said that if he

[023-018]were in her presence one hour, she would have him under a mysterious

[023-019]thing she calls ‘her spell’ again; if he were where she could see him

[023-020]for one week, everything would be made up. It is her opinion that he is

[023-021]suffering from wounded pride, and that the slightest concession on her

[023-022]part will bring him to his knees before her.”

[023-023]Mrs. Comstock giggled. “I do hope the boy isn’t weak-kneed,” she said.

[023-024]“I just happened to be passing the west window this afternoon——”

[023-025]Elnora laughed. “Nothing save actual knowledge ever would have made me

[023-026]believe there was a girl in all this world so infatuated with herself.

[023-027]She speaks casually of her power over men, and boasts of ‘bringing a

[023-028]man to his knees’ as complacently as I would pick up a net and say: ‘I

[023-029]am going to take a butterfly.’ She honestly believes that if Philip

[023-030]were with her a short time she could rekindle his love for her and

[023-031]awaken in him every particle of the old devotion. Mother, the girl is

[023-032]honest! She is absolutely sincere! She so believes in herself and the

[023-033]strength of Phil’s love for her, that all her life she will believe in

[023-034]and brood over that thought, unless she is taught differently. So long

[023-035]as she thinks that, she will nurse wrong ideas and pine over her

[023-036]blighted life. She must be taught that Phil is absolutely free, and yet

[023-037]he will not go to her.”

[023-038]“But how on earth are you proposing to teach her that?”

[023-039]“The way will open.”

[023-040]“Lookey here, Elnora!” cried Mrs. Comstock. “That Carr girl is the

[023-041]handsomest dark woman I ever saw. She’s got to the place where she

[023-042]won’t stop at anything. Her coming here proves that. I don’t believe

[023-043]there was a thing the matter with that automobile. I think that was a

[023-044]scheme she fixed up to get Phil where she could see him alone, as she

[023-045]worked to see you. If you are going deliberately to put Philip under

[023-046]her influence again, you’ve got to brace yourself for the possibility

[023-047]that she may win. A man is a weak mortal, where a lovely woman is

[023-048]concerned, and he never denied that he loved her once. You may make

[023-049]yourself downright miserable.”

[023-050]“But mother, if she won, it wouldn’t make me half so miserable as to

[023-051]marry Phil myself, and then read hunger for her in his eyes! Some one

[023-052]has got to suffer over this. If it proves to be me, I’ll bear it, and

[023-053]you’ll never hear a whisper of complaint from me. I know the real

[023-054]Philip Ammon better in our months of work in the fields than she knows

[023-055]him in all her years of society engagements. So she shall have the hour

[023-056]she asked, many, many of them, enough to make her acknowledge that she

[023-057]is wrong. Now I am going to write my letters and take my walk.”

[023-058]Elnora threw her arms around her mother and kissed her repeatedly.

[023-059]“Don’t you worry about me,” she said. “I will get along all right, and

[023-060]whatever happens, I always will be your girl and you my darling

[023-061]mother.”

[023-062]She left two sealed notes on her desk. Then she changed her dress,

[023-063]packed a small bundle which she dropped with her hat from the window

[023-064]beside the willow, and softly went down stairs. Mrs. Comstock was in

[023-065][[comstock-garden|the garden]]. Elnora picked up the hat and bundle, hurried down the road

[023-066]a few rods, then climbed the fence and entered the woods. She took a

[023-067]diagonal course, and after a long walk reached a road two miles west

[023-068]and one south. There she straightened her [[social-class-and-appearance|clothing]], put on her hat and

[023-069]a thin dark veil and waited the passing of the next trolley. She left

[023-070]it at the first town and took a train for Fort Wayne. She made that

[023-071]point just in time to climb on the evening train north, as it pulled

[023-072]from [[onabasha-station|the station]]. It was after midnight when she left the car at Grand

[023-073]Rapids, and went into the depot to await the coming of day.

[023-074]Tired out, she laid her head on her bundle and fell asleep on a seat in

[023-075]the women’s waiting-room. Long after light she was awakened by the roar

[023-076]and rattle of trains. She washed, re-arranged her hair and clothing,

[023-077]and went into the general waiting-room to find her way to the street.

[023-078]She saw him as he entered the door. There was no mistaking the tall,

[023-079]lithe figure, the bright hair, the lean, brown-splotched face, the

[023-080]steady gray eyes. He was dressed for travelling, and carried a light

[023-081]overcoat and a bag. Straight to him Elnora went speeding.

[023-082]“Oh, I was just starting to find you!” she cried.

[023-083]“Thank you!” he said.

[023-084]“You are going away?” she panted.

[023-085]“Not if I am needed. I have a few minutes. Can you be telling me

[023-086]briefly?”

[023-087]“I am [[limberlost-swamp|the Limberlost]] girl to whom your wife gave the dress for

[023-088]Commencement last spring, and both of you sent lovely gifts. There is a

[023-089]reason, a very good reason, why I must be hidden for a time, and I came

[023-090]straight to you—as if I had a right.”

[023-091]“You have!” answered [[freckles|Freckles]]. “Any boy or girl who ever suffered one

[023-092]pang in the Limberlost has a claim to the best drop of blood in my

[023-093]heart. You needn’t be telling me anything more. The Angel is at our

[023-094]cottage on Mackinac. You shall tell her and play with the babies while

[023-095]you want shelter. This way!”

[023-096]They breakfasted in a luxurious car, talked over the swamp, the work of

[023-097]the [[bird-woman|Bird Woman]]; Elnora told of her nature lectures in the schools, and

[023-098]soon they were good friends. In the evening they left the train at

[023-099]Mackinaw City and crossed the Straits by boat. Sheets of white

[023-100]moonlight flooded the water and paved a molten path across the breast

[023-101]of it straight to the face of the moon.

[023-102]The island lay a dark spot on the silver surface, its tall trees

[023-103]sharply outlined on the summit, and a million lights blinked around the

[023-104]shore. The night guns boomed from the white fort and a dark sentinel

[023-105]paced the ramparts above the little city tucked down close to the

[023-106]water. A great tenor summering in the north came out on the upper deck

[023-107]of the big boat, and baring his head, faced the moon and sang: “Oh, the

[023-108]moon shines bright on my old Kentucky home!” Elnora thought of the

[023-109]Limberlost, of Philip, and her mother, and almost choked with the sobs

[023-110]that would arise in her throat. On the dock a woman of exquisite beauty

[023-111]swept into the arms of Terence O’More.

[023-112]“Oh, Freckles!” she cried. “You’ve been gone a month!”

[023-113]“Four days, Angel, only four days by the clock,” remonstrated Freckles.

[023-114]“Where are the children?”

[023-115]“Asleep! Thank goodness! I’m worn to a thread. I never saw such

[023-116]inventive, active children. I can’t keep track of them!”

[023-117]“I have brought you help,” said Freckles. “Here is the Limberlost girl

[023-118]in whom the Bird Woman is interested. Miss Comstock needs a rest before

[023-119]beginning her school work for next year, so she came to us.”

[023-120]“You dear thing! How good of you!” cried the Angel. “We shall be so

[023-121]happy to have you!”

[023-122]In her room that night, in a beautiful cottage furnished with every

[023-123]luxury, Elnora lifted a tired face to the Angel.

[023-124]“Of course, you understand there is something back of this?” she said.

[023-125]“I must tell you.”

[023-126]“Yes,” agreed the Angel. “Tell me! If you get it out of your system,

[023-127]you will stand a better chance of sleeping.”

[023-128]Elnora stood brushing the copper-bright masses of her hair as she

[023-129]talked. When she finished the Angel was almost hysterical.

[023-130]“You insane creature!” she cried. “How crazy of you to leave him to

[023-131]her! I know both of them. I have met them often. She may be able to

[023-132]make good her boast. But it is perfectly splendid of you! And, after

[023-133]all, really it is the only way. I can see that. I think it is what I

[023-134]should have done myself, or tried to do. I don’t know that I could have

[023-135]done it! When I think of walking away and leaving Freckles with a woman

[023-136]he once loved, to let her see if she can make him love her again, oh,

[023-137]it gives me a graveyard heart. No, I never could have done it! You are

[023-138]bigger than I ever was. I should have turned coward, sure.”

[023-139]“I am a coward,” admitted Elnora. “I am soul-sick! I am afraid I shall

[023-140]lose my senses before this is over. I didn’t want to come! I wanted to

[023-141]stay, to go straight into his arms, to bind myself with his ring, to

[023-142]love him with all my heart. It wasn’t my fault that I came. There was

[023-143]something inside that just pushed me. She is beautiful——”

[023-144]“I quite agree with you!”

[023-145]“You can imagine how fascinating she can be. She used no arts on me.

[023-146]Her purpose was to cower me. She found she could not do that, but she

[023-147]did a thing which helped her more: she proved that she was honest,

[023-148]perfectly sincere in what she thought. She believes that if she merely

[023-149]beckons to Philip, he will go to her. So I am giving her the

[023-150]opportunity to learn from him what he will do. She never will believe

[023-151]it from any one else. When she is satisfied, I shall be also.”

[023-152]“But, child! Suppose she wins him back!”

[023-153]“That is the supposition with which I shall eat and sleep for the

[023-154]coming few weeks. Would one dare ask for a peep at the babies before

[023-155]going to bed?”

[023-156]“Now, you are perfect!” announced the Angel. “I never should have liked

[023-157]you all I can, if you had been content to go to sleep in this house

[023-158]without asking to see the babies. Come this way. We named the first boy

[023-159]for his father, of course, and the girl for Aunt Alice. The next boy is

[023-160]named for my father, and the baby for the Bird Woman. After this we are

[023-161]going to branch out.”

[023-162]Elnora began to laugh.

[023-163]“Oh, I suspect there will be quite a number of them,” said the Angel

[023-164]serenely. “I am told the more there are the less trouble they make. The

[023-165]big ones take care of the little ones. We want a large family. This is

[023-166]our start.”

[023-167]She entered a dark room and held aloft a candle. She went to the side

[023-168]of a small white iron bed in which lay a boy of eight and another of

[023-169]three. They were perfectly formed, rosy children, the elder a replica

[023-170]of his mother, the other very like. Then they came to a cradle where a

[023-171]baby girl of almost two slept soundly, and made a picture.

[023-172]“But just see here!” said the Angel. She threw the light on a sleeping

[023-173]girl of six. A mass of red curls swept the pillow. Line and feature the

[023-174]face was that of Freckles. Without asking, Elnora knew the colour and

[023-175]expression of the closed eyes. The Angel handed Elnora the candle, and

[023-176]stooping, straightened the child’s body. She ran her fingers through

[023-177]the bright curls, and lightly touched the aristocratic little nose.

[023-178]“The supply of freckles holds out in my family, you see!” she said.

[023-179]“Both of the girls will have them, and the second boy a few.”

[023-180]She stood an instant longer, then bending, ran her hand caressingly

[023-181]down a rosy bare leg, while she kissed the babyish red mouth. There had

[023-182]been some reason for touching all of them, the kiss fell on the lips

[023-183]which were like Freckles’s.

[023-184]To Elnora she said a tender good-night, whispering brave words of

[023-185]encouragement and making plans to fill the days to come. Then she went

[023-186]away. An hour later there was a light tap on the girl’s door.

[023-187]“Come!” she called as she lay staring into the dark.

[023-188]The Angel felt her way to the bedside, sat down and took Elnora’s

[023-189]hands.

[023-190]“I just had to come back to you,” she said. “I have been telling

[023-191]Freckles, and he is almost hurting himself with laughing. I didn’t

[023-192]think it was funny, but he does. He thinks it’s the funniest thing that

[023-193]ever happened. He says that to run away from Mr. Ammon, when you had

[023-194]made him no promise at all, when he wasn’t sure of you, won’t send him

[023-195]home to her; it will set him hunting you! He says if you had combined

[023-196]the wisdom of Solomon, Socrates, and all the remainder of the wise men,

[023-197]you couldn’t have chosen any course that would have sealed him to you

[023-198]so surely. He feels that now Mr. Ammon will perfectly hate her for

[023-199]coming down there and driving you away. And you went to give her the

[023-200]chance she wanted. Oh, Elnora! It is becoming funny! I see it, too!”

[023-201]The Angel rocked on the bedside. Elnora faced the dark in silence.

[023-202]“Forgive me,” gulped the Angel. “I didn’t mean to laugh. I didn’t think

[023-203]it was funny, until all at once it came to me. Oh, dear! Elnora, it

[023-204]_is_ funny! I’ve got to laugh!”

[023-205]“Maybe it is,” admitted Elnora “to others; but it isn’t very funny to

[023-206]me. And it won’t be to Philip, or to mother.”

[023-207]That was very true. Mrs. Comstock had been slightly prepared for

[023-208]stringent action of some kind, by what Elnora had said. The mother

[023-209]instantly had guessed where the girl would go, but nothing was said to

[023-210]Philip. That would have been to invalidate Elnora’s test in the

[023-211]beginning, and Mrs. Comstock knew her child well enough to know that

[023-212]she never would marry Philip unless she felt it right that she should.

[023-213]The only way was to find out, and Elnora had gone to seek the

[023-214]information. There was nothing to do but wait until she came back, and

[023-215]her mother was not in the least uneasy but that the girl would return

[023-216]brave and self-reliant, as always.

[023-217]Philip Ammon hurried back to the Limberlost, strong in the hope that

[023-218]now he might take Elnora into his arms and receive her promise to

[023-219]become his wife. His first shock of disappointment came when he found

[023-220]her gone. In talking with Mrs. Comstock he learned that Edith Carr had

[023-221]made an opportunity to speak with Elnora alone. He hastened down the

[023-222]road to meet her, coming back alone, an agitated man. Then search

[023-223]revealed the notes. His read:

[023-224]DEAR PHILIP:

[023-225]I find that I am never going to be able to answer your question of this

[023-226]afternoon fairly to all of us, when you are with me. So I am going away

[023-227]a few weeks to think over matters alone. I shall not tell you, or even

[023-228]mother, where I am going, but I shall be safe, well cared for, and

[023-229]happy. Please go back home and live among your friends, just as you

[023-230]always have done, and on or before the first of September, I will write

[023-231]you where I am, and what I have decided. Please do not blame Edith Carr

[023-232]for this, and do not avoid her. I hope you will call on her and be

[023-233]friends. I think she is very sorry, and covets your friendship at

[023-234]least. Until September, then, as ever,

[023-235]ELNORA.

[023-236]Mrs. Comstock’s note was much the same. Philip was ill with

[023-237]disappointment. In [[grape-arbour|the arbour]] he laid his head on the table, among the

[023-238]implements of Elnora’s loved work, and gulped down dry sobs he could

[023-239]not restrain. Mrs. Comstock never had liked him so well. Her hand

[023-240]involuntarily crept toward his dark head, then she drew back. Elnora

[023-241]would not want her to do anything whatever to influence him.

[023-242]“What am I going to do to convince Edith Carr that I do not love her,

[023-243]and Elnora that I am hers?” he demanded.

[023-244]“I guess you have to figure that out yourself,” said Mrs. Comstock.

[023-245]“I’d be glad to help you if I could, but it seems to be up to you.”

[023-246]Philip sat a long time in silence. “Well, I have decided!” he said

[023-247]abruptly. “Are you perfectly sure Elnora had plenty of money and a safe

[023-248]place to go?”

[023-249]“Absolutely!” answered Mrs. Comstock. “She has been taking care of

[023-250]herself ever since she was born, and she always has come out all right,

[023-251]so far; I’ll stake all I’m worth on it, that she always will. I don’t

[023-252]know where she is, but I’m not going to worry about her safety.”

[023-253]“I can’t help worrying!” cried Philip. “I can think of fifty things

[023-254]that may happen to her when she thinks she is safe. This is

[023-255]distracting! First, I am going to run up to see my father. Then, I’ll

[023-256]let you know what we have decided. Is there anything I can do for you?”

[023-257]“Nothing!” said Mrs. Comstock.

[023-258]But the desire to do something for him was so strong with her she

[023-259]scarcely could keep her lips closed or her hands quiet. She longed to

[023-260]tell him what Edith Carr had said, how it had affected Elnora, and to

[023-261]comfort him as she felt she could. But loyalty to the girl held her. If

[023-262]Elnora truly felt that she could not decide until Edith Carr was

[023-263]convinced, then Edith Carr would have to yield or triumph. It rested

[023-264]with Philip. So Mrs. Comstock kept silent, while Philip took the night

[023-265]limited, a bitterly disappointed man.

[023-266]By noon the next day he was in his father’s offices. They had a long

[023-267]conference, but did not arrive at much until the elder Ammon suggested

[023-268]sending for [[polly-ammon|Polly]]. Anything that might have happened could be explained

[023-269]after Polly had told of the private conference between Edith and

[023-270]Elnora.

[023-271]“Talk about lovely woman!” cried Philip Ammon. “One would think that

[023-272]after such a dose as Edith gave me, she would be satisfied to let me go

[023-273]my way, but no! Not caring for me enough herself to save me from public

[023-274]disgrace, she must now pursue me to keep any other woman from loving

[023-275]me. I call that too much! I am going to see her, and I want you to go

[023-276]with me, father.”

[023-277]“Very well,” said Mr. Ammon, “I will go.”

[023-278]When Edith Carr came into her reception-room that afternoon, gowned for

[023-279]conquest, she expected only Philip, and him penitent. She came hurrying

[023-280]toward him, smiling, radiant, ready to use every allurement she

[023-281]possessed, and paused in dismay when she saw his cold face and his

[023-282]father. “Why, Phil!” she cried. “When did you come home?”

[023-283]“I am not at home,” answered Philip. “I merely ran up to see my father

[023-284]on business, and to inquire of you what it was you said to Miss

[023-285]Comstock yesterday that caused her to disappear before I could return

[023-286]to the Limberlost.”

[023-287]“Miss Comstock disappear! Impossible!” cried Edith Carr. “Where could

[023-288]she go?”

[023-289]“I thought perhaps you could answer that, since it was through you that

[023-290]she went.”

[023-291]“Phil, I haven’t the faintest idea where she is,” said the girl gently.

[023-292]“But you know perfectly why she went! Kindly tell me that.”

[023-293]“Let me see you alone, and I will.”

[023-294]“Here and now, or not at all.”

[023-295]“Phil!”

[023-296]“What did you say to the girl I love?”

[023-297]Then Edith Carr stretched out her arms.

[023-298]“Phil, I am the girl you love!” she cried. “All your life you have

[023-299]loved me. Surely it cannot be all gone in a few weeks of

[023-300]misunderstanding. I was jealous of her! I did not want you to leave me

[023-301]an instant that night for any other girl living. That was the moth I

[023-302]was representing. Every one knew it! I wanted you to bring it to me.

[023-303]When you did not, I knew instantly it had been for her that you worked

[023-304]last summer, she who suggested my dress, she who had power to take you

[023-305]from me, when I wanted you most. The thought drove me mad, and I said

[023-306]and did those insane things. Phil, I beg your pardon! I ask your

[023-307][[forgiveness-and-redemption|forgiveness]]. Yesterday she said that you had told her of me at once.

[023-308]She vowed both of you had been true to me and Phil, I couldn’t look

[023-309]into her eyes and not see that it was the truth. Oh, Phil, if you

[023-310]understood how I have suffered you would forgive me. Phil, I never knew

[023-311]how much I cared for you! I will do anything—anything!”

[023-312]“Then tell me what you said to Elnora yesterday that drove her, alone

[023-313]and friendless, into the night, heaven knows where!”

[023-314]“You have no thought for any one save her?”

[023-315]“Yes,” said Philip. “I have. Because I once loved you, and believed in

[023-316]you, my heart aches for you. I will gladly forgive anything you ask. I

[023-317]will do anything you want, except to resume our former relations. That

[023-318]is impossible. It is hopeless and useless to ask it.”

[023-319]“You truly mean that!”

[023-320]“Yes.”

[023-321]“Then find out from her what I said!”

[023-322]“Come, father,” said Philip, rising.

[023-323]“You were going to show Miss Comstock’s letter to Edith!” suggested Mr.

[023-324]Ammon.

[023-325]“I have not the slightest interest in Miss Comstock’s letter,” said

[023-326]Edith Carr.

[023-327]“You are not even interested in the fact that she says you are not

[023-328]responsible for her going, and that I am to call on you and be friends

[023-329]with you?”

[023-330]“That is interesting, indeed!” sneered Miss Carr.

[023-331]She took the letter, read and returned it.

[023-332]“She has done what she could for my cause, it seems,” she said coldly.

[023-333]“How very generous of her! Do you propose calling out Pinkertons and

[023-334]instituting a general search?”

[023-335]“No,” replied Philip. “I simply propose to go back to the Limberlost

[023-336]and live with her mother, until Elnora becomes convinced that I am not

[023-337]courting you, and never shall be. Then, perhaps, she will come home to

[023-338]us. Good-bye. Good luck to you always!”
