---
description: "Section 25 of A History of English Prose Fiction"
id: ch-025
label: "Section 25"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[025-001]Should some brave youth (worth being drunk) prove nice, And from his fair inviter meanly shrink, 'T would please the ghost of my departed vice, If, at my council, he repent and drink.

[025-002]But Hervey represents the time when dissipation had run a long course, and disgust, sanctity, and misanthropy were succeeding. To him, as to Swift, men were "a worthless species of animals," their vices, natural; their virtues, affectation: Mankind I know, their nature and their art, Their vice their own, their virtue but a part Ill played so oft, that all the cheat can tell, And dangerous only when 't is acted well, *       *       *       *       * To such reflections when I turn my mind _I loathe my being, and abhor mankind._ [Footnote 90: Carlyle, "Frederick the Great," p. 13. vol. i.] [Footnote 91: Addison, "An Account of the Greatest English Poets."

[025-003]Quoted by Henry Morley, LL.D., "English Literature in the Reign of Victoria."] [Footnote 92: Lecky's "History of England in the 18th Century," vol. i, p. 502.] [Footnote 93: Lord Hervey, "Memoirs of George II," v. 3, p. 527.] [Footnote 94: Hervey's "Mem. of George II," vol. 1, p. 147, note.] [Footnote 95: Walpole's "Reminiscences"; Hervey's "Mem.," v. 2, p. 103, note.] [Footnote 96: Walpole's "Mem. of George II," vol. 1, p. 87.] [Footnote 97: Browne's "Estimate of the Times"; Lecky, "Hist. of 18th Century," vol. 1, p. 509.] [Footnote 98: Lord Hervey, "Mem. of Geo. II," vol. i, p. 5.] [Footnote 99: _Idem_, vol. i, p. 170.] [Footnote 100: _Idem_, vol. i, p. 18.] [Footnote 101: Hervey's "Mem.," i, 20.] [Footnote 102: _Idem_, vol. 1, p. 208.] [Footnote 103: Hervey's "Memoirs," 1, 39.] [Footnote 104: _Idem_, ii, 360.] [Footnote 105: _Idem_, ii, 31.] [Footnote 106: _Idem_, vol. i, p. 91.] [Footnote 107: Hervey's "Memoirs," vol. 1, p. 37.] [Footnote 108: Hervey, 1, 22-25.] [Footnote 109: Horace Walpole, "Reminiscences."] [Footnote 110: Locke "On Civil Government," b. ii, ch. 13; Lecky's "History of the 18th Century," vol. I, p. 471.] [Footnote 111: Hervey's "Memoirs," ii, 280.] [Footnote 112: Chesterfield, "Correspondence," iii, 94.] [Footnote 113: Walpole to Mann, Dec. 24, 1741.] [Footnote 114: Hervey's "Memoirs," i, 172.] [Footnote 115: "History of the Eighteenth Century," vol. 1, p. 512.] [Footnote 116: Green's "Short History of the English People," pp. 768-9.] [Footnote 117: Hervey, ii, 189, note.] [Footnote 118: Hervey's "Memoirs," vol. i, p. 500.] [Footnote 119: Hervey's "Memoirs," vol. i, p. 502.] [Footnote 120: Lord Hervey's "Memoirs", ii, 255.] [Footnote 121: _Idem_, ii, 434.] [Footnote 122: Hervey's "Memoirs," ii, 472.] [Footnote 123: Hervey's "Memoirs," ii, 350.] [Footnote 124: _Idem_, i, 90.] [Footnote 125: _Idem_, ii, 349.] [Footnote 126: _Tatler_, No. 159, Saturday, April 15, 1710.] [Footnote 127: Steele, _Tatler_, No. 5.] [Footnote 128: Walpole to Montague, March 20, 1737.] [Footnote 129: Wilson's "Memoirs of Defoe," vol. i, p. 265.] [Footnote 130: Wilson's "Memoirs of Defoe," vol. i, p. 206.] [Footnote 131: Steele, _Tatler_, No. 12 May 7, 1709.] [Footnote 132: Walpole to Mann, Nov. 26, 1711.] [Footnote 133: Letter to Mrs. Ann Granville, Dec. 5, 1739.] [Footnote 134: Letter to Mrs. Ann Granville, Jan. 17, 1731-32.] [Footnote 135: Letter to Mrs. Ann Granville, Nov. 18, 1729.] [Footnote 136: Letter to Mrs. Ann Granville, Christmas-day, 1729.] [Footnote 137: Green, "Short History of the English People," p. 717.] [Footnote 138: Lord Hervey's "Memoirs of George II," vol. ii, p. 139.] [Footnote 139: Strutt's "Sports and Pastimes," p. 259; Lecky, "History of England in the 18th Century," vol. i, chap. iv.] [Footnote 140: Lecky, "History of England in the 18th Century," vol. i, p. 522.] [Footnote 141: Walpole to Sir H. Mann, March 23, 1752.] [Footnote 142: The _Spectator_, "Sir Roger at the Playhouse."] [Footnote 143: Horace Walpole, "Short Notes of My Life."] [Footnote 144: Horace Walpole to Sir H. Mann, Aug. 2, 1750.] [Footnote 145: See the "Newgate Calendar."] [Footnote 146: See the "Newgate Calendar" and Pike's "History of Crime," vol. 2, chap. x.] [Footnote 147: Walpole to Mann, bet. July 14 and 29, 1742.] [Footnote 148: "Amelia," book i, chap. 2.] [Footnote 149: Walpole to Mann, bet. July 14 and 29, 1742.] [Footnote 150: "State Trials;" vol. xvii, p. 298. _Proceedings against John Higgins, Esq., Warden of the Fleet, Thomas Bainbridge, Esq., Warden of the Fleet, Richard Corbett, one of the Tipstaffs of the Fleet, and William Acton, Keeper of the Marshalsea Prison: 3 George II, A.D. 1729.

[025-004]Report of the Com. of the House of Commons_.] II.

[025-005]Lord Hervey's bitter lines introduce us to Jonathan Swift. Nature, together with the character of his time, made the great Dean a misanthropist. Physical infirmity, disappointed hopes, and a long series of humiliations destroyed the happiness which should have belonged to his rare union of noble gifts,--his tall, commanding figure, his awe-inspiring countenance, his acute wit, and magnificent intellect. Naturally proud and sensitive to an abnormal degree, he was obliged to suffer the most galling slights. From his earliest years he hated dependence, and yet, until middle life he was forced to be a dependent. His education was furnished by the charity of relatives, between whom and himself there was no affection. His college degree was conferred in a manner which made it a disgrace rather than an honor.

[025-006]The long years which he passed in the household of Sir William Temple, subject to the humors and caprices of his master, embittered his temper at the time of life when it should have been most buoyant and hopeful.

[025-007]Thus began the melancholy and misanthropy which marred his whole life, darkening his triumphs, turning such love as he had to give into a curse to those who received it, producing an eccentricity which often gave him the appearance of a madman, and finally bringing him to a terrible end--to die, as he himself foretold, like a blasted elm, first at the top. He kept his birthday as a day of mourning. He solemnly regretted his escape when nearly killed by an accident. He habitually parted from a friend with the wish that they might never meet again.

[025-008]Cæsar's description of Cassius is wonderfully applicable to Swift:[151] ----He reads much; He is a great observer, and he looks Quite through the deeds of men ---- Seldom he smiles; and smiles in such a sort As if he mocked himself, and scorn'd his spirit That could be amused to smile at any thing.

[025-009]The character of Swift presents great apparent contradictions. Although full of good-will and appreciation for individuals, although exercising out of a small income the most discriminating and open handed generosity, there has never lived a man more bitter in his misanthropy, more fierce in his denunciation of mankind. Although capable of great and disinterested affection, he was unable to make his affection a source of happiness to himself or to others. Although he always chose for companionship the most refined and cultivated women, the wisest and most honored men, his mind dwelt by preference on the most terrible examples of human depravity, and he gave permanent form, in his literary productions, to ideas from which a healthy mind must always turn with horror and disgust. His misanthropy was founded partly on observation of the evil and corruption which he saw about him, and partly on the suspicions and exaggerations of his own imagination. He gave up writing a history of England, because, in his own words, he found the characters of history such a pack of rascals that he would have no more to say to them. He made a "List of Friends," which he classified as Grateful, Ungrateful, Indifferent, and Doubtful. Of these friends, forty-four in number, only seventeen were marked with the _g_ which signified that their friendship was trusted. We cannot disassociate Swift from his own time, nor can we attribute simply to a melancholy life or to mental aberration the revolting conceptions which his works contain. The coarseness and corruption which marked the private and public life of Swift's day had their share in the production of such poems as The "Lady's Dressing-Room," and such degrading views of human nature as are expressed in the "Voyage to the Houyhnhnms."

[025-010]It is a significant sign of the times that Hogarth, the greatest English painter, and Swift, the greatest English writer, should have employed their talents in caricature and in satire. In the wonderful allegory of the "Tale of a Tub," in which the corruptions and failings of the English, Roman, and Presbyterian churches were ridiculed in the persons of Jack, Peter, and Martin, Swift displayed at an early age his exuberant wit and surpassing satirical power. The "Tale of a Tub" was succeeded by the "Battle of the Books," an imaginary conflict between volumes in a library, which exposed the absurdity of the controversy over the relative merits of the ancients and the moderns. But Swift's satire became most fierce and brilliant when it was turned from rival creeds and rival literatures, and directed toward mankind itself.

[025-011]The "Travels of Lemuel Gulliver" were dropped, said the publisher, at his house, in the dark, from a hackney-coach. In regard to this work, the Dean followed his custom of sending out his writings to the world to make their way on their own merits, without the assistance of his name. But the authorship of the book could not long remain unknown before the storm of applause and curiosity which it immediately excited. It was a production, said Johnson,[152] "so new and strange that it filled the reader with a mingled emotion of merriment and amazement. It was received with such avidity, that the price of the first edition was raised before the second could be made; it was read by the high and the low, the learned and illiterate. Criticism was for a while lost in wonder; no rules of judgment were applied to a book written in open defiance of truth and regularity." Whether read for the satire or the story, the adventures of Gulliver proved equally fascinating. They "offered personal and political satire to the readers in high life, low and coarse incidents to the vulgar, marvels to the romantic, wit to the young and lively, lessons of morality and policy to the grave, and maxims of deep and bitter misanthropy to neglected age and disappointed ambition."[153] The early part of the eighteenth century offered rich material to the satirist, and Swift brought to his work unparalleled fierceness and power. He attacked the corruption of the politician and the minister, the vanity and vice of the courtier, the folly and extravagance of the fashionable world, and gathering venom in his course, made his satire universal and painted the pettiness and deformity of the human race.

[025-012]But among the follies and vices of mankind, vanity was the fault most offensive to Swift, and that which he lashed with his most bitter invective. To ridicule human pride, and to expose its inconsistency with the imperfection of man, is the ruling object of his great satirical [[romance-of-chivalry|romance]]. On Gulliver's return to England from the land of the Houyhnhnms, where, under the degraded form of Yahoos, he had studied mankind as they appeared when influenced by all human vices and brutal instincts unveiled by hypocrisy or civilization, he describes his horror at observing the existence of vanity among his countrymen who resembled Yahoos so closely;-- My reconcilement to the Yahoo kind in general might not be so difficult, if they would be content with those vices and follies only which nature has entitled them to. I am not in the least provoked at the sight of a lawyer, a pickpocket, a colonel, a fool, a lord, a gamester, a politician, a whoremonger, a physician, an evidence, a suborner, an attorney, a traitor, or the like; this is all according to the due course of things: but when I behold a lump of deformity and diseases, both in body and mind, smitten with pride, it immediately breaks all the measures of my patience; neither shall I ever be able to comprehend how such an animal, and such a vice, could tally together.
