---
description: ""
id: ch02
label: "Chapter II: THE LAWN"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER II. THE LAWN

[002-001]WHEN [[diamond|Diamond]] got round the corner of the hay, for a moment he hesitated.

[002-002]The stair by which he would naturally have gone down to the door was

[002-003]at the other side of [[the-hay-loft|the loft]], and looked very black indeed; for it was

[002-004]full of [[north-wind|North Wind]]'s hair, as she descended before him. And just beside

[002-005]him was the ladder going straight down into the stable, up which his

[002-006]father always came to fetch the hay for Diamond's dinner. Through the

[002-007]opening in the floor the faint gleam of the-stable lantern was enticing,

[002-008]and Diamond thought he would run down that way.

[002-009]The stair went close past the loose-box in which Diamond the horse

[002-010]lived. When Diamond the boy was half-way down, he remembered that it

[002-011]was of no use to go this way, for the stable-door was locked. But at the

[002-012]same moment there was horse Diamond's great head poked out of his box

[002-013]on to the ladder, for he knew boy Diamond although he was in his

[002-014][[darkness|night]]-gown, and wanted him to pull his ears for him. This Diamond did

[002-015]very gently for a minute or so, and patted and stroked his neck too, and

[002-016]kissed the big horse, and had begun to take the bits of straw and hay

[002-017]out of his mane, when all at once he recollected that the Lady North

[002-018]Wind was waiting for him in the yard.

[002-019]“Good night, Diamond,” he said, and darted up the ladder, across the

[002-020]loft, and down the stair to the door. But when he got out into the yard,

[002-021]there was no lady.

[002-022]Now it is always a dreadful thing to think there is somebody and find

[002-023]nobody. Children in particular have not made up their minds to it; they

[002-024]generally cry at nobody, especially when they wake up at night. But it

[002-025]was an especial disappointment to Diamond, for his little heart had been

[002-026]beating with joy: the face of the North Wind was so grand! To have

[002-027]a lady like that for a friend--with such long hair, too! Why, it was

[002-028]longer than twenty Diamonds' tails! She was gone. And there he stood,

[002-029]with his bare feet on the stones of the paved yard.

[002-030]It was a clear night overhead, and the [[stars]] were shining. Orion in

[002-031]particular was making the most of his bright belt and golden sword.

[002-032]But the [[moon]] was only a poor thin crescent. There was just one great,

[002-033]jagged, black and gray cloud in the sky, with a steep side to it like a

[002-034]precipice; and the moon was against this side, and looked as if she had

[002-035]tumbled off the top of the cloud-hill, and broken herself in rolling

[002-036]down the precipice. She did not seem comfortable, for she was looking

[002-037]down into the deep pit waiting for her. At least that was what Diamond

[002-038]thought as he stood for a moment staring at her. But he was quite wrong,

[002-039]for the moon was not afraid, and there was no pit she was going down

[002-040]into, for there were no sides to it, and a pit without sides to it is

[002-041]not a pit at all. Diamond, however, had not been out so late before in

[002-042]all his life, and things looked so strange about him!--just as if he had

[002-043]got into Fairyland, of which he knew quite as much as anybody; for his

[002-044]mother had no money to buy books to set him wrong on the subject. I have

[002-045]seen this world--only sometimes, just now and then, you know--look as

[002-046]strange as ever I saw Fairyland. But I confess that I have not yet seen

[002-047]Fairyland at its best. I am always going to see it so some time. But if

[002-048]you had been out in the face and not at the back of the North Wind, on a

[002-049]cold rather frosty night, and in your night-gown, you would have felt it

[002-050]all quite as strange as Diamond did. He cried a little, just a little,

[002-051]he was so disappointed to lose the lady: of course, you, little man,

[002-052]wouldn't have done that! But for my part, I don't mind people crying so

[002-053]much as I mind what they cry about, and how they cry--whether they cry

[002-054]quietly like ladies and gentlemen, or go shrieking like vulgar emperors,

[002-055]or ill-natured cooks; for all emperors are not gentlemen, and all cooks

[002-056]are not ladies--nor all queens and princesses for that matter, either.

## Section 3

[002-057]But it can't be denied that a little gentle crying does one good. It did

[002-058]Diamond good; for as soon as it was over he was a brave boy again.

[002-059]“She shan't say it was my fault, anyhow!” said Diamond. “I daresay she

[002-060]is hiding somewhere to see what I will do. I will look for her.”

[002-061]So he went round the end of the stable towards the kitchen-garden. But

[002-062]the moment he was clear of the shelter of the stable, sharp as a knife

[002-063]came the wind against his little chest and his bare legs. Still he

[002-064]would look in the kitchen-garden, and went on. But when he got round the

[002-065]weeping-ash that stood in the corner, the wind blew much stronger, and

[002-066]it grew stronger and stronger till he could hardly fight against it. And

[002-067]it was so cold! All the flashy spikes of the stars seemed to have got

[002-068]somehow into the wind. Then he thought of what the lady had said about

[002-069]people being cold because they were not with the North Wind. How it was

[002-070]that he should have guessed what she meant at that very moment I cannot

[002-071]tell, but I have observed that the most wonderful thing in the world is

[002-072]how people come to understand anything. He turned his back to the wind,

[002-073]and trotted again towards the yard; whereupon, strange to say, it blew

[002-074]so much more gently against his calves than it had blown against his

[002-075]shins that he began to feel almost warm by contrast.

[002-076]You must not think it was cowardly of Diamond to turn his back to

[002-077]the wind: he did so only because he thought Lady North Wind had said

[002-078]something like telling him to do so. If she had said to him that he must

[002-079]hold his face to it, Diamond would have held his face to it. But the

[002-080]most foolish thing is to fight for no good, and to please nobody.

[002-081]Well, it was just as if the wind was pushing Diamond along. If he turned

[002-082]round, it grew very sharp on his legs especially, and so he thought the

[002-083]wind might really be Lady North Wind, though he could not see her, and

[002-084]he had better let her blow him wherever she pleased. So she blew and

[002-085]blew, and he went and went, until he found himself standing at a door

[002-086]in a wall, which door led from the yard into a little belt of shrubbery,

[002-087]flanking [[mr-coleman|Mr. Coleman]]'s house. Mr. Coleman was his father's master,

[002-088]and the owner of Diamond. He opened the door, and went through the

[002-089]shrubbery, and out into the middle of the lawn, still hoping to find

[002-090]North Wind. The soft grass was very pleasant to his bare feet, and felt

[002-091]warm after the stones of the yard; but the lady was nowhere to be seen.

[002-092]Then he began to think that after all he must have done wrong, and she

[002-093]was offended with him for not following close after her, but staying to

[002-094]talk to the horse, which certainly was neither wise nor polite.

[002-095]There he stood in the middle of the lawn, the wind blowing his

[002-096]night-gown till it flapped like a loose sail. The stars were very shiny

[002-097]over his head; but they did not give light enough to show that the grass

[002-098]was green; and Diamond stood alone in the strange night, which looked

[002-099]half solid all about him. He began to wonder whether he was in a dream

[002-100]or not. It was important to determine this; “for,” thought Diamond, “if

[002-101]I am in a dream, I am safe in my bed, and I needn't cry. But if I'm not

[002-102]in a dream, I'm out here, and perhaps I had better cry, or, at least,

[002-103]I'm not sure whether I can help it.” He came to the conclusion, however,

[002-104]that, whether he was in a dream or not, there could be no harm in not

[002-105]crying for a little while longer: he could begin whenever he liked.

[002-106]The back of Mr. Coleman's house was to the lawn, and one of the

[002-107]drawing-room windows looked out upon it. The ladies had not gone to bed;

[002-108]for the light was still shining in that window. But they had no idea

[002-109]that a little boy was standing on the lawn in his night-gown, or they

[002-110]would have run out in a moment. And as long as he saw that light,

[002-111]Diamond could not feel quite lonely. He stood staring, not at the great

[002-112]warrior Orion in the sky, nor yet at the disconsolate, neglected moon

[002-113]going down in the west, but at the drawing-room window with the light

[002-114]shining through its green curtains. He had been in that room once or

[002-115]twice that he could remember at Christmas times; for the Colemans were

[002-116]kind people, though they did not care much about children.

[002-117]All at once the light went nearly out: he could only see a glimmer of

[002-118]the shape of the window. Then, indeed, he felt that he was left alone.

[002-119]It was so dreadful to be out in the night after everybody was gone

[002-120]to bed! That was more than he could bear. He burst out crying in good

[002-121]earnest, beginning with a wail like that of the wind when it is waking

[002-122]up.

[002-123]Perhaps you think this was very foolish; for could he not go home to his

[002-124]own bed again when he liked? Yes; but it looked dreadful to him to creep

[002-125]up that stair again and lie down in his bed again, and know that North

[002-126]Wind's window was open beside him, and she gone, and he might never see

[002-127]her again. He would be just as lonely there as here. Nay, it would be

[002-128]much worse if he had to think that the window was nothing but a hole in

[002-129]the wall.

[002-130]At the very moment when he burst out crying, the old nurse who had grown

[002-131]to be one of the family, for she had not gone away when [[miss-coleman|Miss Coleman]] did

[002-132]not want any more nursing, came to the back door, which was of glass, to

[002-133]close the shutters. She thought she heard a cry, and, peering out with a

[002-134]hand on each side of her eyes like Diamond's blinkers, she saw something

[002-135]white on the lawn. Too old and too wise to be frightened, she opened the

[002-136]door, and went straight towards the white thing to see what it was. And

[002-137]when Diamond saw her coming he was not frightened either, though

[002-138][[mrs-crump|Mrs. Crump]] was a little cross sometimes; for there is a good kind

[002-139]of crossness that is only disagreeable, and there is a bad kind of

[002-140]crossness that is very nasty indeed. So she came up with her neck

[002-141]stretched out, and her head at the end of it, and her eyes foremost of

[002-142]all, like a snail's, peering into the night to see what it could be that

[002-143]went on glimmering white before her. When she did see, she made a

[002-144]great exclamation, and threw up her hands. Then without a word, for she

[002-145]thought Diamond was walking in his [[dream|sleep]], she caught hold of him, and

[002-146]led him towards the house. He made no objection, for he was just in

[002-147]the mood to be grateful for notice of any sort, and Mrs. Crump led him

[002-148]straight into the drawing-room.

[002-149]Now, from the neglect of the new housemaid, the fire in Miss Coleman's

[002-150]bedroom had gone out, and her mother had told her to brush her hair by

[002-151]the drawing-room fire--a disorderly proceeding which a mother's wish

[002-152]could justify. The young lady was very lovely, though not nearly so

[002-153]beautiful as North Wind; and her hair was extremely long, for it came

[002-154]down to her knees--though that was nothing at all to North Wind's hair.

[002-155]Yet when she looked round, with her hair all about her, as Diamond

[002-156]entered, he thought for one moment that it was North Wind, and, pulling

[002-157]his hand from Mrs. Crump's, he stretched out his arms and ran towards

[002-158]Miss Coleman. She was so pleased that she threw down her brush, and

[002-159]almost knelt on the floor to receive him in her arms. He saw the next

[002-160]moment that she was not Lady North Wind, but she looked so like her he

[002-161]could not help running into her arms and bursting into tears afresh.

[002-162]Mrs. Crump said the poor child had walked out in his sleep, and Diamond

[002-163]thought she ought to know, and did not contradict her for anything he

[002-164]knew, it might be so indeed. He let them talk on about him, and said

[002-165]nothing; and when, after their astonishment was over, and Miss Coleman

[002-166]had given him a sponge-cake, it was decreed that Mrs. Crump should take

[002-167]him to his mother, he was quite satisfied.

[002-168]His mother had to get out of bed to open the door when Mrs. Crump

[002-169]knocked. She was indeed surprised to see her, boy; and having taken

[002-170]him in her arms and carried him to his bed, returned and had a long

[002-171]confabulation with Mrs. Crump, for they were still talking when Diamond

[002-172]fell fast asleep, and could hear them no longer.
