---
description: ""
id: ch12
label: "Chapter XII: WHO MET DIAMOND AT SANDWICH"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XII. WHO MET DIAMOND AT SANDWICH

[012-001]As THEY flew, so fast they went that the sea slid away from under them

[012-002]like a great web of shot silk, blue shot with grey, and green shot with

[012-003]purple. They went so fast that the [[stars]] themselves appeared to sail

[012-004]away past them overhead, “like golden boats,” on a blue sea turned

[012-005]upside down. And they went so fast that [[diamond|Diamond]] himself went the other

[012-006]way as fast--I mean he went fast asleep in [[north-wind|North Wind]]'s arms.

[012-007]When he woke, a face was bending over him; but it was not North Wind's;

[012-008]it was his mother's. He put out his arms to her, and she clasped him to

[012-009]her bosom and burst out crying. Diamond kissed her again and again to

[012-010]make her stop. Perhaps kissing is the best thing for crying, but it will

[012-011]not always stop it.

[012-012]“What is the matter, mother?” he said.

[012-013]“Oh, Diamond, my darling! you have been so ill!” she sobbed.

[012-014]“No, mother dear. I've only been at the back of the north wind,”

[012-015]returned Diamond.

[012-016]“I thought you were dead,” said his mother.

## Section 15

[012-017]But that moment the doctor came in.

[012-018]“Oh! there!” said the doctor with gentle cheerfulness; “we're better

[012-019]to-day, I see.”

[012-020]Then he drew the mother aside, and told her not to talk to Diamond, or

[012-021]to mind what he might say; for he must be kept as quiet as possible. And

[012-022]indeed Diamond was not much inclined to talk, for he felt very strange

[012-023]and weak, which was little wonder, seeing that all the time he had been

[012-024]away he had only sucked a few lumps of ice, and there could not be much

[012-025]nourishment in them.

[012-026]Now while he is lying there, getting strong again with chicken broth and

[012-027]other nice things, I will tell my readers what had been taking place at

[012-028]his home, for they ought to be told it.

[012-029]They may have forgotten that [[miss-coleman|Miss Coleman]] was in a very poor state of

[012-030]health. Now there were three reasons for this. In the first place,

[012-031]her lungs were not strong. In the second place, there was a gentleman

[012-032]somewhere who had not behaved very well to her. In the third place, she

[012-033]had not anything particular to do. These three nots together are enough

[012-034]to make a lady very ill indeed. Of course she could not help the first

[012-035]cause; but if the other two causes had not existed, that would have been

[012-036]of little consequence; she would only have to be a little careful. The

[012-037]second she could not help quite; but if she had had anything to do,

[012-038]and had done it well, it would have been very difficult for any man to

[012-039]behave badly to her. And for this third cause of her illness, if she had

[012-040]had anything to do that was worth doing, she might have borne his bad

[012-041]behaviour so that even that would not have made her ill. It is not

[012-042]always easy, I confess, to find something to do that is worth doing, but

[012-043]the most difficult things are constantly being done, and she might have

[012-044]found something if she had tried. Her fault lay in this, that she had

[012-045]not tried. But, to be sure, her father and mother were to blame that

[012-046]they had never set her going. Only then again, nobody had told her

[012-047]father and mother that they ought to set her going in that direction. So

[012-048]as none of them would find it out of themselves, North Wind had to teach

[012-049]them.

[012-050]We know that North Wind was very busy that [[darkness|night]] on which she left

[012-051]Diamond in the cathedral. She had in a sense been blowing through

[012-052]and through the Colemans' house the whole of the night. First, Miss

[012-053]Coleman's maid had left a chink of her mistress's window open, thinking

[012-054]she had shut it, and North Wind had wound a few of her hairs round the

[012-055]lady's throat. She was considerably worse the next morning. Again, the

[012-056]ship which North Wind had sunk that very night belonged to [[mr-coleman|Mr. Coleman]].

[012-057]Nor will my readers understand what a heavy loss this was to him until

[012-058]I have informed them that he had been getting poorer and poorer for some

[012-059]time. He was not so successful in his speculations as he had been,

[012-060]for he speculated a great deal more than was right, and it was time he

[012-061]should be pulled up. It is a hard thing for a rich man to grow poor;

[012-062]but it is an awful thing for him to grow dishonest, and some kinds of

[012-063]speculation lead a man deep into dishonesty before he thinks what he is

[012-064]about. Poverty will not make a man worthless--he may be worth a great

[012-065]deal more when he is poor than he was when he was rich; but dishonesty

[012-066]goes very far indeed to make a man of no value--a thing to be thrown

[012-067]out in the dust-hole of the creation, like a bit of a broken basin, or a

[012-068]dirty rag. So North Wind had to look after Mr. Coleman, and try to make

[012-069]an honest man of him. So she sank the ship which was his last venture,

[012-070]and he was what himself and his wife and the world called ruined.

[012-071]Nor was this all yet. For on board that vessel Miss Coleman's lover was

[012-072]a passenger; and when the news came that the vessel had gone down, and

[012-073]that all on board had perished, we may be sure she did not think

[012-074]the loss of their fine house and garden and furniture the greatest

[012-075]misfortune in the world.

[012-076]Of course, the trouble did not end with Mr. Coleman and his family.

[012-077]Nobody can suffer alone. When the cause of suffering is most deeply

[012-078]hidden in the heart, and nobody knows anything about it but the man

[012-079]himself, he must be a great and a good man indeed, such as few of us

[012-080]have known, if the [[suffering|pain]] inside him does not make him behave so as to

[012-081]cause all about him to be more or less uncomfortable. But when a man

[012-082]brings money-troubles on himself by making haste to be rich, then

[012-083]most of the people he has to do with must suffer in the same way with

[012-084]himself. The elm-tree which North Wind blew down that very night, as

[012-085]if small and great trials were to be gathered in one heap, crushed Miss

[012-086]Coleman's pretty summer-house: just so the fall of Mr. Coleman crushed

[012-087]the little family that lived over his coach-house and stable. Before

[012-088]Diamond was well enough to be taken home, there was no home for him

[012-089]to go to. Mr. Coleman--or his creditors, for I do not know the

[012-090]particulars--had sold house, carriage, horses, furniture, and

[012-091]everything. He and his wife and daughter and [[mrs-crump|Mrs. Crump]] had gone to live

[012-092]in a small house in [[hoxton|Hoxton]], where he would be unknown, and whence he

[012-093]could walk to his place of business in the City. For he was not an old

[012-094]man, and hoped yet to retrieve his fortunes. Let us hope that he lived

[012-095]to retrieve his [[truth|honesty]], the tail of which had slipped through his

[012-096]fingers to the very last joint, if not beyond it.

[012-097]Of course, [[diamonds-father|Diamond's father]] had nothing to do for a time, but it was

[012-098]not so hard for him to have nothing to do as it was for Miss Coleman. He

[012-099]wrote to his wife that, if her sister would keep her there till he got

[012-100]a place, it would be better for them, and he would be greatly obliged

[012-101]to her. Meantime, [[mr-raymond|the gentleman]] who had bought the house had allowed his

[012-102]furniture to remain where it was for a little while.

[012-103]Diamond's aunt was quite willing to keep them as long as she could. And

[012-104]indeed Diamond was not yet well enough to be moved with safety.

[012-105]When he had recovered so far as to be able to go out, one day his mother

[012-106]got her sister's husband, who had a little pony-cart, to carry them

[012-107]down to [[the-sea|the sea-shore]], and leave them there for a few hours. He had

[012-108]some business to do further on at Ramsgate, and would pick them up as he

[012-109]returned. A whiff of the sea-air would do them both good, she said, and

[012-110]she thought besides she could best tell Diamond what had happened if she

[012-111]had him quite to herself.
