---
description: ""
id: ch15
label: "Chapter XV: THE MEWS"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XV. THE MEWS

[015-001]IT WAS late in the afternoon when [[diamond|Diamond]] and his mother and the baby

[015-002]reached [[london|London]]. I was so full of Diamond that I forgot to tell you a

[015-003]baby had arrived in the meantime. His father was waiting for them with

[015-004]his own cab, but they had not told Diamond who the horse was; for his

[015-005]father wanted to enjoy the pleasure of his surprise when he found it

[015-006]out. He got in with his mother without looking at the horse, and his

[015-007]father having put up Diamond's carpet-bag and his mother's little trunk,

[015-008]got upon the box himself and drove off; and Diamond was quite proud of

[015-009]riding home in his father's own carriage. But when he got to the mews,

[015-010]he could not help being a little dismayed at first; and if he had never

[015-011]been to the back of the north wind, I am afraid he would have cried a

[015-012]little. But instead of that, he said to himself it was a fine thing all

[015-013]the old furniture was there. And instead of helping his mother to be

[015-014]miserable at the change, he began to find out all the advantages of the

[015-015]place; for every place has some advantages, and they are always

[015-016]better worth knowing than the disadvantages. Certainly the weather was

[015-017]depressing, for a thick, dull, persistent rain was falling by the time

[015-018]they reached home. But happily the weather is very changeable; and

[015-019]besides, there was a good fire burning in the room, which their

[015-020]neighbour with the drunken husband had attended to for them; and the

[015-021]tea-things were put out, and the kettle was boiling on the fire. And

[015-022]with a good fire, and tea and bread and butter, things cannot be said to

[015-023]be miserable.

[015-024][[diamonds-father|Diamond's father]] and mother were, notwithstanding, rather miserable, and

[015-025]Diamond began to feel a kind of darkness beginning to spread over his

[015-026]own mind. But the same moment he said to himself, “This will never do.

[015-027]I can't give in to this. I've been to the back of the north wind. Things

[015-028]go right there, and so I must try to get things to go right here. I've

[015-029]got to fight the miserable things. They shan't make me miserable if I

[015-030]can help it.” I do not mean that he thought these very words. They are

[015-031]perhaps too grown-up for him to have thought, but they represent the

[015-032]kind of thing that was in his heart and his head. And when heart and

[015-033]head go together, nothing can stand before them.

[015-034]“What nice bread and butter this is!” said Diamond.

[015-035]“I'm glad you like it, my dear” said his father. “I bought the butter

[015-036]myself at the little shop round the corner.”

[015-037]“It's very nice, thank you, father. Oh, there's baby waking! I'll take

[015-038]him.”

[015-039]“Sit still, Diamond,” said his mother. “Go on with your bread and

[015-040]butter. You're not strong enough to lift him yet.”

[015-041]So she took the baby herself, and set him on her knee. Then Diamond

[015-042]began to amuse him, and went on till the little fellow was shrieking

[015-043]with laughter. For the baby's world was his mother's arms; and the

[015-044]drizzling rain, and the dreary mews, and even his father's troubled

[015-045]face could not touch him. What cared baby for the loss of a hundred

[015-046]situations? Yet neither father nor mother thought him hard-hearted

[015-047]because he crowed and laughed in the middle of their troubles. On the

[015-048]contrary, his crowing and laughing were infectious. His little heart was

[015-049]so full of merriment that it could not hold it all, and it ran over into

[015-050]theirs. Father and mother began to laugh too, and Diamond laughed till

[015-051]he had a fit of coughing which frightened his mother, and made them all

[015-052]stop. His father took the baby, and his mother put him to bed.

[015-053]But it was indeed a change to them all, not only from [[sandwich|Sandwich]], but from

[015-054]their old place, instead of the great [[the-river|river]] where the huge barges with

[015-055]their mighty brown and yellow sails went tacking from side to side like

[015-056]little pleasure-skiffs, and where the long thin boats shot past with

[015-057]eight and sometimes twelve rowers, their windows now looked out upon a

[015-058]dirty paved yard. And there was no garden more for Diamond to run into

[015-059]when he pleased, with gay flowers about his feet, and solemn sun-filled

[015-060]trees over his head. Neither was there a wooden wall at the back of

[015-061]his bed with a hole in it for [[north-wind|North Wind]] to come in at when she liked.

[015-062]Indeed, there was such a high wall, and there were so many houses about

[015-063]the mews, that North Wind seldom got into the place at all, except when

[015-064]something must be done, and she had a grand cleaning out like other

[015-065]housewives; while the partition at the head of Diamond's new bed only

[015-066]divided it from the room occupied by a cabman who drank too much beer,

[015-067]and came home chiefly to quarrel with his wife and pinch his children.

[015-068]It was dreadful to Diamond to hear the scolding and the crying. But it

[015-069]could not make him miserable, because he had been at the back of the

[015-070]north wind.

[015-071]If my reader find it hard to believe that Diamond should be so good,

[015-072]he must remember that he had been to the back of the north wind. If he

[015-073]never knew a boy so good, did he ever know a boy that had been to the

[015-074]back of the north wind? It was not in the least strange of Diamond to

[015-075]behave as he did; on the contrary, it was thoroughly sensible of him.

[015-076]We shall see how he got on.
