---
description: ""
id: ch16
label: "Chapter XVI: DIAMOND MAKES A BEGINNING"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XVI. DIAMOND MAKES A BEGINNING

[016-001]THE wind blew loud, but [[diamond|Diamond]] slept a deep [[dream|sleep]], and never heard

[016-002]it. My own impression is that every time when Diamond slept well and

[016-003]remembered nothing about it in the morning, he had been all that [[darkness|night]]

[016-004]at the back of the north wind. I am almost sure that was how he woke

[016-005]so refreshed, and felt so quiet and hopeful all the day. Indeed he said

[016-006]this much, though not to me--that always when he woke from such a sleep

[016-007]there was a something in his mind, he could not tell what--could not

[016-008]tell whether it was the last far-off sounds of the [[the-river|river]] dying away in

[016-009]the distance, or some of the words of the endless [[music|song]] his mother had

[016-010]read to him on [[the-sea|the sea-shore]]. Sometimes he thought it must have been

[016-011]the twittering of the swallows--over the shallows, you, know; but it may

[016-012]have been the chirping of the dingy sparrows picking up their breakfast

[016-013]in the yard--how can I tell? I don't know what I know, I only know what

[016-014]I think; and to tell the truth, I am more for the swallows than the

[016-015]sparrows. When he knew he was coming awake, he would sometimes try hard

[016-016]to keep hold of the words of what seemed a new song, one he had not

[016-017]heard before--a song in which the words and the [[song|music]] somehow appeared

[016-018]to be all one; but even when he thought he had got them well fixed in

[016-019]his mind, ever as he came awaker--as he would say--one line faded away

[016-020]out of it, and then another, and then another, till at last there was

[016-021]nothing left but some lovely picture of water or grass or daisies, or

[016-022]something else very common, but with all the commonness polished off it,

[016-023]and the lovely soul of it, which people so seldom see, and, alas! yet

[016-024]seldomer believe in, shining out. But after that he would sing the

[016-025]oddest, loveliest little songs to the baby--of his own making, his

[016-026]mother said; but Diamond said he did not make them; they were made

[016-027]somewhere inside him, and he knew nothing about them till they were

[016-028]coming out.

[016-029]When he woke that first morning he got up at once, saying to himself,

[016-030]“I've been ill long enough, and have given a great deal of trouble; I

[016-031]must try and be of use now, and help my mother.” When he went into her

[016-032]room he found her lighting the fire, and his father just getting out of

[016-033]bed. They had only the one room, besides the little one, not much more

[016-034]than a closet, in which Diamond slept. He began at once to set things

[016-035]to rights, but the baby waking up, he took him, and nursed him till

[016-036]his mother had got the breakfast ready. She was looking gloomy, and his

[016-037]father was silent; and indeed except Diamond had done all he possibly

[016-038]could to keep out the misery that was trying to get in at doors and

[016-039]windows, he too would have grown miserable, and then they would have

[016-040]been all miserable together. But to try to make others comfortable is

[016-041]the only way to get right comfortable ourselves, and that comes partly

[016-042]of not being able to think so much about ourselves when we are helping

[016-043]other people. For our Selves will always do pretty well if we don't pay

[016-044]them too much attention. Our Selves are like some little children who

[016-045]will be happy enough so long as they are left to their own games, but

[016-046]when we begin to interfere with them, and make them presents of too nice

[016-047]playthings, or too many sweet things, they begin at once to fret and

[016-048]spoil.

## Section 18

[016-049]“Why, Diamond, child!” said his mother at last, “you're as good to your

[016-050]mother as if you were a girl--nursing the baby, and toasting the bread,

[016-051]and sweeping up [[home|the hearth]]! I declare a body would think you had been

[016-052]among the fairies.”

[016-053]Could Diamond have had greater praise or greater pleasure? You see

[016-054]when he forgot his Self his mother took care of his Self, and loved and

[016-055]praised his Self. Our own praises poison our Selves, and puff and swell

[016-056]them up, till they lose all shape and [[beauty]], and become like great

[016-057]toadstools. But the praises of father or mother do our Selves good, and

[016-058]comfort them and make them beautiful. They never do them any harm. If

[016-059]they do any harm, it comes of our mixing some of our own praises with

[016-060]them, and that turns them nasty and slimy and poisonous.

[016-061]When his father had finished his breakfast, which he did rather in a

[016-062]hurry, he got up and went down into the yard to get out his horse and

[016-063]put him to the cab.

[016-064]“Won't you come and see the cab, Diamond?” he said.

[016-065]“Yes, please, father--if mother can spare me a minute,” answered

[016-066]Diamond.

[016-067]“Bless the child! I don't want him,” said his mother cheerfully.

[016-068]But as he was following his father out of the door, she called him back.

[016-069]“Diamond, just hold the baby one minute. I have something to say to your

[016-070]father.”

[016-071]So Diamond sat down again, took the baby in his lap, and began poking

[016-072]his face into its little body, laughing and singing all the while,

[016-073]so that the baby crowed like a little bantam. And what he sang was

[016-074]something like this--such nonsense to those that couldn't understand it!

[016-075]but not to the baby, who got all the good in the world out of it:--

[016-076]baby's a-[[sleep|sleeping]] wake up baby for all the swallows are the merriest

[016-077]fellows and have the yellowest children who would go [[sleep|sleeping]] and

[016-078]snore like a gaby disturbing his mother and father and brother and all

[016-079]a-boring their ears with his snoring snoring snoring for himself and no

[016-080]other for himself in particular wake up baby sit up perpendicular hark

[016-081]to the gushing hark to the rushing where the sheep are the woolliest and

[016-082]the lambs the unruliest and their tails the whitest and their eyes the

[016-083]brightest and baby's the bonniest and baby's the funniest and baby's the

[016-084]shiniest and baby's the tiniest and baby's the merriest and baby's

[016-085]the worriest of all the lambs that plague their dams and mother's

[016-086]the whitest of all the dams that feed the lambs that go crop-cropping

[016-087]without stop-stopping and father's the best of all the swallows that

[016-088]build their nest out of the shining shallows and he has the merriest

[016-089]children that's baby and Diamond and Diamond and baby and baby and

[016-090]Diamond and Diamond and baby--

[016-091]Here Diamond's knees went off in a wild dance which tossed the baby

[016-092]about and shook the laughter out of him in immoderate peals. His mother

[016-093]had been listening at the door to the last few lines of his song, and

[016-094]came in with the tears in her eyes. She took the baby from him, gave him

[016-095]a kiss, and told him to run to his father.

[016-096]By the time Diamond got into the yard, the horse was between the shafts,

[016-097]and his father was looping the traces on. Diamond went round to look at

[016-098]the horse. The sight of him made him feel very queer. He did not know

[016-099]much about different horses, and all other horses than their own were

[016-100]very much the same to him. But he could not make it out. This was

[016-101]Diamond and it wasn't Diamond. Diamond didn't hang his head like that;

[016-102]yet the head that was hanging was very like the one that Diamond used

[016-103]to hold so high. Diamond's bones didn't show through his skin like that;

[016-104]but the skin they pushed out of shape so was very like Diamond's skin;

[016-105]and the bones might be Diamond's bones, for he had never seen the shape

[016-106]of them. But when he came round in front of the old horse, and he put

[016-107]out his long neck, and began sniffing at him and rubbing his upper lip

[016-108]and his nose on him, then Diamond saw it could be no other than old

[016-109]Diamond, and he did just as his father had done before--put his arms

[016-110]round his neck and cried--but not much.

[016-111]“Ain't it jolly, father?” he said. “Was there ever anybody so lucky as

[016-112]me? Dear old Diamond!”

[016-113]And he hugged the horse again, and kissed both his big hairy cheeks. He

[016-114]could only manage one at a time, however--the other cheek was so far off

[016-115]on the other side of his big head.

[016-116]His father mounted the box with just the same air, as Diamond thought,

[016-117]with which he had used to get upon the coach-box, and Diamond said

[016-118]to himself, “Father's as grand as ever anyhow.” He had kept his brown

[016-119]livery-coat, only his wife had taken the silver buttons off and put

[016-120]brass ones instead, because they did not think it polite to [[mr-coleman|Mr. Coleman]]

[016-121]in his fallen fortunes to let his crest be seen upon the box of a cab.

[016-122]Old Diamond had kept just his collar; and that had the silver crest upon

[016-123]it still, for his master thought nobody would notice that, and so let it

[016-124]remain for a memorial of the better days of which it reminded him--not

[016-125]unpleasantly, seeing it had been by no fault either of his or of the old

[016-126]horse's that they had come down in the world together.

[016-127]“Oh, father, do let me drive a bit,” said Diamond, jumping up on the box

[016-128]beside him.

[016-129]His father changed places with him at once, putting the reins into his

[016-130]hands. Diamond gathered them up eagerly.

[016-131]“Don't pull at his mouth,” said his father, “just feel, at it gently

[016-132]to let him know you're there and attending to him. That's what I call

[016-133]talking to him through the reins.”

[016-134]“Yes, father, I understand,” said Diamond. Then to the horse he said,

[016-135]“Go on Diamond.” And old Diamond's ponderous bulk began at once to move

[016-136]to the voice of the little boy.

[016-137]But before they had reached the entrance of the mews, another voice

[016-138]called after young Diamond, which, in his turn, he had to obey, for it

[016-139]was that of his mother. “Diamond! Diamond!” it cried; and Diamond pulled

[016-140]the reins, and the horse stood still as a stone.

[016-141]“Husband,” said his mother, coming up, “you're never going to trust him

[016-142]with the reins--a baby like that?”

[016-143]“He must learn some day, and he can't begin too soon. I see already he's

[016-144]a born coachman,” said his father proudly. “And I don't see well how

[016-145]he could escape it, for my father and my grandfather, that's his

[016-146]great-grandfather, was all coachmen, I'm told; so it must come natural

[016-147]to him, any one would think. Besides, you see, old Diamond's as proud of

[016-148]him as we are our own selves, wife. Don't you see how he's turning round

[016-149]his ears, with the mouths of them open, for the first word he speaks to

[016-150]tumble in? He's too well bred to turn his head, you know.”

[016-151]“Well, but, husband, I can't do without him to-day. Everything's got to

[016-152]be done, you know. It's my first day here. And there's that baby!”

[016-153]“Bless you, wife! I never meant to take him away--only to the bottom of

[016-154]Endell Street. He can watch his way back.”

[016-155]“No thank you, father; not to-day,” said Diamond. “Mother wants me.

[016-156]Perhaps she'll let me go another day.”

[016-157]“Very well, my man,” said his father, and took the reins which Diamond

[016-158]was holding out to him.

[016-159]Diamond got down, a little disappointed of course, and went with his

[016-160]mother, who was too pleased to speak. She only took hold of his hand as

[016-161]tight as if she had been afraid of his running away instead of glad that

[016-162]he would not leave her.

[016-163]Now, although they did not know it, the owner of [[the-stable|the stables]], the same

[016-164]man who had sold the horse to his father, had been standing just inside

[016-165]one of the stable-doors, with his hands in his pockets, and had heard

[016-166]and seen all that passed; and from that day [[mr-stonecrop|John Stonecrop]] took a great

[016-167]fancy to the little boy. And this was the beginning of what came of it.

[016-168]The same evening, just as Diamond was feeling tired of the day's work,

[016-169]and wishing his father would come home, Mr. Stonecrop knocked at the

[016-170]door. His mother went and opened it.

[016-171]“Good evening, ma'am,” said he. “Is the little master in?”

[016-172]“Yes, to be sure he is--at your service, I'm sure, Mr. Stonecrop,” said

[016-173]his mother.

[016-174]“No, no, ma'am; it's I'm at his service. I'm just a-going out with my

[016-175]own cab, and if he likes to come with me, he shall drive my old horse

[016-176]till he's tired.”

[016-177]“It's getting rather late for him,” said his mother thoughtfully. “You

[016-178]see he's been an invalid.”

[016-179]Diamond thought, what a funny thing! How could he have been an invalid

[016-180]when he did not even know what the word meant? But, of course, his

[016-181]mother was right.

[016-182]“Oh, well,” said Mr. Stonecrop, “I can just let him drive through

[016-183]Bloomsbury Square, and then he shall run home again.”

[016-184]“Very good, sir. And I'm much obliged to you,” said his mother.

[016-185]And Diamond, dancing with [[joy|delight]], got his cap, put his hand in Mr.

[016-186]Stonecrop's, and went with him to the yard where the cab was waiting.

[016-187]He did not think the horse looked nearly so nice as Diamond, nor Mr.

[016-188]Stonecrop nearly so grand as his father; but he was none, the less

[016-189]pleased. He got up on the box, and his new friend got up beside him.

[016-190]“What's the horse's name?” whispered Diamond, as he took the reins from

[016-191]the man.

[016-192]“It's not a nice name,” said Mr. Stonecrop. “You needn't call him by it.

[016-193]I didn't give it him. He'll go well enough without it. Give the boy a

[016-194]whip, Jack. I never carries one when I drive old----”

[016-195]He didn't finish the sentence. Jack handed Diamond a whip, with which,

[016-196]by holding it half down the stick, he managed just to flack the haunches

[016-197]of the horse; and away he went.

[016-198]“Mind the gate,” said Mr. Stonecrop; and Diamond did mind the gate, and

[016-199]guided the nameless horse through it in safety, pulling him this way and

[016-200]that according as was necessary. Diamond learned to drive all the sooner

[016-201]that he had been accustomed to do what he was told, and could obey the

[016-202]smallest hint in a moment. Nothing helps one to get on like that. Some

[016-203]people don't know how to do what they are told; they have not been used

[016-204]to it, and they neither understand quickly nor are able to turn what

[016-205]they do understand into action quickly. With an obedient mind one learns

[016-206]the rights of things fast enough; for it is the law of the universe, and

[016-207]to obey is to understand.

[016-208]“Look out!” cried Mr. Stonecrop, as they were turning the corner into

[016-209]Bloomsbury Square.

[016-210]It was getting dusky now. A cab was approaching rather rapidly from

[016-211]the opposite direction, and Diamond pulling aside, and the other driver

[016-212]pulling up, they only just escaped a collision. Then they knew each

[016-213]other.

[016-214]“Why, Diamond, it's a bad beginning to run into your own father,” cried

[016-215]the driver.

[016-216]“But, father, wouldn't it have been a bad ending to run into your own

[016-217]son?” said Diamond in return; and the two men laughed heartily.

[016-218]“This is very kind of you, I'm sure, Stonecrop,” said his father.

[016-219]“Not a bit. He's a brave fellow, and'll be fit to drive on his own hook

[016-220]in a week or two. But I think you'd better let him drive you home now,

[016-221]for his mother don't like his having over much of the night air, and I

[016-222]promised not to take him farther than the square.”

## Section 19

[016-223]“Come along then, Diamond,” said his father, as he brought his cab up to

[016-224]the other, and moved off the box to the seat beside it. Diamond jumped

[016-225]across, caught at the reins, said “Good-night, and thank you, Mr.

[016-226]Stonecrop,” and drove away home, feeling more of a man than he had ever

[016-227]yet had a chance of feeling in all his life. Nor did his father find it

[016-228]necessary to give him a single hint as to his driving. Only I suspect

[016-229]the fact that it was old Diamond, and old Diamond on his way to his

[016-230]stable, may have had something to do with young Diamond's success.

[016-231]“Well, child,” said his mother, when he entered the room, “you've not

[016-232]been long gone.”

[016-233]“No, mother; here I am. Give me the baby.”

[016-234]“The baby's asleep,” said his mother.

[016-235]“Then give him to me, and I'll lay him down.”

[016-236]But as Diamond took him, he woke up and began to laugh. For he was

[016-237]indeed one of the merriest children. And no wonder, for he was as plump

[016-238]as a plum-pudding, and had never had an ache or a [[suffering|pain]] that lasted more

[016-239]than five minutes at a time. Diamond sat down with him and began to sing

[016-240]to him.

[016-241]baby baby babbing your father's gone a-cabbing to catch a shilling for

[016-242]its pence to make the baby babbing dance for old Diamond's a duck they

[016-243]say he can swim but the duck of diamonds is baby that's him and of all

[016-244]the swallows the merriest fellows that bake their cake with the water

[016-245]they shake out of the river flowing for ever and make dust into clay on

[016-246]the shiniest day to build their nest father's the best and mother's the

[016-247]whitest and her eyes are the brightest of all the dams that watch their

[016-248]lambs cropping the grass where the waters pass singing for ever and of

[016-249]all the lambs with the shakingest tails and the jumpingest feet baby's

[016-250]the funniest baby's the bonniest and he never wails and he's always

[016-251]sweet and Diamond's his nurse and Diamond's his nurse and Diamond's his

[016-252]nurse

[016-253]When Diamond's rhymes grew scarce, he always began dancing the baby.

[016-254]Some people wondered that such a child could rhyme as he did, but his

[016-255]rhymes were not very good, for he was only trying to remember what he

[016-256]had heard the river sing at the back of the north wind.
