---
description: ""
id: ch18
label: "Chapter XVIII: THE DRUNKEN CABMAN"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XVIII. THE DRUNKEN CABMAN

[018-001]A FEW nights after this, [[diamond|Diamond]] woke up suddenly, believing he heard

[018-002][[north-wind|North Wind]] thundering along. But it was something quite different. South

[018-003]Wind was moaning round the chimneys, to be sure, for she was not very

[018-004]happy that [[darkness|night]], but it was not her voice that had wakened Diamond. Her

[018-005]voice would only have lulled him the deeper asleep. It was a loud, angry

[018-006]voice, now growling like that of a beast, now raving like that of a

[018-007]madman; and when Diamond came a little wider awake, he knew that it was

[018-008]the voice of the drunken cabman, the wall of whose room was at the head

[018-009]of his bed. It was anything but pleasant to hear, but he could not help

[018-010]hearing it. At length there came a cry from the woman, and then a scream

[018-011]from the baby. Thereupon Diamond thought it time that somebody did

[018-012]something, and as himself was the only somebody at hand, he must go and

[018-013]see whether he could not do something. So he got up and put on part of

[018-014]his clothes, and went down the stair, for [[drunken-cabman|the cabman]]'s room did not open

[018-015]upon their stair, and he had to go out into the yard, and in at the next

[018-016]door. This, fortunately, the cabman, being drunk, had left open. By

[018-017]the time he reached their stair, all was still except the voice of the

[018-018]crying baby, which guided him to the right door. He opened it softly,

[018-019]and peeped in. There, leaning back in a chair, with his arms hanging

[018-020]down by his sides, and his legs stretched out before him and supported

[018-021]on his heels, sat the drunken cabman. His wife lay in her clothes upon

[018-022]the bed, sobbing, and the baby was wailing in the cradle. It was very

[018-023]miserable altogether.

[018-024]Now the way most people do when they see anything very miserable is to

[018-025]turn away from the sight, and try to forget it. But Diamond began as

[018-026]usual to try to destroy the misery. The little boy was just as much one

[018-027]of God's messengers as if he had been an [[angel]] with a flaming sword,

[018-028]going out to fight the devil. The devil he had to fight just then

[018-029]was Misery. And the way he fought him was the very best. Like a wise

[018-030]soldier, he attacked him first in his weakest point--that was the baby;

[018-031]for Misery can never get such a hold of a baby as of a grown person.

[018-032]Diamond was knowing in babies, and he knew he could do something to make

[018-033]the baby, happy; for although he had only known one baby as yet, and

[018-034]although not one baby is the same as another, yet they are so very much

[018-035]alike in some things, and he knew that one baby so thoroughly, that he

[018-036]had good reason to believe he could do something for any other. I have

[018-037]known people who would have begun to fight the devil in a very different

[018-038]and a very stupid way. They would have begun by scolding the idiotic

[018-039]cabman; and next they would make his wife angry by saying it must be her

[018-040]fault as well as his, and by leaving ill-bred though well-meant shabby

[018-041]little books for them to read, which they were sure to hate the sight

[018-042]of; while all the time they would not have put out a finger to touch the

[018-043]wailing baby. But Diamond had him out of the cradle in a moment, set

[018-044]him up on his knee, and told him to look at the light. Now all the light

[018-045]there was came only from a lamp in the yard, and it was a very dingy and

[018-046]yellow light, for the glass of the lamp was dirty, and the gas was bad;

[018-047]but the light that came from it was, notwithstanding, as certainly

[018-048]light as if it had come from the sun itself, and the baby knew that, and

[018-049]smiled to it; and although it was indeed a wretched room which that lamp

[018-050]lighted--so dreary, and dirty, and empty, and hopeless!--there in the

[018-051]middle of it sat Diamond on a stool, smiling to the baby, and the baby

[018-052]on his knees smiling to the lamp. The father of him sat staring at

[018-053]nothing, neither asleep nor awake, not quite lost in stupidity either,

[018-054]for through it all he was dimly angry with himself, he did not know

[018-055]why. It was that he had struck his wife. He had forgotten it, but was

[018-056]miserable about it, notwithstanding. And this misery was the voice of

[018-057]the great [[love|Love]] that had made him and his wife and the baby and Diamond,

[018-058]speaking in his heart, and telling him to be good. For that great Love

[018-059]speaks in the most wretched and dirty hearts; only the tone of its voice

[018-060]depends on the echoes of the place in which it sounds. On Mount Sinai,

[018-061]it was thunder; in the cabman's heart it was misery; in the soul of St.

[018-062]John it was perfect blessedness.

[018-063]By and by he became aware that there was a voice of [[music|singing]] in the room.

[018-064]This, of course, was the voice of Diamond [[song|singing]] to the baby--song

[018-065]after song, every one as foolish as another to the cabman, for he was

[018-066]too tipsy to part one word from another: all the words mixed up in his

[018-067]ear in a gurgle without division or stop; for such was the way he spoke

[018-068]himself, when he was in this horrid condition. But the baby was more

[018-069]than content with Diamond's songs, and Diamond himself was so contented

[018-070]with what the songs were all about, that he did not care a bit about the

[018-071]songs themselves, if only baby liked them. But they did the cabman good

[018-072]as well as the baby and Diamond, for they put him to [[dream|sleep]], and the

[018-073]sleep was busy all the time it lasted, smoothing the wrinkles out of his

[018-074]temper.

[018-075]At length Diamond grew tired of singing, and began to talk to the baby

[018-076]instead. And as soon as he stopped singing, the cabman began to wake up.

[018-077]His brain was a little clearer now, his temper a little smoother,

[018-078]and his heart not quite so dirty. He began to listen and he went on

[018-079]listening, and heard Diamond saying to the baby something like this, for

[018-080]he thought the cabman was asleep:

[018-081]“Poor daddy! Baby's daddy takes too much beer and gin, and that makes

[018-082]him somebody else, and not his own self at all. Baby's daddy would never

[018-083]hit baby's mammy if he didn't take too much beer. He's very fond of

[018-084]baby's mammy, and works from morning to night to get her breakfast and

[018-085]dinner and supper, only at night he forgets, and pays the money away for

[018-086]beer. And they put nasty stuff in beer, I've heard my daddy say, that

[018-087]drives all the good out, and lets all the bad in. Daddy says when a man

[018-088]takes a drink, there's a thirsty devil creeps into his inside, because

[018-089]he knows he will always get enough there. And the devil is always crying

[018-090]out for more drink, and that makes the man thirsty, and so he drinks

[018-091]more and more, till he kills himself with it. And then the ugly devil

[018-092]creeps out of him, and crawls about on his belly, looking for some other

[018-093]cabman to get into, that he may drink, drink, drink. That's what my

[018-094]daddy says, baby. And he says, too, the only way to make the devil come

[018-095]out is to give him plenty of cold water and tea and coffee, and nothing

[018-096]at all that comes from the public-house; for the devil can't abide that

[018-097]kind of stuff, and creeps out pretty soon, for fear of being drowned

[018-098]in it. But your daddy will drink the nasty stuff, poor man! I wish he

[018-099]wouldn't, for it makes mammy cross with him, and no wonder! and then

[018-100]when mammy's cross, he's crosser, and there's nobody in the house to

[018-101]take care of them but baby; and you do take care of them, baby--don't

[018-102]you, baby? I know you do. Babies always take care of their fathers and

[018-103]mothers--don't they, baby? That's what they come for--isn't it, baby?

[018-104]And when daddy stops drinking beer and nasty gin with turpentine in it,

[018-105]father says, then mammy will be so happy, and look so pretty! and daddy

[018-106]will be so good to baby! and baby will be as happy as a swallow, which

[018-107]is the merriest fellow! And Diamond will be so happy too! And when

[018-108]Diamond's a man, he'll take baby out with him on the box, and teach him

[018-109]to drive a cab.”

## Section 21

[018-110]He went on with chatter like this till baby was asleep, by which time

[018-111]he was tired, and father and mother were both wide awake--only rather

[018-112]confused--the one from the beer, the other from the blow--and staring,

[018-113]the one from his chair, the other from her bed, at Diamond. But he was

[018-114]quite unaware of their notice, for he sat half-asleep, with his eyes

[018-115]wide open, staring in his turn, though without knowing it, at the

[018-116]cabman, while the cabman could not withdraw his gaze from Diamond's

[018-117]white face and big eyes. For Diamond's face was always rather pale, and

[018-118]now it was paler than usual with sleeplessness, and the light of the

[018-119]street-lamp upon it. At length he found himself nodding, and he knew

[018-120]then it was time to put the baby down, lest he should let him fall. So

[018-121]he rose from the little three-legged stool, and laid the baby in the

[018-122]cradle, and covered him up--it was well it was a warm night, and he did

[018-123]not want much covering--and then he all but staggered out of the door,

[018-124]he was so tipsy himself with sleep.

[018-125]“Wife,” said the cabman, turning towards the bed, “I do somehow believe

[018-126]that wur a angel just gone. Did you see him, wife? He warn't wery big,

[018-127]and he hadn't got none o' them wingses, you know. It wur one o' them

[018-128]baby-angels you sees on the gravestones, you know.”

[018-129]“Nonsense, hubby!” said his wife; “but it's just as good. I might say

[018-130]better, for you can ketch hold of him when you like. That's little

[018-131]Diamond as everybody knows, and a duck o' diamonds he is! No woman could

[018-132]wish for a better child than he be.”

[018-133]“I ha' heerd on him in the stable, but I never see the brat afore. Come,

[018-134]old girl, let bygones be bygones, and gie us a kiss, and we'll go to

[018-135]bed.”

[018-136]The cabman kept his cab in another yard, although he had his room in

[018-137]this. He was often late in coming home, and was not one to take notice

[018-138]of children, especially when he was tipsy, which was oftener than not.

[018-139]Hence, if he had ever seen Diamond, he did not know him. But his wife

[018-140]knew him well enough, as did every one else who lived all day in the

[018-141]yard. She was a good-natured woman. It was she who had got the fire

[018-142]lighted and the tea ready for them when Diamond and his mother came home

[018-143]from [[sandwich|Sandwich]]. And her husband was not an ill-natured man either, and

[018-144]when in the morning he recalled not only Diamond's visit, but how he

[018-145]himself had behaved to his wife, he was very vexed with himself, and

[018-146]gladdened his poor wife's heart by telling her how sorry he was. And for

[018-147]a whole week after, he did not go near the public-house, hard as it was

[018-148]to avoid it, seeing a certain rich brewer had built one, like a trap to

[018-149]catch souls and bodies in, at almost every corner he had to pass on his

[018-150]way home. Indeed, he was never quite so bad after that, though it was

[018-151]some time before he began really to reform.
