---
description: ""
id: ch25
label: "Chapter XXV: DIAMOND'S DREAM"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XXV. DIAMOND'S DREAM

[025-001]“THERE, baby!” said [[diamond|Diamond]]; “I'm so happy that I can only sing

[025-002]nonsense. Oh, father, think if you had been a poor man, and hadn't had a

[025-003]cab and old Diamond! What should I have done?”

[025-004]“I don't know indeed what you could have done,” said his father from the

[025-005]bed.

[025-006]“We should have all starved, my precious Diamond,” said his mother,

[025-007]whose pride in her boy was even greater than her joy in the shillings.

[025-008]Both of them together made her heart ache, for pleasure can do that as

[025-009]well as [[suffering|pain]].

[025-010]“Oh no! we shouldn't,” said Diamond. “I could have taken [[nanny|Nanny]]'s

[025-011]crossing till she came back; and then the money, instead of going for

[025-012][[sal|Old Sal]]'s gin, would have gone for father's beef-tea. I wonder what

[025-013]Nanny will do when she gets well again. Somebody else will be sure to

[025-014]have taken the crossing by that time. I wonder if she will fight for it,

[025-015]and whether I shall have to help her. I won't bother my head about that.

[025-016]Time enough yet! Hey diddle! hey diddle! hey diddle diddle! I wonder

[025-017]whether [[mr-raymond|Mr. Raymond]] would take me to see Nanny. Hey diddle! hey diddle!

[025-018]hey diddle diddle! The baby and fiddle! O, mother, I'm such a silly!

[025-019]But I can't help it. I wish I could think of something else, but there's

[025-020]nothing will come into my head but hey diddle diddle! the cat and the

[025-021]fiddle! I wonder what the angels do--when they're extra happy, you

[025-022]know--when they've been driving cabs all day and taking home the money

[025-023]to their mothers. Do you think they ever sing nonsense, mother?”

[025-024]“I daresay they've got their own sort of it,” answered his mother,

[025-025]“else they wouldn't be like other people.” She was thinking more of her

[025-026]twenty-one shillings and sixpence, and of the nice dinner she would get

[025-027]for her sick husband next day, than of the angels and their nonsense,

[025-028]when she said it. But Diamond found her answer all right.

[025-029]“Yes, to be sure,” he replied. “They wouldn't be like other people

[025-030]if they hadn't their nonsense sometimes. But it must be very pretty

[025-031]nonsense, and not like that silly hey diddle diddle! the cat and the

[025-032]fiddle! I wish I could get it out of my head. I wonder what the angels'

[025-033]nonsense is like. Nonsense is a very good thing, ain't it, mother?--a

[025-034]little of it now and then; more of it for baby, and not so much for

[025-035]grown people like cabmen and their mothers? It's like the pepper and

[025-036]salt that goes in the soup--that's it--isn't it, mother? There's baby

[025-037]fast asleep! Oh, what a nonsense baby it is--to [[dream|sleep]] so much! Shall I

[025-038]put him down, mother?”

[025-039]Diamond chattered away. What rose in his happy little heart ran out

[025-040]of his mouth, and did his father and mother good. When he went to bed,

[025-041]which he did early, being more tired, as you may suppose, than usual, he

[025-042]was still thinking what the nonsense could be like which the angels

[025-043]sang when they were too happy to sing sense. But before coming to

[025-044]any conclusion he fell fast asleep. And no wonder, for it must be

[025-045]acknowledged a difficult question.

[025-046]That [[darkness|night]] he had a very curious dream which I think my readers would

[025-047]like to have told them. They would, at least, if they are as fond of

[025-048]nice dreams as I am, and don't have enough of them of their own.

[025-049]He dreamed that he was running about in the twilight in the old garden.

[025-050]He thought he was waiting for [[north-wind|North Wind]], but she did not come. So he

[025-051]would run down to the back gate, and see if she were there. He ran and

[025-052]ran. It was a good long garden out of his dream, but in his dream it

[025-053]had grown so long and spread out so wide that the gate he wanted was

[025-054]nowhere. He ran and ran, but instead of coming to the gate found himself

[025-055]in a beautiful country, not like any country he had ever been in before.

[025-056]There were no trees of any size; nothing bigger in fact than hawthorns,

[025-057]which were full of may-blossom. The place in which they grew was wild

[025-058]and dry, mostly covered with grass, but having patches of heath. It

[025-059]extended on every side as far as he could see. But although it was so

[025-060]wild, yet wherever in an ordinary heath you might have expected furze

[025-061]bushes, or holly, or broom, there grew roses--wild and rare--all kinds.

[025-062]On every side, far and near, roses were glowing. There too was the

[025-063]gum-cistus, whose flowers fall every night and come again the next

[025-064]morning, lilacs and syringas and laburnums, and many shrubs besides,

[025-065]of which he did not know the names; but the roses were everywhere. He

[025-066]wandered on and on, wondering when it would come to an end. It was of no

[025-067]use going back, for there was no house to be seen anywhere. But he was

[025-068]not frightened, for you know Diamond was used to things that were

[025-069]rather out of the way. He threw himself down under a rose-bush, and fell

[025-070]asleep.

[025-071]He woke, not out of his dream, but into it, thinking he heard a child's

[025-072]voice, calling “Diamond, Diamond!” He jumped up, but all was still about

[025-073]him. The rose-bushes were pouring out their odours in clouds. He could

[025-074]see the scent like mists of the same colour as the rose, issuing like

[025-075]a slow fountain and spreading in the air till it joined the thin rosy

[025-076]vapour which hung over all the wilderness. But again came the voice

[025-077]calling him, and it seemed to come from over his head. He looked up, but

[025-078]saw only the deep blue sky full of [[stars]]--more brilliant, however, than

[025-079]he had seen them before; and both sky and stars looked nearer to the

[025-080]earth.

[025-081]While he gazed up, again he heard the cry. At the same moment he saw one

[025-082]of the biggest stars over his head give a kind of twinkle and jump,

[025-083]as if it went out and came in again. He threw himself on his back,

[025-084]and fixed his eyes upon it. Nor had he gazed long before it went out,

[025-085]leaving something like a scar in the blue. But as he went on gazing he

[025-086]saw a face where the star had been--a merry face, with bright eyes.

[025-087]The eyes appeared not only to see Diamond, but to know that Diamond had

[025-088]caught sight of them, for the face withdrew the same moment. Again came

[025-089]the voice, calling “Diamond, Diamond;” and in jumped the star to its

[025-090]place.

[025-091]Diamond called as loud as he could, right up into the sky:

[025-092]“Here's Diamond, down below you. What do you want him to do?”

[025-093]The next instant many of the stars round about that one went out, and

[025-094]many voices shouted from the sky,--

[025-095]“Come up; come up. We're so jolly! Diamond! Diamond!”

[025-096]This was followed by a peal of the merriest, kindliest laughter, and all

[025-097]the stars jumped into their places again.

[025-098]“How am I to come up?” shouted Diamond.

[025-099]“Go round the rose-bush. It's got its foot in it,” said the first voice.

[025-100]Diamond got up at once, and walked to the other side of the rose-bush.

[025-101]There he found what seemed the very opposite of what he wanted--a stair

[025-102]down into the earth. It was of turf and moss. It did not seem to promise

[025-103]well for getting into the sky, but Diamond had learned to look through

[025-104]the look of things. The voice must have meant that he was to go down

[025-105]this stair; and down this stair Diamond went, without waiting to think

[025-106]more about it.

[025-107]It was such a nice stair, so cool and soft--all the sides as well as the

[025-108]steps grown with moss and grass and ferns! Down and down Diamond went--a

[025-109]long way, until at last he heard the gurgling and splashing of a little

[025-110]stream; nor had he gone much farther before he met it--yes, met it

[025-111]coming up the stairs to meet him, running up just as naturally as if

[025-112]it had been doing the other thing. Neither was Diamond in the least

[025-113]surprised to see it pitching itself from one step to another as it

[025-114]climbed towards him: he never thought it was odd--and no more it was,

[025-115]there. It would have been odd here. It made a merry [[music|tune]] as it came, and

[025-116]its voice was like the laughter he had heard from the sky. This appeared

[025-117]promising; and he went on, down and down the stair, and up and up the

[025-118]stream, till at last he came where it hurried out from under a stone,

[025-119]and the stair stopped altogether. And as the stream bubbled up, the

[025-120]stone shook and swayed with its force; and Diamond thought he would try

[025-121]to lift it. Lightly it rose to his hand, forced up by the stream from

[025-122]below; and, by what would have seemed an unaccountable perversion of

[025-123]things had he been awake, threatened to come tumbling upon his head.

[025-124]But he avoided it, and when it fell, got upon it. He now saw that the

[025-125]opening through which the water came pouring in was over his head, and

[025-126]with the help of the stone he scrambled out by it, and found himself

[025-127]on the side of a grassy hill which rounded away from him in every

[025-128]direction, and down which came the brook which vanished in the hole.

[025-129]But scarcely had he noticed so much as this before a merry shouting and

[025-130]laughter burst upon him, and a number of naked little boys came running,

[025-131]every one eager to get to him first. At the shoulders of each fluttered

[025-132]two little wings, which were of no use for flying, as they were mere

[025-133]buds; only being made for it they could not help fluttering as if they

[025-134]were flying. Just as the foremost of the troop reached him, one or two

[025-135]of them fell, and the rest with shouts of laughter came tumbling over

[025-136]them till they heaped up a mound of struggling merriment. One after

[025-137]another they extricated themselves, and each as he got free threw his

[025-138]arms round Diamond and kissed him. Diamond's heart was ready to melt

[025-139]within him from clear [[joy|delight]]. When they had all embraced him,--

## Section 27

[025-140]“Now let us have some fun,” cried one, and with a shout they all

[025-141]scampered hither and thither, and played the wildest gambols on the

[025-142]grassy slopes. They kept constantly coming back to Diamond, however, as

[025-143]the centre of their enjoyment, rejoicing over him as if they had found a

[025-144]lost playmate.

[025-145]There was a wind on the hillside which blew like the very embodiment

[025-146]of living gladness. It blew into Diamond's heart, and made him so happy

[025-147]that he was forced to sit down and cry.

[025-148]“Now let's go and dig for stars,” said one who seemed to be the captain

[025-149]of the troop.

[025-150]They all scurried away, but soon returned, one after another, each with

[025-151]a pickaxe on his shoulder and a spade in his hand. As soon as they were

[025-152]gathered, the captain led them in a straight line to another part of the

[025-153]hill. Diamond rose and followed.

[025-154]“Here is where we begin our lesson for to-night,” he said. “Scatter and

[025-155]dig.”

[025-156]There was no more fun. Each went by himself, walking slowly with bent

[025-157]shoulders and his eyes fixed on the ground. Every now and then one would

[025-158]stop, kneel down, and look intently, feeling with his hands and parting

[025-159]the grass. One would get up and walk on again, another spring to his

[025-160]feet, catch eagerly at his pickaxe and strike it into the ground once

[025-161]and again, then throw it aside, snatch up his spade, and commence

[025-162]digging at the loosened earth. Now one would sorrowfully shovel the

[025-163]earth into the hole again, trample it down with his little bare white

[025-164]feet, and walk on. But another would give a joyful shout, and after

[025-165]much tugging and loosening would draw from the hole a lump as big as his

[025-166]head, or no bigger than his fist; when the under side of it would pour

[025-167]such a blaze of golden or bluish light into Diamond's eyes that he was

[025-168]quite dazzled. Gold and blue were the commoner colours: the jubilation

[025-169]was greater over red or green or purple. And every time a star was

[025-170]dug up all the little angels dropped their tools and crowded about it,

[025-171]shouting and dancing and fluttering their wing-buds.

[025-172]When they had examined it well, they would kneel down one after the

[025-173]other and peep through the hole; but they always stood back to give

[025-174]Diamond the first look. All that diamond could report, however, was,

[025-175]that through the star-holes he saw a great many things and places and

[025-176]people he knew quite well, only somehow they were different--there was

[025-177]something marvellous about them--he could not tell what. Every time he

[025-178]rose from looking through a star-hole, he felt as if his heart would

[025-179]break for, joy; and he said that if he had not cried, he did not know

[025-180]what would have become of him.

[025-181]As soon as all had looked, the star was carefully fitted in again, a

[025-182]little mould was strewn over it, and the rest of the heap left as a sign

[025-183]that the star had been discovered.

[025-184]At length one dug up a small star of a most lovely colour--a colour

[025-185]Diamond had never seen before. The moment the [[angel]] saw what it was,

[025-186]instead of showing it about, he handed it to one of his neighbours, and

[025-187]seated himself on the edge of the hole, saying:

[025-188]“This will do for me. Good-bye. I'm off.”

[025-189]They crowded about him, hugging and kissing him; then stood back with a

[025-190]solemn stillness, their wings lying close to their shoulders. The little

[025-191]fellow looked round on them once with a smile, and then shot himself

[025-192]headlong through the star-hole. Diamond, as privileged, threw himself

[025-193]on the ground to peep after him, but he saw nothing. “It's no use,” said

[025-194]the captain. “I never saw anything more of one that went that way.”

[025-195]“His wings can't be much use,” said Diamond, concerned and fearful, yet

[025-196]comforted by the calm looks of the rest.

[025-197]“That's true,” said the captain. “He's lost them by this time. They all

[025-198]do that go that way. You haven't got any, you see.”

[025-199]“No,” said Diamond. “I never did have any.”

[025-200]“Oh! didn't you?” said the captain.

[025-201]“Some people say,” he added, after a pause, “that they come again. I

[025-202]don't know. I've never found the colour I care about myself. I suppose I

[025-203]shall some day.”

[025-204]Then they looked again at the star, put it carefully into its hole,

[025-205]danced around it and over it--but solemnly, and called it by the name of

[025-206]the finder.

[025-207]“Will you know it again?” asked Diamond.

[025-208]“Oh, yes. We never forget a star that's been made a door of.”

[025-209]Then they went on with their searching and digging.

[025-210]Diamond having neither pickaxe nor spade, had the more time to think.

[025-211]“I don't see any little girls,” he said at last.

[025-212]The captain stopped his shovelling, leaned on his spade, rubbed his

[025-213]forehead thoughtfully with his left hand--the little angels were all

[025-214]left-handed--repeated the words “little girls,” and then, as if a

[025-215]thought had struck him, resumed his work, saying--

[025-216]“I think I know what you mean. I've never seen any of them, of course;

[025-217]but I suppose that's the sort you mean. I'm told--but mind I don't say

[025-218]it is so, for I don't know--that when we fall asleep, a troop of angels

[025-219]very like ourselves, only quite different, goes round to all the stars

[025-220]we have discovered, and discovers them after us. I suppose with our

[025-221]shovelling and handling we spoil them a bit; and I daresay the clouds

[025-222]that come up from below make them smoky and dull sometimes. They

[025-223]say--mind, I say they say--these other angels take them out one by one,

[025-224]and pass each round as we do, and breathe over it, and rub it with

[025-225]their white hands, which are softer than ours, because they don't do any

[025-226]pick-and-spade work, and smile at it, and put it in again: and that is

[025-227]what keeps them from growing dark.”

[025-228]“How jolly!” thought Diamond. “I should like to see them at their work

[025-229]too.--When do you go to sleep?” he asked the captain.

[025-230]“When we grow sleepy,” answered the captain. “They do say--but mind I

[025-231]say they say--that it is when those others--what do you call them? I

[025-232]don't know if that is their name; I am only guessing that may be the

[025-233]sort you mean--when they are on their rounds and come near any troop of

[025-234]us we fall asleep. They live on the west side of the hill. None of us

[025-235]have ever been to the top of it yet.”

[025-236]Even as he spoke, he dropped his spade. He tumbled down beside it,

[025-237]and lay fast asleep. One after the other each of the troop dropped his

[025-238]pickaxe or shovel from his listless hands, and lay fast asleep by his

[025-239]work.

[025-240]“Ah!” thought Diamond to himself, with delight, “now the girl-angels are

[025-241]coming, and I, not being an angel, shall not fall asleep like the rest,

[025-242]and I shall see the girl-angels.”

[025-243]But the same moment he felt himself growing sleepy. He struggled hard

[025-244]with the invading power. He put up his fingers to his eyelids and pulled

[025-245]them open. But it was of no use. He thought he saw a glimmer of pale

[025-246]rosy light far up the green hill, and ceased to know.

[025-247]When he awoke, all the angels were starting up wide awake too. He

[025-248]expected to see them lift their tools, but no, the time for play had

[025-249]come. They looked happier than ever, and each began to sing where he

[025-250]stood. He had not heard them sing before.

[025-251]“Now,” he thought, “I shall know what kind of nonsense the angels sing

[025-252]when they are merry. They don't drive cabs, I see, but they dig for

[025-253]stars, and they work hard enough to be merry after it.”

[025-254]And he did hear some of the angels' nonsense; for if it was all sense to

[025-255]them, it had only just as much sense to Diamond as made good nonsense of

[025-256]it. He tried hard to set it down in his mind, listening as closely as

[025-257]he could, now to one, now to another, and now to all together. But

[025-258]while they were yet [[song|singing]] he began, to his dismay, to find that he was

[025-259]coming awake--faster and faster. And as he came awake, he found that,

[025-260]for all the [[kindness|goodness]] of his memory, verse after verse of the angels'

[025-261]nonsense vanished from it. He always thought he could keep the last,

[025-262]but as the next began he lost the one before it, and at length awoke,

[025-263]struggling to keep hold of the last verse of all. He felt as if the

[025-264]effort to keep from forgetting that one verse of the vanishing song

[025-265]nearly killed him. And yet by the time he was wide awake he could not be

[025-266]sure of that even. It was something like this:

[025-267]White hands of whiteness

[025-268]Wash the stars' faces,

[025-269]Till glitter, glitter, glit, goes their brightness

[025-270]Down to poor places.

[025-271]This, however, was so near sense that he thought it could not be really

[025-272]what they did sing.
