---
description: ""
id: ch26
label: "Chapter XXVI: DIAMOND TAKES A FARE THE WRONG WAY RIGHT"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XXVI. DIAMOND TAKES A FARE THE WRONG WAY RIGHT

[026-001]THE next morning [[diamond|Diamond]] was up almost as early as before. He had

[026-002]nothing to fear from his mother now, and made no secret of what he was

[026-003]about. By the time he reached the stable, several of the men were there.

[026-004]They asked him a good many questions as to his luck the day before, and

[026-005]he told them all they wanted to know. But when he proceeded to harness

[026-006]the old horse, they pushed him aside with rough kindness, called him a

[026-007]baby, and began to do it all for him. So Diamond ran in and had another

[026-008]mouthful of tea and bread and butter; and although he had never been so

[026-009]tired as he was the [[darkness|night]] before, he started quite fresh this morning.

[026-010]It was a cloudy day, and the wind blew hard from the north--so hard

[026-011]sometimes that, perched on the box with just his toes touching the

[026-012]ground, Diamond wished that he had some kind of strap to fasten himself

[026-013]down with lest he should be blown away. But he did not really mind it.

[026-014]His head was full of the dream he had dreamed; but it did not make him

[026-015]neglect his work, for his work was not to dig [[stars]] but to drive old

[026-016]Diamond and pick up fares. There are not many people who can think about

[026-017]beautiful things and do common work at the same time. But then there are

[026-018]not many people who have been to the back of the north wind.

[026-019]There was not much business doing. And Diamond felt rather cold,

[026-020]notwithstanding his mother had herself put on his comforter and helped

[026-021]him with his greatcoat. But he was too well aware of his dignity to

[026-022]get inside his cab as some do. A cabman ought to be above minding the

[026-023]weather--at least so Diamond thought. At length he was called to a

[026-024]neighbouring house, where a young woman with a heavy box had to be taken

[026-025]to Wapping for a coast-steamer.

[026-026]He did not find it at all pleasant, so far east and so near the [[the-river|river]];

[026-027]for the roughs were in great force. However, there being no block, not

[026-028]even in Nightingale Lane, he reached the entrance of the wharf, and set

[026-029]down his passenger without annoyance. But as he turned to go back, some

[026-030]idlers, not content with chaffing him, showed a mind to the fare the

[026-031]young woman had given him. They were just pulling him off the box, and

[026-032]Diamond was shouting for the police, when a pale-faced man, in very

[026-033]shabby clothes, but with the look of a gentleman somewhere about him,

[026-034]came up, and making good use of his stick, drove them off.

[026-035]“Now, my little man,” he said, “get on while you can. Don't lose any

[026-036]time. This is not a place for you.”

## Section 28

[026-037]But Diamond was not in the habit of thinking only of himself. He saw

[026-038]that his new friend looked weary, if not ill, and very poor.

[026-039]“Won't you jump in, sir?” he said. “I will take you wherever you like.”

[026-040]“Thank you, my man; but I have no money; so I can't.”

[026-041]“Oh! I don't want any money. I shall be much happier if you will get in.

[026-042]You have saved me all I had. I owe you a lift, sir.”

[026-043]“Which way are you going?”

[026-044]“To Charing Cross; but I don't mind where I go.”

[026-045]“Well, I am very tired. If you will take me to Charing Cross, I shall be

[026-046]greatly obliged to you. I have walked from Gravesend, and had hardly a

[026-047]penny left to get through the tunnel.”

[026-048]So saying, he opened the door and got in, and Diamond drove away.

[026-049]But as he drove, he could not help fancying he had seen the

[026-050]gentleman--for Diamond knew he was a gentleman--before. Do all he could,

[026-051]however, he could not recall where or when. Meantime his fare, if we may

[026-052]call him such, seeing he was to pay nothing, whom the relief of being

[026-053]carried had made less and less inclined to carry himself, had been

[026-054]turning over things in his mind, and, as they passed the Mint, called to

[026-055]Diamond, who stopped the horse, got down and went to the window.

[026-056]“If you didn't mind taking me to Chiswick, I should be able to pay you

[026-057]when we got there. It's a long way, but you shall have the whole fare

[026-058]from the Docks--and something over.”

[026-059]“Very well, sir” said Diamond. “I shall be most happy.”

[026-060]He was just clambering up again, when [[mr-raymond|the gentleman]] put his head out of

[026-061]the window and said--

[026-062]“It's The Wilderness--[[mr-coleman|Mr. Coleman]]'s place; but I'll direct you when we

[026-063]come into the neighbourhood.”

[026-064]It flashed upon Diamond who he was. But he got upon his box to arrange

[026-065]his thoughts before making any reply.

[026-066]The gentleman was [[mr-evans|Mr. Evans]], to whom [[miss-coleman|Miss Coleman]] was to have been

[026-067]married, and Diamond had seen him several times with her in the garden.

[026-068]I have said that he had not behaved very well to Miss Coleman. He had

[026-069]put off their marriage more than once in a cowardly fashion, merely

[026-070]because he was ashamed to marry upon a small income, and live in a

[026-071]humble way. When a man thinks of what people will say in such a case, he

[026-072]may love, but his love is but a poor affair. Mr. Coleman took him

[026-073]into the firm as a junior partner, and it was in a measure through his

[026-074]influence that he entered upon those speculations which ruined him. So

[026-075]his love had not been a blessing. The ship which [[north-wind|North Wind]] had sunk was

[026-076]their last venture, and Mr. Evans had gone out with it in the hope

[026-077]of turning its cargo to the best advantage. He was one of the single

[026-078]boat-load which managed to reach a desert island, and he had gone

[026-079]through a great many hardships and sufferings since then. But he was

[026-080]not past being taught, and his troubles had done him no end of good, for

[026-081]they had made him doubt himself, and begin to think, so that he had come

[026-082]to see that he had been foolish as well as wicked. For, if he had had

[026-083]Miss Coleman with him in the desert island, to build her a hut, and hunt

[026-084]for her food, and make clothes for her, he would have thought himself

[026-085]the most fortunate of men; and when he was at home, he would not marry

[026-086]till he could afford a man-servant. Before he got home again, he had

[026-087]even begun to understand that no man can make haste to be rich without

[026-088]going against the will of God, in which case it is the one frightful

[026-089]thing to be successful. So he had come back a more humble man, and

[026-090]longing to ask Miss Coleman to forgive him. But he had no idea what

[026-091]ruin had fallen upon them, for he had never made himself thoroughly

[026-092]acquainted with the firm's affairs. Few speculative people do know their

[026-093]own affairs. Hence he never doubted he should find matters much as he

[026-094]left them, and expected to see them all at The Wilderness as before. But

[026-095]if he had not fallen in with Diamond, he would not have thought of going

[026-096]there first.

[026-097]What was Diamond to do? He had heard his father and mother drop

[026-098]some remarks concerning Mr. Evans which made him doubtful of him. He

[026-099]understood that he had not been so considerate as he might have been.

[026-100]So he went rather slowly till he should make up his mind. It was, of

[026-101]course, of no use to drive Mr. Evans to Chiswick. But if he should tell

[026-102]him what had befallen them, and where they lived now, he might put off

[026-103]going to see them, and he was certain that Miss Coleman, at least, must

[026-104]want very much to see Mr. Evans. He was pretty sure also that the best

[026-105]thing in any case was to bring them together, and let them set matters

[026-106]right for themselves.

[026-107]The moment he came to this conclusion, he changed his course from

[026-108]westward to northward, and went straight for Mr. Coleman's poor little

[026-109]house in [[hoxton|Hoxton]]. Mr. Evans was too tired and too much occupied with his

[026-110]thoughts to take the least notice of the streets they passed through,

[026-111]and had no suspicion, therefore, of the change of direction.

[026-112]By this time the wind had increased almost to a hurricane, and as they

[026-113]had often to head it, it was no joke for either of the Diamonds. The

[026-114]distance, however, was not great. Before they reached the street where

[026-115]Mr. Coleman lived it blew so tremendously, that when Miss Coleman, who

[026-116]was going out a little way, opened the door, it dashed against the wall

[026-117]with such a bang, that she was afraid to venture, and went in again.

[026-118]In five minutes after, Diamond drew up at the door. As soon as he had

[026-119]entered the street, however, the wind blew right behind them, and when

[026-120]he pulled up, old Diamond had so much ado to stop the cab against it,

[026-121]that the breeching broke. Young Diamond jumped off his box, knocked

[026-122]loudly at the door, then turned to the cab and said--before Mr. Evans

[026-123]had quite begun to think something must be amiss:

[026-124]“Please, sir, my harness has given away. Would you mind stepping in here

[026-125]for a few minutes? They're friends of mine. I'll take you where you like

[026-126]after I've got it mended. I shan't be many minutes, but you can't stand

[026-127]in this wind.”

[026-128]Half stupid with fatigue and want of food, Mr. Evans yielded to the

[026-129]boy's suggestion, and walked in at the door which the maid held with

[026-130]difficulty against the wind. She took Mr. Evans for a visitor, as indeed

[026-131]he was, and showed him into the room on the ground-floor. Diamond, who

[026-132]had followed into the hall, whispered to her as she closed the door--

[026-133]“Tell Miss Coleman. It's Miss Coleman he wants to see.”

[026-134]“I don't know” said the maid. “He don't look much like a gentleman.”

[026-135]“He is, though; and I know him, and so does Miss Coleman.”

[026-136]The maid could not but remember Diamond, having seen him when he and his

[026-137]father brought the ladies home. So she believed him, and went to do what

[026-138]he told her.

[026-139]What passed in the little parlour when Miss Coleman came down does not

[026-140]belong to my story, which is all about Diamond. If he had known that

[026-141]Miss Coleman thought Mr. Evans was dead, perhaps he would have managed

[026-142]differently. There was a cry and a running to and fro in the house, and

[026-143]then all was quiet again.

[026-144]Almost as soon as Mr. Evans went in, the wind began to cease, and was

[026-145]now still. Diamond found that by making the breeching just a little

[026-146]tighter than was quite comfortable for the old horse he could do very

[026-147]well for the present; and, thinking it better to let him have his bag in

[026-148]this quiet place, he sat on the box till the old horse should have eaten

[026-149]his dinner. In a little while Mr. Evans came out, and asked him to come

[026-150]in. Diamond obeyed, and to his [[joy|delight]] Miss Coleman put her arms round

[026-151]him and kissed him, and there was payment for him! Not to mention the

[026-152]five precious shillings she gave him, which he could not refuse because

[026-153]his mother wanted them so much at home for his father. He left them

[026-154]nearly as happy as they were themselves.

[026-155]The rest of the day he did better, and, although he had not so much

[026-156]to take home as the day before, yet on the whole the result was

[026-157]satisfactory. And what a story he had to tell his father and mother

[026-158]about his adventures, and how he had done, and what was the result! They

[026-159]asked him such a multitude of questions! some of which he could answer,

[026-160]and some of which he could not answer; and his father seemed ever so

[026-161]much better from finding that his boy was already not only useful to his

[026-162]family but useful to other people, and quite taking his place as a man

[026-163]who judged what was wise, and did work worth doing.

[026-164]For a fortnight Diamond went on driving his cab, and keeping his family.

[026-165]He had begun to be known about some parts of [[london|London]], and people would

[026-166]prefer taking his cab because they liked what they heard of him. One

[026-167]gentleman who lived near the mews engaged him to carry him to the

[026-168]City every morning at a certain hour; and Diamond was punctual as

[026-169]clockwork--though to effect that required a good deal of care, for his

[026-170]father's watch was not much to be depended on, and had to be watched

[026-171]itself by the clock of St. George's church. Between the two, however, he

[026-172]did make a success of it.

[026-173]After that fortnight, his father was able to go out again. Then Diamond

[026-174]went to make inquiries about [[nanny|Nanny]], and this led to something else.
