---
description: ""
id: ch28
label: "Chapter XXVIII: LITTLE DAYLIGHT"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XXVIII. LITTLE DAYLIGHT

[028-001]NO HOUSE of any pretension to be called a palace is in the least worthy

[028-002]of the name, except it has a wood near it--very near it--and the nearer

[028-003]the better. Not all round it--I don't mean that, for a palace ought to

[028-004]be open to the sun and wind, and stand high and brave, with weathercocks

[028-005]glittering and flags flying; but on one side of every palace there must

[028-006]be a wood. And there was a very grand wood indeed beside the palace of

[028-007]the king who was going to be Daylight's father; such a grand wood, that

[028-008]nobody yet had ever got to the other end of it. Near the house it was

[028-009]kept very trim and nice, and it was free of brushwood for a long way in;

[028-010]but by degrees it got wild, and it grew wilder, and wilder, and wilder,

[028-011]until some said wild beasts at last did what they liked in it. The king

[028-012]and his courtiers often hunted, however, and this kept the wild beasts

[028-013]far away from the palace.

[028-014]One glorious summer morning, when the wind and sun were out together,

[028-015]when the vanes were flashing and the flags frolicking against the blue

[028-016]sky, little Daylight made her appearance from somewhere--nobody could

[028-017]tell where--a beautiful baby, with such bright eyes that she might have

[028-018]come from the sun, only by and by she showed such lively ways that she

[028-019]might equally well have come out of the wind. There was great jubilation

[028-020]in the palace, for this was the first baby the queen had had, and there

[028-021]is as much [[joy|happiness]] over a new baby in a palace as in a cottage.

[028-022]But there is one disadvantage of living near a wood: you do not know

[028-023]quite who your neighbours may be. Everybody knew there were in it

[028-024]several fairies, living within a few miles of the palace, who always had

[028-025]had something to do with each new baby that came; for fairies live

[028-026]so much longer than we, that they can have business with a good many

[028-027]generations of human mortals. The curious houses they lived in were well

[028-028]known also,--one, a hollow oak; another, a birch-tree, though nobody

[028-029]could ever find how that fairy made a house of it; another, a hut of

[028-030]growing trees intertwined, and patched up with turf and moss. But there

[028-031]was another fairy who had lately come to the place, and nobody even knew

[028-032]she was a fairy except the other fairies. A wicked old thing she was,

[028-033]always concealing her power, and being as disagreeable as she could,

[028-034]in order to tempt people to give her offence, that she might have the

[028-035]pleasure of taking vengeance upon them. The people about thought she was

[028-036]a witch, and those who knew her by sight were careful to avoid offending

[028-037]her. She lived in a mud house, in a swampy part of the forest.

[028-038]In all history we find that fairies give their remarkable gifts to

[028-039]prince or princess, or any child of sufficient importance in their eyes,

[028-040]always at the christening. Now this we can understand, because it is

[028-041]an ancient custom amongst human beings as well; and it is not hard to

[028-042]explain why wicked fairies should choose the same time to do unkind

[028-043]things; but it is difficult to understand how they should be able to

[028-044]do them, for you would fancy all wicked creatures would be powerless on

[028-045]such an occasion. But I never knew of any interference on the part of

[028-046]the wicked fairy that did not turn out a good thing in the end. What a

[028-047]good thing, for instance, it was that one princess should [[dream|sleep]] for a

[028-048]hundred years! Was she not saved from all the plague of young men who

[028-049]were not worthy of her? And did she not come awake exactly at the right

[028-050]moment when the right prince kissed her? For my part, I cannot help

[028-051]wishing a good many girls would sleep till just the same fate overtook

[028-052]them. It would be happier for them, and more agreeable to their friends.

[028-053]Of course all the known fairies were invited to the christening. But the

[028-054]king and queen never thought of inviting an old witch.

[028-055]For the power of the fairies they have by nature; whereas a witch gets

[028-056]her power by wickedness. The other fairies, however, knowing the danger

[028-057]thus run, provided as well as they could against accidents from her

[028-058]quarter. But they could neither render her powerless, nor could they

[028-059]arrange their gifts in reference to hers beforehand, for they could not

[028-060]tell what those might be.

[028-061]Of course the old hag was there without being asked. Not to be asked

[028-062]was just what she wanted, that she might have a sort of reason for doing

[028-063]what she wished to do. For somehow even the wickedest of creatures likes

[028-064]a pretext for doing the wrong thing.

[028-065]Five fairies had one after the other given the child such gifts as each

[028-066]counted best, and the fifth had just stepped back to her place in the

[028-067]surrounding splendour of ladies and gentlemen, when, mumbling a laugh

[028-068]between her toothless gums, the wicked fairy hobbled out into the middle

[028-069]of the circle, and at the moment when the archbishop was handing the

[028-070]baby to the lady at the head of the nursery department of state affairs,

[028-071]addressed him thus, giving a bite or two to every word before she could

[028-072]part with it:

[028-073]“Please your Grace, I'm very deaf: would your Grace mind repeating the

[028-074]princess's name?”

[028-075]“With pleasure, my good woman,” said the archbishop, stooping to shout

[028-076]in her ear: “the infant's name is little Daylight.”

## Section 30

[028-077]“And little daylight it shall be,” cried the fairy, in the tone of a dry

[028-078]axle, “and little good shall any of her gifts do her. For I bestow upon

[028-079]her the gift of [[sleep|sleeping]] all day long, whether she will or not. Ha, ha!

[028-080]He, he! Hi, hi!”

[028-081]Then out started the sixth fairy, who, of course, the others had

[028-082]arranged should come after the wicked one, in order to undo as much as

[028-083]she might.

[028-084]“If she sleep all day,” she said, mournfully, “she shall, at least, wake

[028-085]all [[darkness|night]].”

[028-086]“A nice prospect for her mother and me!” thought the poor king; for they

[028-087]loved her far too much to give her up to nurses, especially at night, as

[028-088]most kings and queens do--and are sorry for it afterwards.

[028-089]“You spoke before I had done,” said the wicked fairy. “That's against

[028-090]the law. It gives me another chance.”

[028-091]“I beg your pardon,” said the other fairies, all together.

[028-092]“She did. I hadn't done laughing,” said the crone. “I had only got to

[028-093]Hi, hi! and I had to go through Ho, ho! and Hu, hu! So I decree that if

[028-094]she wakes all night she shall wax and wane with its mistress, the [[moon]].

[028-095]And what that may mean I hope her royal parents will live to see. Ho,

[028-096]ho! Hu, hu!”

[028-097]But out stepped another fairy, for they had been wise enough to keep two

[028-098]in reserve, because every fairy knew the trick of one.

[028-099]“Until,” said the seventh fairy, “a prince comes who shall kiss her

[028-100]without knowing it.”

[028-101]The wicked fairy made a horrid noise like an angry cat, and hobbled

[028-102]away. She could not pretend that she had not finished her speech this

[028-103]time, for she had laughed Ho, ho! and Hu, hu!

[028-104]“I don't know what that means,” said the poor king to the seventh fairy.

[028-105]“Don't be afraid. The meaning will come with the thing itself,” said

[028-106]she.

[028-107]The assembly broke up, miserable enough--the queen, at least, prepared

[028-108]for a good many sleepless nights, and the lady at the head of the

[028-109]nursery department anything but comfortable in the prospect before her,

[028-110]for of course the queen could not do it all. As for the king, he made up

[028-111]his mind, with what courage he could summon, to meet the demands of the

[028-112]case, but wondered whether he could with any propriety require the First

[028-113]Lord of the Treasury to take a share in the burden laid upon him.

[028-114]I will not attempt to describe what they had to go through for some

[028-115]time. But at last the household settled into a regular system--a very

[028-116]irregular one in some respects. For at certain seasons the palace rang

[028-117]all night with bursts of laughter from little Daylight, whose heart the

[028-118]old fairy's curse could not reach; she was Daylight still, only a little

[028-119]in the wrong place, for she always dropped asleep at the first hint of

[028-120]dawn in the east. But her merriment was of short duration. When the moon

[028-121]was at the full, she was in glorious spirits, and as beautiful as it was

[028-122]possible for a child of her age to be. But as the moon waned, she faded,

[028-123]until at last she was wan and withered like the poorest, sickliest child

[028-124]you might come upon in the streets of a great city in the arms of a

[028-125]homeless mother. Then the night was quiet as the day, for the little

[028-126]creature lay in her gorgeous cradle night and day with hardly a motion,

[028-127]and indeed at last without even a moan, like one dead. At first they

[028-128]often thought she was dead, but at last they got used to it, and only

[028-129]consulted the almanac to find the moment when she would begin to revive,

[028-130]which, of course, was with the first appearance of the silver thread of

[028-131]the crescent moon. Then she would move her lips, and they would give her

[028-132]a little nourishment; and she would grow better and better and better,

[028-133]until for a few days she was splendidly well. When well, she was always

[028-134]merriest out in the [[light|moonlight]]; but even when near her worst, she seemed

[028-135]better when, in warm summer nights, they carried her cradle out into

[028-136]the light of the waning moon. Then in her sleep she would smile the

[028-137]faintest, most pitiful smile.

[028-138]For a long time very few people ever saw her awake. As she grew older

[028-139]she became such a favourite, however, that about the palace there were

[028-140]always some who would contrive to keep awake at night, in order to be

[028-141]near her. But she soon began to take every chance of getting away from

[028-142]her nurses and enjoying her moonlight alone. And thus things went on

[028-143]until she was nearly seventeen years of age. Her father and mother had

[028-144]by that time got so used to the odd state of things that they had ceased

[028-145]to wonder at them. All their arrangements had reference to the state

[028-146]of the Princess Daylight, and it is amazing how things contrive to

[028-147]accommodate themselves. But how any prince was ever to find and deliver

[028-148]her, appeared inconceivable.

[028-149]As she grew older she had grown more and more beautiful, with the

[028-150]sunniest hair and the loveliest eyes of heavenly blue, brilliant and

[028-151]profound as the sky of a June day. But so much more painful and sad was

[028-152]the change as her bad time came on. The more beautiful she was in the

[028-153]full moon, the more withered and worn did she become as the moon waned.

[028-154]At the time at which my story has now arrived, she looked, when the moon

[028-155]was small or gone, like an old woman exhausted with suffering. This was

[028-156]the more painful that her appearance was unnatural; for her hair and

[028-157]eyes did not change. Her wan face was both drawn and wrinkled, and had

[028-158]an eager hungry look. Her skinny hands moved as if wishing, but unable,

[028-159]to lay hold of something. Her shoulders were bent forward, her chest

[028-160]went in, and she stooped as if she were eighty years old. At last she

[028-161]had to be put to bed, and there await the flow of the tide of life. But

[028-162]she grew to dislike being seen, still more being touched by any hands,

[028-163]during this season. One lovely summer evening, when the moon lay all but

[028-164]gone upon the verge of the horizon, she vanished from her attendants,

[028-165]and it was only after searching for her a long time in great [[fear|terror]],

[028-166]that they found her fast asleep in the forest, at the foot of a silver

[028-167]birch, and carried her home.

[028-168]A little way from the palace there was a great open glade, covered with

[028-169]the greenest and softest grass. This was her favourite haunt; for here

[028-170]the full moon shone free and glorious, while through a vista in the

[028-171]trees she could generally see more or less of the dying moon as it

[028-172]crossed the opening. Here she had a little rustic house built for her,

[028-173]and here she mostly resided. None of the court might go there without

[028-174]leave, and her own attendants had learned by this time not to be

[028-175]officious in waiting upon her, so that she was very much at liberty.

[028-176]Whether the good fairies had anything to do with it or not I cannot

[028-177]tell, but at last she got into the way of retreating further into the

[028-178]wood every night as the moon waned, so that sometimes they had great

[028-179]trouble in finding her; but as she was always very angry if she

[028-180]discovered they were watching her, they scarcely dared to do so. At

[028-181]length one night they thought they had lost her altogether. It was

[028-182]morning before they found her. Feeble as she was, she had wandered into

[028-183]a thicket a long way from the glade, and there she lay--fast asleep, of

[028-184]course.

[028-185]Although the fame of her [[beauty]] and sweetness had gone abroad, yet as

[028-186]everybody knew she was under a bad spell, no king in the neighbourhood

[028-187]had any desire to have her for a daughter-in-law. There were serious

[028-188]objections to such a relation.

[028-189][[About]] this time in a neighbouring kingdom, in consequence of the

[028-190]wickedness of the nobles, an insurrection took place upon the death of

[028-191]the old king, the greater part of the nobility was massacred, and

[028-192]the young prince was compelled to flee for his life, disguised like a

[028-193]peasant. For some time, until he got out of the country, he suffered

[028-194]much from hunger and fatigue; but when he got into that ruled by the

[028-195]princess's father, and had no longer any fear of being recognised, he

[028-196]fared better, for the people were kind. He did not abandon his disguise,

[028-197]however. One tolerable reason was that he had no other clothes to put

[028-198]on, and another that he had very little money, and did not know where to

[028-199]get any more. There was no good in telling everybody he met that he

[028-200]was a prince, for he felt that a prince ought to be able to get on like

[028-201]other people, else his rank only made a fool of him. He had read of

[028-202]princes setting out upon adventure; and here he was out in similar case,

[028-203]only without having had a choice in the matter. He would go on, and see

[028-204]what would come of it.

[028-205]For a day or two he had been walking through the palace-wood, and had

[028-206]had next to nothing to eat, when he came upon the strangest little

[028-207]house, inhabited by a very nice, tidy, motherly old woman. This was one

[028-208]of the good fairies. The moment she saw him she knew quite well who

[028-209]he was and what was going to come of it; but she was not at liberty to

[028-210]interfere with the orderly march of events. She received him with the

[028-211]kindness she would have shown to any other traveller, and gave him bread

[028-212]and milk, which he thought the most delicious food he had ever tasted,

[028-213]wondering that they did not have it for dinner at the palace sometimes.

[028-214]The old woman pressed him to stay all night. When he awoke he was amazed

[028-215]to find how well and strong he felt. She would not take any of the money

[028-216]he offered, but begged him, if he found occasion of continuing in the

[028-217]neighbourhood, to return and occupy the same quarters.

[028-218]“Thank you much, good mother,” answered the prince; “but there is little

[028-219]chance of that. The sooner I get out of this wood the better.”

[028-220]“I don't know that,” said the fairy.

[028-221]“What do you mean?” asked the prince.

[028-222]“Why, how should I know?” returned she.

[028-223]“I can't tell,” said the prince.

[028-224]“Very well,” said the fairy.

[028-225]“How strangely you talk!” said the prince.

[028-226]“Do I?” said the fairy.

[028-227]“Yes, you do,” said the prince.

[028-228]“Very well,” said the fairy.

[028-229]The prince was not used to be spoken to in this fashion, so he felt a

[028-230]little angry, and turned and walked away. But this did not offend the

[028-231]fairy. She stood at the door of her little house looking after him till

[028-232]the trees hid him quite. Then she said “At last!” and went in.

[028-233]The prince wandered and wandered, and got nowhere. The sun sank and sank

[028-234]and went out of sight, and he seemed no nearer the end of the wood than

[028-235]ever. He sat down on a fallen tree, ate a bit of bread the old woman had

[028-236]given him, and waited for the moon; for, although he was not much of an

[028-237]astronomer, he knew the moon would rise some time, because she had risen

[028-238]the night before. Up she came, slow and slow, but of a good size, pretty

[028-239]nearly round indeed; whereupon, greatly refreshed with his piece of

[028-240]bread, he got up and went--he knew not whither.

[028-241]After walking a considerable distance, he thought he was coming to the

[028-242]outside of the forest; but when he reached what he thought the last of

[028-243]it, he found himself only upon the edge of a great open space in it,

[028-244]covered with grass. The moon shone very bright, and he thought he had

[028-245]never seen a more lovely spot. Still it looked dreary because of its

[028-246]loneliness, for he could not see the house at the other side. He sat

[028-247]down, weary again, and gazed into the glade. He had not seen so much

[028-248]room for several days.

## Section 31

[028-249]All at once he spied something in the middle of the grass. What could it

[028-250]be? It moved; it came nearer. Was it a human creature, gliding across--a

[028-251]girl dressed in white, gleaming in the moonshine? She came nearer and

[028-252]nearer. He crept behind a tree and watched, wondering. It must be some

[028-253]strange being of the wood--a nymph whom the moonlight and the warm

[028-254]dusky air had enticed from her tree. But when she came close to where

[028-255]he stood, he no longer doubted she was human--for he had caught sight of

[028-256]her sunny hair, and her clear blue eyes, and the loveliest face and form

[028-257]that he had ever seen. All at once she began [[music|singing]] like a nightingale,

[028-258]and dancing to her own [[song|music]], with her eyes ever turned towards the

[028-259]moon. She passed close to where he stood, dancing on by the edge of the

[028-260]trees and away in a great circle towards the other side, until he could

[028-261]see but a spot of white in the yellowish green of the moonlit grass. But

[028-262]when he feared it would vanish quite, the spot grew, and became a figure

[028-263]once more. She approached him again, singing and dancing, and waving her

[028-264]arms over her head, until she had completed the circle. Just opposite

[028-265]his tree she stood, ceased her song, dropped her arms, and broke out

[028-266]into a long clear laugh, musical as a brook. Then, as if tired, she

[028-267]threw herself on the grass, and lay gazing at the moon. The prince was

[028-268]almost afraid to breathe lest he should startle her, and she should

[028-269]vanish from his sight. As to venturing near her, that never came into

[028-270]his head.

[028-271]She had lain for a long hour or longer, when the prince began again to

[028-272]doubt concerning her. Perhaps she was but a vision of his own fancy. Or

[028-273]was she a spirit of the wood, after all? If so, he too would haunt the

[028-274]wood, glad to have lost kingdom and everything for the hope of being

[028-275]near her. He would build him a hut in the forest, and there he would

[028-276]live for the pure chance of seeing her again. Upon nights like this at

[028-277]least she would come out and bask in the moonlight, and make his soul

[028-278]blessed. But while he thus dreamed she sprang to her feet, turned her

[028-279]face full to the moon, and began singing as she would draw her down from

[028-280]the sky by the power of her entrancing voice. She looked more beautiful

[028-281]than ever. Again she began dancing to her own music, and danced away

[028-282]into the distance. Once more she returned in a similar manner; but

[028-283]although he was watching as eagerly as before, what with fatigue and

[028-284]what with gazing, he fell fast asleep before she came near him. When he

[028-285]awoke it was broad daylight, and the princess was nowhere.

[028-286]He could not leave the place. What if she should come the next night! He

[028-287]would gladly endure a day's hunger to see her yet again: he would buckle

[028-288]his belt quite tight. He walked round the glade to see if he could

[028-289]discover any prints of her feet. But the grass was so short, and her

[028-290]steps had been so light, that she had not left a single trace behind

[028-291]her. He walked half-way round the wood without seeing anything to

[028-292]account for her presence. Then he spied a lovely little house, with

[028-293]thatched roof and low eaves, surrounded by an exquisite garden, with

[028-294]doves and peacocks walking in it. Of course this must be where the

[028-295]gracious lady who loved the moonlight lived. Forgetting his appearance,

[028-296]he walked towards the door, determined to make inquiries, but as he

[028-297]passed a little pond full of gold and silver fishes, he caught sight of

[028-298]himself and turned to find the door to the kitchen. There he knocked,

[028-299]and asked for a piece of bread. The good-natured cook brought him in,

[028-300]and gave him an excellent breakfast, which the prince found nothing the

[028-301]worse for being served in the kitchen. While he ate, he talked with

[028-302]his entertainer, and learned that this was the favourite retreat of

[028-303]the Princess Daylight. But he learned nothing more, both because he was

[028-304]afraid of seeming inquisitive, and because the cook did not choose to be

[028-305]heard talking about her mistress to a peasant lad who had begged for his

[028-306]breakfast.

[028-307]As he rose to take his leave, it occurred to him that he might not be

[028-308]so far from the old woman's cottage as he had thought, and he asked the

[028-309]cook whether she knew anything of such a place, describing it as well as

[028-310]he could. She said she knew it well enough, adding with a smile--

[028-311]“It's there you're going, is it?”

[028-312]“Yes, if it's not far off.”

[028-313]“It's not more than three miles. But mind what you are about, you know.”

[028-314]“Why do you say that?”

[028-315]“If you're after any mischief, she'll make you repent it.”

[028-316]“The best thing that could happen under the circumstances,” remarked the

[028-317]prince.

[028-318]“What do you mean by that?” asked the cook.

[028-319]“Why, it stands to reason,” answered the prince “that if you wish to do

[028-320]anything wrong, the best thing for you is to be made to repent of it.”

[028-321]“I see,” said the cook. “Well, I think you may venture. She's a good old

[028-322]soul.”

[028-323]“Which way does it lie from here?” asked the prince.

[028-324]She gave him full instructions; and he left her with many thanks.

[028-325]Being now refreshed, however, the prince did not go back to the cottage

[028-326]that day: he remained in the forest, amusing himself as best he could,

[028-327]but waiting anxiously for the night, in the hope that the princess would

[028-328]again appear. Nor was he disappointed, for, directly the moon rose, he

[028-329]spied a glimmering shape far across the glade. As it drew nearer, he saw

[028-330]it was she indeed--not dressed in white as before: in a pale blue like

[028-331]the sky, she looked lovelier still. He thought it was that the blue

[028-332]suited her yet better than the white; he did not know that she was

[028-333]really more beautiful because the moon was nearer the full. In fact the

[028-334]next night was full moon, and the princess would then be at the zenith

[028-335]of her loveliness.

[028-336]The prince feared for some time that she was not coming near his

[028-337]hiding-place that night; but the circles in her dance ever widened as

[028-338]the moon rose, until at last they embraced the whole glade, and she

[028-339]came still closer to the trees where he was hiding than she had come the

[028-340]night before. He was entranced with her loveliness, for it was indeed a

[028-341]marvellous thing. All night long he watched her, but dared not go near

[028-342]her. He would have been ashamed of watching her too, had he not become

[028-343]almost incapable of thinking of anything but how beautiful she was. He

[028-344]watched the whole night long, and saw that as the moon went down she

[028-345]retreated in smaller and smaller circles, until at last he could see her

[028-346]no more.

[028-347]Weary as he was, he set out for the old woman's cottage, where he

[028-348]arrived just in time for her breakfast, which she shared with him. He

[028-349]then went to bed, and slept for many hours. When he awoke the sun was

[028-350]down, and he departed in great anxiety lest he should lose a glimpse

[028-351]of the lovely vision. But, whether it was by the machinations of the

[028-352]swamp-fairy, or merely that it is one thing to go and another to return

[028-353]by the same road, he lost his way. I shall not attempt to describe his

[028-354]misery when the moon rose, and he saw nothing but trees, trees, trees.

[028-355]She was high in the heavens before he reached the glade. Then indeed

[028-356]his troubles vanished, for there was the princess coming dancing towards

[028-357]him, in a dress that shone like gold, and with shoes that glimmered

[028-358]through the grass like fireflies. She was of course still more beautiful

[028-359]than before. Like an embodied sunbeam she passed him, and danced away

[028-360]into the distance.

[028-361]Before she returned in her circle, the clouds had begun to gather about

[028-362]the moon. The wind rose, the trees moaned, and their lighter branches

[028-363]leaned all one way before it. The prince feared that the princess would

[028-364]go in, and he should see her no more that night. But she came dancing on

[028-365]more jubilant than ever, her golden dress and her sunny hair streaming

[028-366]out upon the blast, waving her arms towards the moon, and in the

[028-367]exuberance of her delight ordering the clouds away from off her face.

[028-368]The prince could hardly believe she was not a creature of the elements,

[028-369]after all.

[028-370]By the time she had completed another circle, the clouds had gathered

[028-371]deep, and there were growlings of distant thunder. Just as she passed

[028-372]the tree where he stood, a flash of lightning blinded him for a moment,

[028-373]and when he saw again, to his horror, the princess lay on the ground.

[028-374]He darted to her, thinking she had been struck; but when she heard him

[028-375]coming, she was on her feet in a moment.

[028-376]“What do you want?” she asked.

[028-377]“I beg your pardon. I thought--the lightning” said the prince,

[028-378]hesitating.

[028-379]“There's nothing the matter,” said the princess, waving him off rather

[028-380]haughtily.

[028-381]The poor prince turned and walked towards the wood.

[028-382]“Come back,” said Daylight: “I like you. You do what you are told. Are

[028-383]you good?”

[028-384]“Not so good as I should like to be,” said the prince.

[028-385]“Then go and grow better,” said the princess.

[028-386]Again the disappointed prince turned and went.

[028-387]“Come back,” said the princess.

[028-388]He obeyed, and stood before her waiting.

[028-389]“Can you tell me what the sun is like?” she asked.

[028-390]“No,” he answered. “But where's the good of asking what you know?”

[028-391]“But I don't know,” she rejoined.

[028-392]“Why, everybody knows.”

[028-393]“That's the very thing: I'm not everybody. I've never seen the sun.”

[028-394]“Then you can't know what it's like till you do see it.”

[028-395]“I think you must be a prince,” said the princess.

[028-396]“Do I look like one?” said the prince.

[028-397]“I can't quite say that.”

[028-398]“Then why do you think so?”

[028-399]“Because you both do what you are told and speak the truth.--Is the sun

[028-400]so very bright?”

[028-401]“As bright as the lightning.”

[028-402]“But it doesn't go out like that, does it?”

[028-403]“Oh, no. It shines like the moon, rises and sets like the moon, is much

[028-404]the same shape as the moon, only so bright that you can't look at it for

[028-405]a moment.”

[028-406]“But I would look at it,” said the princess.

[028-407]“But you couldn't,” said the prince.

[028-408]“But I could,” said the princess.

[028-409]“Why don't you, then?”

[028-410]“Because I can't.”

[028-411]“Why can't you?”

[028-412]“Because I can't wake. And I never shall wake until----”

[028-413]Here she hid her face in her hands, turned away, and walked in the

[028-414]slowest, stateliest manner towards the house. The prince ventured to

[028-415]follow her at a little distance, but she turned and made a repellent

[028-416]gesture, which, like a true gentleman-prince, he obeyed at once. He

[028-417]waited a long time, but as she did not come near him again, and as the

[028-418]night had now cleared, he set off at last for the old woman's cottage.

[028-419]It was long past midnight when he reached it, but, to his surprise, the

[028-420]old woman was paring potatoes at the door. Fairies are fond of doing odd

[028-421]things. Indeed, however they may dissemble, the night is always their

[028-422]day. And so it is with all who have fairy blood in them.

[028-423]“Why, what are you doing there, this time of the night, mother?” said

[028-424]the prince; for that was the kind way in which any young man in his

[028-425]country would address a woman who was much older than himself.

## Section 32

[028-426]“Getting your supper ready, my son,” she answered.

[028-427]“Oh, I don't want any supper,” said the prince.

[028-428]“Ah! you've seen Daylight,” said she.

[028-429]“I've seen a princess who never saw it,” said the prince.

[028-430]“Do you like her?” asked the fairy.

[028-431]“Oh! don't I?” said the prince. “More than you would believe, mother.”

[028-432]“A fairy can believe anything that ever was or ever could be,” said the

[028-433]old woman.

[028-434]“Then are you a fairy?” asked the prince.

[028-435]“Yes,” said she.

[028-436]“Then what do you do for things not to believe?” asked the prince.

[028-437]“There's plenty of them--everything that never was nor ever could be.”

[028-438]“Plenty, I grant you,” said the prince. “But do you believe there could

[028-439]be a princess who never saw the daylight? Do you believe that now?”

[028-440]This the prince said, not that he doubted the princess, but that he

[028-441]wanted the fairy to tell him more. She was too old a fairy, however, to

[028-442]be caught so easily.

[028-443]“Of all people, fairies must not tell secrets. Besides, she's a

[028-444]princess.”

[028-445]“Well, I'll tell you a secret. I'm a prince.”

[028-446]“I know that.”

[028-447]“How do you know it?”

[028-448]“By the curl of the third eyelash on your left eyelid.”

[028-449]“Which corner do you count from?”

[028-450]“That's a secret.”

[028-451]“Another secret? Well, at least, if I am a prince, there can be no harm

[028-452]in telling me about a princess.”

[028-453]“It's just the princes I can't tell.”

[028-454]“There ain't any more of them--are there?” said the prince.

[028-455]“What! you don't think you're the only prince in the world, do you?”

[028-456]“Oh, dear, no! not at all. But I know there's one too many just at

[028-457]present, except the princess----”

[028-458]“Yes, yes, that's it,” said the fairy.

[028-459]“What's it?” asked the prince.

[028-460]But he could get nothing more out of the fairy, and had to go to bed

[028-461]unanswered, which was something of a trial.

[028-462]Now wicked fairies will not be bound by the law which the good fairies

[028-463]obey, and this always seems to give the bad the advantage over the good,

[028-464]for they use means to gain their ends which the others will not. But it

[028-465]is all of no consequence, for what they do never succeeds; nay, in the

[028-466]end it brings about the very thing they are trying to prevent. So

[028-467]you see that somehow, for all their cleverness, wicked fairies are

[028-468]dreadfully stupid, for, although from the beginning of the world they

[028-469]have really helped instead of thwarting the good fairies, not one of

[028-470]them is a bit wiser for it. She will try the bad thing just as they all

[028-471]did before her; and succeeds no better of course.

[028-472]The prince had so far stolen a march upon the swamp-fairy that she

[028-473]did not know he was in the neighbourhood until after he had seen the

[028-474]princess those three times. When she knew it, she consoled herself by

[028-475]thinking that the princess must be far too proud and too modest for any

[028-476]young man to venture even to speak to her before he had seen her six

[028-477]times at least. But there was even less danger than the wicked fairy

[028-478]thought; for, however much the princess might desire to be set free, she

[028-479]was dreadfully afraid of the wrong prince. Now, however, the fairy was

[028-480]going to do all she could.

[028-481]She so contrived it by her deceitful spells, that the next night the

[028-482]prince could not by any endeavour find his way to the glade. It would

[028-483]take me too long to tell her tricks. They would be amusing to us, who

[028-484]know that they could not do any harm, but they were something other than

[028-485]amusing to the poor prince. He wandered about the forest till daylight,

[028-486]and then fell fast asleep. The same thing occurred for seven following

[028-487]days, during which neither could he find the good fairy's cottage. After

[028-488]the third quarter of the moon, however, the bad fairy thought she might

[028-489]be at ease about the affair for a fortnight at least, for there was no

[028-490]chance of the prince wishing to kiss the princess during that period.

[028-491]So the first day of the fourth quarter he did find the cottage, and the

[028-492]next day he found the glade. For nearly another week he haunted it. But

[028-493]the princess never came. I have little doubt she was on the farther

[028-494]edge of it some part of every night, but at this period she always wore

[028-495]black, and, there being little or no light, the prince never saw her.

[028-496]Nor would he have known her if he had seen her. How could he have

[028-497]taken the worn decrepit creature she was now, for the glorious Princess

[028-498]Daylight?

[028-499]At last, one night when there was no moon at all, he ventured near the

[028-500]house. There he heard voices talking, although it was past midnight; for

[028-501]her women were in considerable uneasiness, because the one whose turn it

[028-502]was to watch her had fallen asleep, and had not seen which way she went,

[028-503]and this was a night when she would probably wander very far, describing

[028-504]a circle which did not touch the open glade at all, but stretched away

[028-505]from the back of the house, deep into that side of the forest--a part

[028-506]of which the prince knew nothing. When he understood from what they said

[028-507]that she had disappeared, and that she must have gone somewhere in the

[028-508]said direction, he plunged at once into the wood to see if he could find

[028-509]her. For hours he roamed with nothing to guide him but the vague notion

[028-510]of a circle which on one side bordered on the house, for so much had he

[028-511]picked up from the talk he had overheard.

[028-512]It was getting towards the dawn, but as yet there was no streak of light

[028-513]in the sky, when he came to a great birch-tree, and sat down weary at

[028-514]the foot of it. While he sat--very miserable, you may be sure--full of

[028-515]fear for the princess, and wondering how her attendants could take it so

[028-516]quietly, he bethought himself that it would not be a bad plan to light

[028-517]a fire, which, if she were anywhere near, would attract her. This he

[028-518]managed with a tinder-box, which the good fairy had given him. It was

[028-519]just beginning to blaze up, when he heard a moan, which seemed to come

[028-520]from the other side of the tree. He sprung to his feet, but his heart

[028-521]throbbed so that he had to lean for a moment against the tree before he

[028-522]could move. When he got round, there lay a human form in a little dark

[028-523]heap on the earth. There was light enough from his fire to show that it

[028-524]was not the princess. He lifted it in his arms, hardly heavier than a

[028-525]child, and carried it to the flame. The countenance was that of an old

[028-526]woman, but it had a fearfully strange look. A black hood concealed her

[028-527]hair, and her eyes were closed. He laid her down as comfortably as he

[028-528]could, chafed her hands, put a little cordial from a bottle, also the

[028-529]gift of the fairy, into her mouth; took off his coat and wrapped it

[028-530]about her, and in short did the best he could. In a little while she

[028-531]opened her eyes and looked at him--so pitifully! The tears rose and

[028-532]flowed from her grey wrinkled cheeks, but she said never a word. She

[028-533]closed her eyes again, but the tears kept on flowing, and her whole

[028-534]appearance was so utterly pitiful that the prince was near crying too.

[028-535]He begged her to tell him what was the matter, promising to do all

[028-536]he could to help her; but still she did not speak. He thought she was

[028-537]dying, and took her in his arms again to carry her to the princess's

[028-538]house, where he thought the good-natured cook might be able to do

[028-539]something for her. When he lifted her, the tears flowed yet faster, and

[028-540]she gave such a sad moan that it went to his very heart.

[028-541]“Mother, mother!” he said. “Poor mother!” and kissed her on the withered

[028-542]lips.

[028-543]She started; and what eyes they were that opened upon him! But he did

[028-544]not see them, for it was still very dark, and he had enough to do to

[028-545]make his way through the trees towards the house.

[028-546]Just as he approached the door, feeling more tired than he could have

[028-547]imagined possible--she was such a little thin old thing--she began to

[028-548]move, and became so restless that, unable to carry her a moment longer,

[028-549]he thought to lay her on the grass. But she stood upright on her feet.

[028-550]Her hood had dropped, and her hair fell about her. The first gleam

[028-551]of the morning was caught on her face: that face was bright as the

[028-552]never-aging Dawn, and her eyes were lovely as the sky of darkest blue.

[028-553]The prince recoiled in overmastering wonder. It was Daylight herself

[028-554]whom he had brought from the forest! He fell at her feet, nor dared to

[028-555]look up until she laid her hand upon his head. He rose then.

[028-556]“You kissed me when I was an old woman: there! I kiss you when I am a

[028-557]young princess,” murmured Daylight.--“Is that the sun coming?”
