---
description: ""
id: ch31
label: "Chapter XXXI: THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER XXXI. THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW

[031-001]IT WAS a great [[joy|delight]] to [[diamond|Diamond]] when at length [[nanny|Nanny]] was well enough

[031-002]to leave the hospital and go home to their house. She was not very

[031-003]strong yet, but [[diamonds-mother|Diamond's mother]] was very considerate of her, and took

[031-004]care that she should have nothing to do she was not quite fit for. If

[031-005]Nanny had been taken straight from the street, it is very probable she

[031-006]would not have been so pleasant in a decent household, or so easy to

[031-007]teach; but after the refining influences of her illness and the kind

[031-008]treatment she had had in the hospital, she moved about the house just

[031-009]like some rather sad pleasure haunting the mind. As she got better, and

[031-010]the colour came back to her cheeks, her step grew lighter and quicker,

[031-011]her smile shone out more readily, and it became certain that she would

[031-012]soon be a treasure of help. It was great fun to see Diamond teaching

[031-013]her how to hold the baby, and wash and dress him, and often they laughed

[031-014]together over her awkwardness. But she had not many such lessons before

[031-015]she was able to perform those duties quite as well as Diamond himself.

[031-016]Things however did not go well with [[diamonds-father|Joseph]] from the very arrival of

[031-017]Ruby. It almost seemed as if the red beast had brought ill luck with

[031-018]him. The fares were fewer, and the pay less. Ruby's services did indeed

[031-019]make the week's income at first a little beyond what it used to be, but

[031-020]then there were two more to feed. After the first month he fell lame,

[031-021]and for the whole of the next Joseph dared not attempt to work him. I

[031-022]cannot say that he never grumbled, for his own health was far from what

[031-023]it had been; but I can say that he tried to do his best. During all

[031-024]that month, they lived on very short commons indeed, seldom tasting meat

[031-025]except on Sundays, and poor old Diamond, who worked hardest of all, not

[031-026]even then--so that at the end of it he was as thin as a clothes-horse,

[031-027]while Ruby was as plump and sleek as a bishop's cob.

[031-028]Nor was it much better after Ruby was able to work again, for it was

[031-029]a season of great depression in business, and that is very soon felt

[031-030]amongst the cabmen. City men look more after their shillings, and their

[031-031]wives and daughters have less to spend. It was besides a wet autumn, and

[031-032]bread rose greatly in price. When I add to this that Diamond's mother

[031-033]was but poorly, for a new baby was coming, you will see that these were

[031-034]not very jolly times for our friends in the mews.

[031-035]Notwithstanding the depressing influences around him, Joseph was able to

[031-036]keep a little hope alive in his heart; and when he came home at [[darkness|night]],

[031-037]would get Diamond to read to him, and would also make Nanny produce her

[031-038]book that he might see how she was getting on. For Diamond had taken her

[031-039]education in hand, and as she was a clever child, she was very soon able

[031-040]to put letters and words together.

[031-041]Thus the three months passed away, but [[mr-raymond|Mr. Raymond]] did not return.

[031-042]Joseph had been looking anxiously for him, chiefly with the desire of

[031-043]getting rid of Ruby--not that he was absolutely of no use to him, but

[031-044]that he was a constant weight upon his mind. Indeed, as far as provision

[031-045]went, he was rather worse off with Ruby and Nanny than he had been

[031-046]before, but on the other hand, Nanny was a great help in the house, and

[031-047]it was a comfort to him to think that when the new baby did come, Nanny

[031-048]would be with his wife.

[031-049]Of God's gifts a baby is of the greatest; therefore it is no wonder that

[031-050]when this one came, she was as heartily welcomed by the little household

[031-051]as if she had brought plenty with her. Of course she made a great

[031-052]difference in the work to be done--far more difference than her size

[031-053]warranted, but Nanny was no end of help, and Diamond was as much of a

[031-054]sunbeam as ever, and began to sing to the new baby the first moment he

[031-055]got her in his arms. But he did not sing the same songs to her that he

[031-056]had sung to his brother, for, he said, she was a new baby and must have

[031-057]new songs; and besides, she was a sister-baby and not a brother-baby,

[031-058]and of course would not like the same kind of songs. Where the

[031-059]difference in his songs lay, however, I do not pretend to be able to

[031-060]point out. One thing I am sure of, that they not only had no small share

[031-061]in the education of the little girl, but helped the whole family a great

[031-062]deal more than they were aware.

[031-063]How they managed to get through the long dreary expensive winter, I can

[031-064]hardly say. Sometimes things were better, sometimes worse. But at last

[031-065]the spring came, and the winter was over and gone, and that was much.

[031-066]Still, Mr. Raymond did not return, and although the mother would have

[031-067]been able to manage without Nanny now, they could not look for a place

[031-068]for her so long as they had Ruby; and they were not altogether sorry for

[031-069]this. One week at last was worse than they had yet had. They were almost

[031-070]without bread before it was over. But the sadder he saw his father and

[031-071]mother looking, the more Diamond set himself to sing to the two babies.

[031-072]One thing which had increased their expenses was that they had been

[031-073]forced to hire another little room for Nanny. When the second baby came,

[031-074]Diamond gave up his room that Nanny might be at hand to help his mother,

[031-075]and went to hers, which, although a fine place to what she had been

[031-076]accustomed to, was not very nice in his eyes. He did not mind the change

[031-077]though, for was not his mother the more comfortable for it? And was

[031-078]not Nanny more comfortable too? And indeed was not Diamond himself more

[031-079]comfortable that other people were more comfortable? And if there was

[031-080]more comfort every way, the change was a happy one.
