---
description: "Being sick was all very well, but Thea knew from experience that starting back"
id: ch03
label: "Part 1, Chapter 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## III

[003-001] Being sick was all very well, but Thea knew from experience that starting back

[003-002] to school again was attended by depressing difficulties. One Monday morning she

[003-003] got up early with Axel and Gunner, who shared her wing room, and hurried into

[003-004] the back living-room, between the dining-room and the kitchen. There, beside a

[003-005] soft-coal stove, the younger children of the family undressed at night and

[003-006] dressed in the morning. The older daughter, Anna, and the two big boys slept

[003-007] upstairs, where the rooms were theoretically warmed by stovepipes from below.

[003-008] The first (and the worst!) thing that confronted Thea was a suit of clean,

[003-009] prickly red flannel, fresh from the wash. Usually the torment of breaking in a

[003-010] clean suit of flannel came on Sunday, but yesterday, as she was staying in the

[003-011] house, she had begged off. Their winter underwear was a trial to all the

[003-012] children, but it was bitterest to Thea because she happened to have the most

[003-013] sensitive skin. While she was tugging it on, her Aunt Tillie brought in warm

[003-014] water from the boiler and filled the tin pitcher. Thea washed her face, brushed

[003-015] and braided her hair, and got into her blue cashmere dress. Over this she

[003-016] buttoned a long apron, with sleeves, which would not be removed until she put

[003-017] on her cloak to go to school. Gunner and Axel, on the soap box behind the

[003-018] stove, had their usual quarrel about which should wear the tightest stockings,

[003-019] but they exchanged reproaches in low tones, for they were wholesomely afraid of

[003-020] [[mrs-kronborg|Mrs. Kronborg]]’s rawhide whip. She did not chastise her children often,

[003-021] but she did it thoroughly. Only a somewhat stern system of discipline could

[003-022] have kept any degree of order and quiet in that overcrowded house.

[003-023] Mrs. Kronborg’s children were all trained to dress themselves at the

[003-024] earliest possible age, to make their own beds,—the boys as well as the

[003-025] girls,—to take care of their clothes, to eat what was given them, and to

[003-026] keep out of the way. Mrs. Kronborg would have made a good chess player; she had

[003-027] a head for moves and positions.

[003-028] Anna, the elder daughter, was her mother’s lieutenant. All the children

[003-029] knew that they must obey Anna, who was an obstinate contender for proprieties

[003-030] and not always fair minded. To see the young Kronborgs headed for Sunday School

[003-031] was like watching a military drill. Mrs. Kronborg let her children’s

[003-032] minds alone. She did not pry into their thoughts or nag them. She respected

[003-033] them as individuals, and outside of the house they had a great deal of liberty.

[003-034] But their communal life was definitely ordered.

[003-035] In the winter the children breakfasted in the kitchen; Gus and Charley and Anna

[003-036] first, while the younger children were dressing. Gus was nineteen and was a

[003-037] clerk in a dry-goods store. Charley, eighteen months younger, worked in a feed

[003-038] store. They left the house by the kitchen door at seven o’clock, and then

[003-039] Anna helped her Aunt Tillie get the breakfast for the younger ones. Without the

[003-040] help of this sister-in-law, Tillie Kronborg, Mrs. Kronborg’s life would

[003-041] have been a hard one. Mrs. Kronborg often reminded Anna that “no hired

[003-042] help would ever have taken the same interest.”

[003-043] Mr. Kronborg came of a poorer stock than his wife; from a lowly, ignorant

[003-044] family that had lived in a poor part of Sweden. His great-grandfather had gone

[003-045] to Norway to work as a farm laborer and had married a Norwegian girl. This

[003-046] strain of Norwegian blood came out somewhere in each generation of the

[003-047] Kronborgs. The intemperance of one of Peter Kronborg’s uncles, and the

[003-048] religious mania of another, had been alike charged to the Norwegian

[003-049] grandmother. Both Peter Kronborg and his sister Tillie were more like the

[003-050] Norwegian root of the family than like the Swedish, and this same Norwegian

[003-051] strain was strong in Thea, though in her it took a very different character.

[003-052] Tillie was a queer, addle-pated thing, as flighty as a girl at thirty-five, and

[003-053] overweeningly fond of gay clothes—which taste, as Mrs. Kronborg

[003-054] philosophically said, did nobody any harm. Tillie was always cheerful, and her

[003-055] tongue was still for scarcely a minute during the day. She had been cruelly

[003-056] overworked on her father’s Minnesota farm when she was a young girl, and

[003-057] she had never been so happy as she was now; had never before, as she said, had

[003-058] such social advantages. She thought her brother the most important man in

[003-059] Moonstone. She never missed a church service, and, much to the embarrassment of

[003-060] the children, she always “spoke a piece” at the Sunday-School

[003-061] concerts. She had a complete set of “Standard Recitations,” which

[003-062] she conned on Sundays. This morning, when Thea and her two younger brothers sat

[003-063] down to breakfast, Tillie was remonstrating with Gunner because he had not

[003-064] learned a recitation assigned to him for George Washington Day at school. The

[003-065] unmemorized text lay heavily on Gunner’s conscience as he attacked his

[003-066] buckwheat cakes and sausage. He knew that Tillie was in the right, and that

[003-067] “when the day came he would be ashamed of himself.”

[003-068] “I don’t care,” he muttered, stirring his coffee; “they

[003-069] oughtn’t to make boys speak. It’s all right for girls. They like to

[003-070] show off.”

[003-071] “No showing off about it. Boys ought to like to speak up for their

[003-072] country. And what was the use of your father buying you a new suit, if

[003-073] you’re not going to take part in anything?”

[003-074] “That was for Sunday-School. I’d rather wear my old one, anyhow.

[003-075] Why didn’t they give the piece to Thea?” Gunner grumbled.

[003-076] Tillie was turning buckwheat cakes at the griddle. “Thea can play and

[003-077] sing, she don’t need to speak. But you’ve got to know how to do

[003-078] something, Gunner, that you have. What are you going to do when you git big and

[003-079] want to git into society, if you can’t do nothing? Everybody’ll

[003-080] say, ‘Can you sing? Can you play? Can you speak? Then git right out of

[003-081] society.’ An’ that’s what they’ll say to you, Mr.

[003-082] Gunner.”

[003-083] Gunner and Alex grinned at Anna, who was preparing her mother’s

[003-084] breakfast. They never made fun of Tillie, but they understood well enough that

[003-085] there were subjects upon which her ideas were rather foolish. When Tillie

[003-086] struck the shallows, Thea was usually prompt in turning the conversation.

[003-087] “Will you and Axel let me have your sled at recess?” she asked.

[003-088] “All the time?” asked Gunner dubiously.

[003-089] “I’ll work your examples for you to-night, if you do.”

[003-090] “Oh, all right. There’ll be a lot of ’em.”

[003-091] “I don’t mind, I can work ’em fast. How about yours,

[003-092] Axel?”

[003-093] Axel was a fat little boy of seven, with pretty, lazy blue eyes. “I

[003-094] don’t care,” he murmured, buttering his last buckwheat cake without

[003-095] ambition; “too much trouble to copy ’em down. Jenny Smiley’ll

[003-096] let me have hers.”

[003-097] The boys were to pull Thea to school on their sled, as the snow was deep. The

[003-098] three set off together. Anna was now in the high school, and she no longer went

[003-099] with the family party, but walked to school with some of the older girls who

[003-100] were her friends, and wore a hat, not a hood like Thea.
