---
description: "The children in the primary grades were sometimes required to make relief maps"
id: ch05
label: "Part 1, Chapter 5"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## V

[005-001] The children in the primary grades were sometimes required to make relief maps

[005-002] of Moonstone in sand. Had they used colored sands, as the Navajo medicine men

[005-003] do in their sand mosaics, they could easily have indicated the social

[005-004] classifications of Moonstone, since these conformed to certain topographical

[005-005] boundaries, and every child understood them perfectly.

[005-006] The main business street ran, of course, through the center of the town. To the

[005-007] west of this street lived all the people who were, as Tillie Kronborg said,

[005-008] “in society.” Sylvester Street, the third parallel with Main Street

[005-009] on the west, was the longest in town, and the best dwellings were built along

[005-010] it. Far out at the north end, nearly a mile from the court-house and its

[005-011] cottonwood grove, was [[dr-archie|Dr. Archie]]’s house, its big yard and garden

[005-012] surrounded by a white paling fence. The Methodist Church was in the center of

[005-013] the town, facing the court-house square. The Kronborgs lived half a mile south

[005-014] of the church, on the long street that stretched out like an arm to the depot

[005-015] settlement. This was the first street west of Main, and was built up only on

[005-016] one side. The preacher’s house faced the backs of the brick and frame

[005-017] store buildings and a draw full of sunflowers and scraps of old iron. The

[005-018] sidewalk which ran in front of the Kronborgs’ house was the one

[005-019] continuous sidewalk to the depot, and all the train men and roundhouse

[005-020] employees passed the front gate every time they came uptown. Thea and Mrs.

[005-021] Kronborg had many friends among the railroad men, who often paused to chat

[005-022] across the fence, and of one of these we shall have more to say.

[005-023] In the part of Moonstone that lay east of Main Street, toward the deep ravine

[005-024] which, farther south, wound by Mexican Town, lived all the humbler citizens,

[005-025] the people who voted but did not run for office. The houses were little

[005-026] story-and-a-half cottages, with none of the fussy architectural efforts that

[005-027] marked those on Sylvester Street. They nestled modestly behind their

[005-028] cottonwoods and Virginia creeper; their occupants had no social pretensions to

[005-029] keep up. There were no half-glass front doors with doorbells, or formidable

[005-030] parlors behind closed shutters. Here the old women washed in the back yard, and

[005-031] the men sat in the front doorway and smoked their pipes. The people on

[005-032] Sylvester Street scarcely knew that this part of the town existed. Thea liked

[005-033] to take Thor and her express wagon and explore these quiet, shady streets,

[005-034] where the people never tried to have lawns or to grow elms and pine trees, but

[005-035] let the native timber have its way and spread in luxuriance. She had many

[005-036] friends there, old women who gave her a yellow rose or a spray of trumpet vine

[005-037] and appeased Thor with a cooky or a doughnut. They called Thea “that

[005-038] preacher’s girl,” but the demonstrative was misplaced, for when

[005-039] they spoke of Mr. Kronborg they called him “the Methodist

[005-040] preacher.”

[005-041] Dr. Archie was very proud of his yard and garden, which he worked himself. He

[005-042] was the only man in Moonstone who was successful at growing rambler roses, and

[005-043] his strawberries were famous. One morning when Thea was downtown on an errand,

[005-044] the doctor stopped her, took her hand and went over her with a quizzical eye,

[005-045] as he nearly always did when they met.

[005-046] “You haven’t been up to my place to get any strawberries yet, Thea.

[005-047] They’re at their best just now. Mrs. Archie doesn’t know what to do

[005-048] with them all. Come up this afternoon. Just tell Mrs. Archie I sent you. Bring

[005-049] a big basket and pick till you are tired.”

[005-050] When she got home Thea told her mother that she didn’t want to go,

[005-051] because she didn’t like Mrs. Archie.

[005-052] “She is certainly one queer woman,” [[mrs-kronborg|Mrs. Kronborg]] assented,

[005-053] “but he’s asked you so often, I guess you’ll have to go this

[005-054] time. She won’t bite you.”

[005-055] After dinner Thea took a basket, put Thor in his baby buggy, and set out for

[005-056] Dr. Archie’s house at the other end of town. As soon as she came within

[005-057] sight of the house, she slackened her pace. She approached it very slowly,

[005-058] stopping often to pick dandelions and sand-peas for Thor to crush up in his

[005-059] fist.

[005-060] It was his wife’s custom, as soon as Dr. Archie left the house in the

[005-061] morning, to shut all the doors and windows to keep the dust out, and to pull

[005-062] down the shades to keep the sun from fading the carpets. She thought, too, that

[005-063] neighbors were less likely to drop in if the house was closed up. She was one

[005-064] of those people who are stingy without motive or reason, even when they can

[005-065] gain nothing by it. She must have known that skimping the doctor in heat and

[005-066] food made him more extravagant than he would have been had she made him

[005-067] comfortable. He never came home for lunch, because she gave him such miserable

[005-068] scraps and shreds of food. No matter how much milk he bought, he could never

[005-069] get thick cream for his strawberries. Even when he watched his wife lift it

[005-070] from the milk in smooth, ivory-colored blankets, she managed, by some

[005-071] sleight-of-hand, to dilute it before it got to the breakfast table. The

[005-072] butcher’s favorite joke was about the kind of meat he sold Mrs. Archie.

[005-073] She felt no interest in food herself, and she hated to prepare it. She liked

[005-074] nothing better than to have Dr. Archie go to Denver for a few days—he

[005-075] often went chiefly because he was hungry—and to be left alone to eat

[005-076] canned salmon and to keep the house shut up from morning until night.

[005-077] Mrs. Archie would not have a servant because, she said, “they ate too

[005-078] much and broke too much”; she even said they knew too much. She used what

[005-079] mind she had in devising shifts to minimize her housework. She used to tell her

[005-080] neighbors that if there were no men, there would be no housework. When Mrs.

[005-081] Archie was first married, she had been always in a panic for fear she would

[005-082] have children. Now that her apprehensions on that score had grown paler, she

[005-083] was almost as much afraid of having dust in the house as she had once been of

[005-084] having children in it. If dust did not get in, it did not have to be got out,

[005-085] she said. She would take any amount of trouble to avoid trouble. Why, nobody

[005-086] knew. Certainly her husband had never been able to make her out. Such little,

[005-087] mean natures are among the darkest and most baffling of created things. There

[005-088] is no law by which they can be explained. The ordinary incentives of pain and

[005-089] pleasure do not account for their behavior. They live like insects, absorbed in

[005-090] petty activities that seem to have nothing to do with any genial aspect of

[005-091] human life.

[005-092] Mrs. Archie, as Mrs. Kronborg said, “liked to gad.” She liked to

[005-093] have her house clean, empty, dark, locked, and to be out of it—anywhere.

[005-094] A church social, a prayer meeting, a ten-cent show; she seemed to have no

[005-095] preference. When there was nowhere else to go, she used to sit for hours in

[005-096] Mrs. Smiley’s millinery and notion store, listening to the talk of the

[005-097] women who came in, watching them while they tried on hats, blinking at them

[005-098] from her corner with her sharp, restless little eyes. She never talked much

[005-099] herself, but she knew all the gossip of the town and she had a sharp ear for

[005-100] racy anecdotes—“traveling men’s stories,” they used to

[005-101] be called in Moonstone. Her clicking laugh sounded like a typewriting machine

[005-102] in action, and, for very pointed stories, she had a little screech.

[005-103] Mrs. Archie had been Mrs. Archie for only six years, and when she was Belle

[005-104] White she was one of the “pretty” girls in Lansing, Michigan. She

[005-105] had then a train of suitors. She could truly remind Archie that “the boys

[005-106] hung around her.” They did. They thought her very spirited and were

[005-107] always saying, “Oh, that Belle White, she’s a case!” She used

[005-108] to play heavy practical jokes which the young men thought very clever. Archie

[005-109] was considered the most promising young man in “the young crowd,”

[005-110] so Belle selected him. She let him see, made him fully aware, that she had

[005-111] selected him, and Archie was the sort of boy who could not withstand such

[005-112] enlightenment. Belle’s family were sorry for him. On his wedding day her

[005-113] sisters looked at the big, handsome boy—he was twenty-four—as he

[005-114] walked down the aisle with his bride, and then they looked at each other. His

[005-115] besotted confidence, his sober, radiant face, his gentle, protecting arm, made

[005-116] them uncomfortable. Well, they were glad that he was going West at once, to

[005-117] fulfill his doom where they would not be onlookers. Anyhow, they consoled

[005-118] themselves, they had got Belle off their hands.

[005-119] More than that, Belle seemed to have got herself off her hands. Her reputed

[005-120] prettiness must have been entirely the result of determination, of a fierce

[005-121] little ambition. Once she had married, fastened herself on some one, come to

[005-122] port,—it vanished like the ornamental plumage which drops away from some

[005-123] birds after the mating season. The one aggressive action of her life was over.

[005-124] She began to shrink in face and stature. Of her harum-scarum spirit there was

[005-125] nothing left but the little screech. Within a few years she looked as small and

[005-126] mean as she was.

[005-127] Thor’s chariot crept along. Thea approached the house unwillingly. She

[005-128] didn’t care about the strawberries, anyhow. She had come only because she

[005-129] did not want to hurt Dr. Archie’s feelings. She not only disliked Mrs.

[005-130] Archie, she was a little afraid of her. While Thea was getting the heavy

[005-131] baby-buggy through the iron gate she heard some one call, “Wait a

[005-132] minute!” and Mrs. Archie came running around the house from the back

[005-133] door, her apron over her head. She came to help with the buggy, because she was

[005-134] afraid the wheels might scratch the paint off the gateposts. She was a skinny

[005-135] little woman with a great pile of frizzy light hair on a small head.

[005-136] “Dr. Archie told me to come up and pick some strawberries,” Thea

[005-137] muttered, wishing she had stayed at home.

[005-138] Mrs. Archie led the way to the back door, squinting and shading her eyes with

[005-139] her hand. “Wait a minute,” she said again, when Thea explained why

[005-140] she had come.

[005-141] She went into her kitchen and Thea sat down on the porch step. When Mrs. Archie

[005-142] reappeared she carried in her hand a little wooden butter-basket trimmed with

[005-143] fringed tissue paper, which she must have brought home from some church supper.

[005-144] “You’ll have to have something to put them in,” she said,

[005-145] ignoring the yawning willow basket which stood empty on Thor’s feet.

[005-146] “You can have this, and you needn’t mind about returning it. You

[005-147] know about not trampling the vines, don’t you?”

[005-148] Mrs. Archie went back into the house and Thea leaned over in the sand and

[005-149] picked a few strawberries. As soon as she was sure that she was not going to

[005-150] cry, she tossed the little basket into the big one and ran Thor’s buggy

[005-151] along the gravel walk and out of the gate as fast as she could push it. She was

[005-152] angry, and she was ashamed for Dr. Archie. She could not help thinking how

[005-153] uncomfortable he would be if he ever found out about it. Little things like

[005-154] that were the ones that cut him most. She slunk home by the back way, and again

[005-155] almost cried when she told her mother about it.

[005-156] Mrs. Kronborg was frying doughnuts for her husband’s supper. She laughed

[005-157] as she dropped a new lot into the hot grease. “It’s wonderful, the

[005-158] way some people are made,” she declared. “But I wouldn’t let

[005-159] that upset me if I was you. Think what it would be to live with it all the

[005-160] time. You look in the black pocketbook inside my handbag and take a dime and go

[005-161] downtown and get an ice-cream soda. That’ll make you feel better. Thor

[005-162] can have a little of the ice-cream if you feed it to him with a spoon. He likes

[005-163] it, don’t you, son?” She stooped to wipe his chin. Thor was only

[005-164] six months old and inarticulate, but it was quite true that he liked ice-cream.
