---
description: "Mr. Kronborg considered Thea a remarkable child; but so were all his children"
id: ch09
label: "Part 1, Chapter 9"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## IX

[009-001] Mr. Kronborg considered Thea a remarkable child; but so were all his children

[009-002] remarkable. If one of the business men downtown remarked to him that he

[009-003] “had a mighty bright little girl, there,” he admitted it, and at

[009-004] once began to explain what a “long head for business” his son Gus

[009-005] had, or that Charley was “a natural electrician,” and had put in a

[009-006] telephone from the house to the preacher’s study behind the church.

[009-007] [[mrs-kronborg|Mrs. Kronborg]] watched her daughter thoughtfully. She found her more interesting

[009-008] than her other children, and she took her more seriously, without thinking much

[009-009] about why she did so. The other children had to be guided, directed, kept from

[009-010] conflicting with one another. Charley and Gus were likely to want the same

[009-011] thing, and to quarrel about it. Anna often demanded unreasonable service from

[009-012] her older brothers; that they should sit up until after midnight to bring her

[009-013] home from parties when she did not like the youth who had offered himself as

[009-014] her escort; or that they should drive twelve miles into the country, on a

[009-015] winter night, to take her to a ranch dance, after they had been working hard

[009-016] all day. Gunner often got bored with his own clothes or stilts or sled, and

[009-017] wanted Axel’s. But Thea, from the time she was a little thing, had her

[009-018] own routine. She kept out of every one’s way, and was hard to manage only

[009-019] when the other children interfered with her. Then there was trouble indeed:

[009-020] bursts of temper which used to alarm Mrs. Kronborg. “You ought to know

[009-021] enough to let Thea alone. She lets you alone,” she often said to the

[009-022] other children.

[009-023] One may have staunch friends in one’s own family, but one seldom has

[009-024] admirers. Thea, however, had one in the person of her addle-pated aunt, Tillie

[009-025] Kronborg. In older countries, where dress and opinions and manners are not so

[009-026] thoroughly standardized as in our own West, there is a belief that people who

[009-027] are foolish about the more obvious things of life are apt to have peculiar

[009-028] insight into what lies beyond the obvious. The old woman who can never learn

[009-029] not to put the kerosene can on the stove, may yet be able to tell fortunes, to

[009-030] persuade a backward child to grow, to cure warts, or to tell people what to do

[009-031] with a young girl who has gone melancholy. Tillie’s mind was a curious

[009-032] machine; when she was awake it went round like a wheel when the belt has

[009-033] slipped off, and when she was asleep she dreamed follies. But she had

[009-034] intuitions. She knew, for instance, that Thea was different from the other

[009-035] Kronborgs, worthy though they all were. Her romantic imagination found

[009-036] possibilities in her niece. When she was sweeping or ironing, or turning the

[009-037] ice-cream freezer at a furious rate, she often built up brilliant futures for

[009-038] Thea, adapting freely the latest novel she had read.

[009-039] Tillie made enemies for her niece among the church people because, at sewing

[009-040] societies and church suppers, she sometimes spoke vauntingly, with a toss of

[009-041] her head, just as if Thea’s “wonderfulness” were an accepted

[009-042] fact in Moonstone, like Mrs. Archie’s stinginess, or Mrs. Livery

[009-043] Johnson’s duplicity. People declared that, on this subject, Tillie made

[009-044] them tired.

[009-045] Tillie belonged to a dramatic club that once a year performed in the Moonstone

[009-046] Opera House such plays as “Among the Breakers,” and “The

[009-047] Veteran of 1812.” Tillie played character parts, the flirtatious old maid

[009-048] or the spiteful *intrigante*. She used to study her parts up in the attic

[009-049] at home. While she was committing the lines, she got Gunner or Anna to hold the

[009-050] book for her, but when she began “to bring out the expression,” as

[009-051] she said, she used, very timorously, to ask Thea to hold the book. Thea was

[009-052] usually—not always—agreeable about it. Her mother had told her

[009-053] that, since she had some influence with Tillie, it would be a good thing for

[009-054] them all if she could tone her down a shade and “keep her from taking on

[009-055] any worse than need be.” Thea would sit on the foot of Tillie’s

[009-056] bed, her feet tucked under her, and stare at the silly text. “I

[009-057] wouldn’t make so much fuss, there, Tillie,” she would remark

[009-058] occasionally; “I don’t see the point in it”; or, “What

[009-059] do you pitch your voice so high for? It don’t carry half as well.”

[009-060] “I don’t see how it comes Thea is so patient with Tillie,”

[009-061] Mrs. Kronborg more than once remarked to her husband. “She ain’t

[009-062] patient with most people, but it seems like she’s got a peculiar patience

[009-063] for Tillie.”

[009-064] Tillie always coaxed Thea to go “behind the scenes” with her when

[009-065] the club presented a play, and help her with her make-up. Thea hated it, but

[009-066] she always went. She felt as if she had to do it. There was something in

[009-067] Tillie’s adoration of her that compelled her. There was no family

[009-068] impropriety that Thea was so much ashamed of as Tillie’s

[009-069] “acting” and yet she was always being dragged in to assist her.

[009-070] Tillie simply had her, there. She didn’t know why, but it was so. There

[009-071] was a string in her somewhere that Tillie could pull; a sense of obligation to

[009-072] Tillie’s misguided aspirations. The saloon-keepers had some such feeling

[009-073] of responsibility toward [[spanish-johnny|Spanish Johnny]].

[009-074] The dramatic club was the pride of Tillie’s heart, and her enthusiasm was

[009-075] the principal factor in keeping it together. Sick or well, Tillie always

[009-076] attended rehearsals, and was always urging the young people, who took

[009-077] rehearsals lightly, to “stop fooling and begin now.” The young

[009-078] men—bank clerks, grocery clerks, insurance agents—played tricks,

[009-079] laughed at Tillie, and “put it up on each other” about seeing her

[009-080] home; but they often went to tiresome rehearsals just to oblige her. They were

[009-081] good-natured young fellows. Their trainer and stage-manager was young Upping,

[009-082] the jeweler who ordered Thea’s music for her.

[009-083] Though barely thirty, he had followed half a dozen professions, and had once

[009-084] been a violinist in the orchestra of the Andrews Opera Company, then well known

[009-085] in little towns throughout Colorado and Nebraska.

[009-086] By one amazing indiscretion Tillie very nearly lost her hold upon the Moonstone

[009-087] Drama Club. The club had decided to put on “The Drummer Boy of

[009-088] Shiloh,” a very ambitious undertaking because of the many supers needed

[009-089] and the scenic difficulties of the act which took place in Andersonville

[009-090] Prison. The members of the club consulted together in Tillie’s absence as

[009-091] to who should play the part of the drummer boy. It must be taken by a very

[009-092] young person, and village boys of that age are self-conscious and are not apt

[009-093] at memorizing. The part was a long one, and clearly it must be given to a girl.

[009-094] Some members of the club suggested [[thea-kronborg|Thea Kronborg]], others advocated [[lily-fisher|Lily Fisher]].

[009-095] Lily’s partisans urged that she was much prettier than Thea, and had a

[009-096] much “sweeter disposition.” Nobody denied these facts. But there

[009-097] was nothing in the least boyish about Lily, and she sang all songs and played

[009-098] all parts alike. Lily’s simper was popular, but it seemed not quite the

[009-099] right thing for the heroic drummer boy.

[009-100] Upping, the trainer, talked to one and another: “Lily’s all right

[009-101] for girl parts,” he insisted, “but you’ve got to get a girl

[009-102] with some ginger in her for this. Thea’s got the voice, too. When she

[009-103] sings, ‘Just Before the Battle, Mother,’ she’ll bring down

[009-104] the house.”

[009-105] When all the members of the club had been privately consulted, they announced

[009-106] their decision to Tillie at the first regular meeting that was called to cast

[009-107] the parts. They expected Tillie to be overcome with joy, but, on the contrary,

[009-108] she seemed embarrassed. “I’m afraid Thea hasn’t got time for

[009-109] that,” she said jerkily. “She is always so busy with her music.

[009-110] Guess you’ll have to get somebody else.”

[009-111] The club lifted its eyebrows. Several of Lily Fisher’s friends coughed.

[009-112] Mr. Upping flushed. The stout woman who always played the injured wife called

[009-113] Tillie’s attention to the fact that this would be a fine opportunity for

[009-114] her niece to show what she could do. Her tone was condescending.

[009-115] Tillie threw up her head and laughed; there was something sharp and wild about

[009-116] Tillie’s laugh—when it was not a giggle. “Oh, I guess Thea

[009-117] hasn’t got time to do any showing off. Her time to show off ain’t

[009-118] come yet. I expect she’ll make us all sit up when it does. No use asking

[009-119] her to take the part. She’d turn her nose up at it. I guess they’d

[009-120] be glad to get her in the Denver Dramatics, if they could.”

[009-121] The company broke up into groups and expressed their amazement. Of course all

[009-122] Swedes were conceited, but they would never have believed that all the conceit

[009-123] of all the Swedes put together would reach such a pitch as this. They confided

[009-124] to each other that Tillie was “just a little off, on the subject of her

[009-125] niece,” and agreed that it would be as well not to excite her further.

[009-126] Tillie got a cold reception at rehearsals for a long while afterward, and Thea

[009-127] had a crop of new enemies without even knowing it.
