---
description: "Mr. Kronborg was too fond of his ease and too sensible to worry his children"
id: ch18
label: "Part 1, Chapter 18"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## XVIII

[018-001] Mr. Kronborg was too fond of his ease and too sensible to worry his children

[018-002] much about religion. He was more sincere than many preachers, but when he spoke

[018-003] to his family about matters of conduct it was usually with a regard for keeping

[018-004] up appearances. The church and church work were discussed in the family like

[018-005] the routine of any other business. Sunday was the hard day of the week with

[018-006] them, just as Saturday was the busy day with the merchants on Main Street.

[018-007] Revivals were seasons of extra work and pressure, just as threshing-time was on

[018-008] the farms. Visiting elders had to be lodged and cooked for, the folding-bed in

[018-009] the parlor was let down, and [[mrs-kronborg|Mrs. Kronborg]] had to work in the kitchen all day

[018-010] long and attend the night meetings.

[018-011] During one of these revivals Thea’s sister Anna professed religion with,

[018-012] as Mrs. Kronborg said, “a good deal of fluster.” While Anna was

[018-013] going up to the mourners’ bench nightly and asking for the prayers of the

[018-014] congregation, she disseminated general gloom throughout the household, and

[018-015] after she joined the church she took on an air of “set-apartness”

[018-016] that was extremely trying to her brothers and her sister, though they realized

[018-017] that Anna’s sanctimoniousness was perhaps a good thing for their father.

[018-018] A preacher ought to have one child who did more than merely acquiesce in

[018-019] religious observances, and Thea and the boys were glad enough that it was Anna

[018-020] and not one of themselves who assumed this obligation.

[018-021] “Anna, she’s American,” Mrs. Kronborg used to say. The

[018-022] Scandinavian mould of countenance, more or less marked in each of the other

[018-023] children, was scarcely discernible in her, and she looked enough like other

[018-024] Moonstone girls to be thought pretty. Anna’s nature was conventional,

[018-025] like her face. Her position as the minister’s eldest daughter was

[018-026] important to her, and she tried to live up to it. She read sentimental

[018-027] religious story-books and emulated the spiritual struggles and magnanimous

[018-028] behavior of their persecuted heroines. Everything had to be interpreted for

[018-029] Anna. Her opinions about the smallest and most commonplace things were gleaned

[018-030] from the Denver papers, the church weeklies, from sermons and Sunday-School

[018-031] addresses. Scarcely anything was attractive to her in its natural

[018-032] state—indeed, scarcely anything was decent until it was clothed by the

[018-033] opinion of some authority. Her ideas about habit, character, duty, love,

[018-034] marriage, were grouped under heads, like a book of popular quotations, and were

[018-035] totally unrelated to the emergencies of human living. She discussed all these

[018-036] subjects with other Methodist girls of her age. They would spend hours, for

[018-037] instance, in deciding what they would or would not tolerate in a suitor or a

[018-038] husband, and the frailties of masculine nature were too often a subject of

[018-039] discussion among them. In her behavior Anna was a harmless girl, mild except

[018-040] where her prejudices were concerned, neat and industrious, with no graver fault

[018-041] than priggishness; but her mind had really shocking habits of classification.

[018-042] The wickedness of Denver and of [[chicago|Chicago]], and even of Moonstone, occupied her

[018-043] thoughts too much. She had none of the delicacy that goes with a nature of warm

[018-044] impulses, but the kind of fishy curiosity which justifies itself by an

[018-045] expression of horror.

[018-046] Thea, and all Thea’s ways and friends, seemed indecorous to Anna. She not

[018-047] only felt a grave social discrimination against the Mexicans; she could not

[018-048] forget that [[spanish-johnny|Spanish Johnny]] was a drunkard and that “nobody knew what he

[018-049] did when he ran away from home.” Thea pretended, of course, that she

[018-050] liked the Mexicans because they were fond of music; but every one knew that

[018-051] music was nothing very real, and that it did not matter in a girl’s

[018-052] relations with people. What was real, then, and what did matter? Poor Anna!

[018-053] Anna approved of [[ray-kennedy|Ray Kennedy]] as a young man of steady habits and blameless

[018-054] life, but she regretted that he was an atheist, and that he was not a passenger

[018-055] conductor with brass buttons on his coat. On the whole, she wondered what such

[018-056] an exemplary young man found to like in Thea. [[dr-archie|Dr. Archie]] she treated

[018-057] respectfully because of his position in Moonstone, but she *knew* he had

[018-058] kissed the Mexican barytone’s pretty daughter, and she had a whole

[018-059] *dossier* of evidence about his behavior in his hours of relaxation in

[018-060] Denver. He was “fast,” and it was because he was “fast”

[018-061] that Thea liked him. Thea always liked that kind of people. Dr. Archie’s

[018-062] whole manner with Thea, Anna often told her mother, was too free. He was always

[018-063] putting his hand on Thea’s head, or holding her hand while he laughed and

[018-064] looked down at her. The kindlier manifestation of human nature (about which

[018-065] Anna sang and talked, in the interests of which she went to conventions and

[018-066] wore white ribbons) were never realities to her after all. She did not believe

[018-067] in them. It was only in attitudes of protest or reproof, clinging to the cross,

[018-068] that human beings could be even temporarily decent.

[018-069] Preacher Kronborg’s secret convictions were very much like Anna’s.

[018-070] He believed that his wife was absolutely good, but there was not a man or woman

[018-071] in his congregation whom he trusted all the way.

[018-072] Mrs. Kronborg, on the other hand, was likely to find something to admire in

[018-073] almost any human conduct that was positive and energetic. She could always be

[018-074] taken in by the stories of tramps and runaway boys. She went to the circus and

[018-075] admired the bareback riders, who were “likely good enough women in their

[018-076] way.” She admired Dr. Archie’s fine physique and well-cut clothes

[018-077] as much as Thea did, and said she “felt it was a privilege to be handled

[018-078] by such a gentleman when she was sick.”

[018-079] Soon after Anna became a church member she began to remonstrate with Thea about

[018-080] practicing—playing “secular music”—on Sunday. One

[018-081] Sunday the dispute in the parlor grew warm and was carried to Mrs. Kronborg in

[018-082] the kitchen. She listened judicially and told Anna to read the chapter about

[018-083] how Naaman the leper was permitted to bow down in the house of Rimmon. Thea

[018-084] went back to the piano, and Anna lingered to say that, since she was in the

[018-085] right, her mother should have supported her.

[018-086] “No,” said Mrs. Kronborg, rather indifferently, “I

[018-087] can’t see it that way, Anna. I never forced you to practice, and I

[018-088] don’t see as I should keep Thea from it. I like to hear her, and I guess

[018-089] your father does. You and Thea will likely follow different lines, and I

[018-090] don’t see as I’m called upon to bring you up alike.”

[018-091] Anna looked meek and abused. “Of course all the church people must hear

[018-092] her. Ours is the only noisy house on this street. You hear what she’s

[018-093] playing now, don’t you?”

[018-094] Mrs. Kronborg rose from browning her coffee. “Yes; it’s the Blue

[018-095] Danube waltzes. I’m familiar with ’em. If any of the church people

[018-096] come at you, you just send ’em to me. I ain’t afraid to speak out

[018-097] on occasion, and I wouldn’t mind one bit telling the Ladies’ Aid a

[018-098] few things about standard composers.” Mrs. Kronborg smiled, and added

[018-099] thoughtfully, “No, I wouldn’t mind that one bit.”

[018-100] Anna went about with a reserved and distant air for a week, and Mrs. Kronborg

[018-101] suspected that she held a larger place than usual in her daughter’s

[018-102] prayers; but that was another thing she didn’t mind.

[018-103] Although revivals were merely a part of the year’s work, like examination

[018-104] week at school, and although Anna’s piety impressed her very little, a

[018-105] time came when Thea was perplexed about religion. A scourge of typhoid broke

[018-106] out in Moonstone and several of Thea’s schoolmates died of it. She went

[018-107] to their funerals, saw them put into the ground, and wondered a good deal about

[018-108] them. But a certain grim incident, which caused the epidemic, troubled her even

[018-109] more than the death of her friends.

[018-110] Early in July, soon after Thea’s fifteenth birthday, a particularly

[018-111] disgusting sort of tramp came into Moonstone in an empty box car. Thea was

[018-112] sitting in the hammock in the front yard when he first crawled up to the town

[018-113] from the depot, carrying a bundle wrapped in dirty ticking under one arm, and

[018-114] under the other a wooden box with rusty screening nailed over one end. He had a

[018-115] thin, hungry face covered with black hair. It was just before suppertime when

[018-116] he came along, and the street smelled of fried potatoes and fried onions and

[018-117] coffee. Thea saw him sniffing the air greedily and walking slower and slower.

[018-118] He looked over the fence. She hoped he would not stop at their gate, for her

[018-119] mother never turned any one away, and this was the dirtiest and most utterly

[018-120] wretched-looking tramp she had ever seen. There was a terrible odor about him,

[018-121] too. She caught it even at that distance, and put her handkerchief to her nose.

[018-122] A moment later she was sorry, for she knew that he had noticed it. He looked

[018-123] away and shuffled a little faster.

[018-124] A few days later Thea heard that the tramp had camped in an empty shack over on

[018-125] the east edge of town, beside the ravine, and was trying to give a miserable

[018-126] sort of show there. He told the boys who went to see what he was doing, that he

[018-127] had traveled with a circus. His bundle contained a filthy clown’s suit,

[018-128] and his box held half a dozen rattlesnakes.

[018-129] Saturday night, when Thea went to the butcher shop to get the chickens for

[018-130] Sunday, she heard the whine of an accordion and saw a crowd before one of the

[018-131] saloons. There she found the tramp, his bony body grotesquely attired in the

[018-132] clown’s suit, his face shaved and painted white,—the sweat

[018-133] trickling through the paint and washing it away,—and his eyes wild and

[018-134] feverish. Pulling the accordion in and out seemed to be almost too great an

[018-135] effort for him, and he panted to the tune of “Marching through

[018-136] Georgia.” After a considerable crowd had gathered, the tramp exhibited

[018-137] his box of snakes, announced that he would now pass the hat, and that when the

[018-138] onlookers had contributed the sum of one dollar, he would eat “one of

[018-139] these living reptiles.” The crowd began to cough and murmur, and the

[018-140] saloon keeper rushed off for the marshal, who arrested the wretch for giving a

[018-141] show without a license and hurried him away to the calaboose.

[018-142] The calaboose stood in a sunflower patch,—an old hut with a barred window

[018-143] and a padlock on the door. The tramp was utterly filthy and there was no way to

[018-144] give him a bath. The law made no provision to grub-stake vagrants, so after the

[018-145] constable had detained the tramp for twentyfour hours, he released him and told

[018-146] him to “get out of town, and get quick.” The fellow’s

[018-147] rattlesnakes had been killed by the saloon keeper. He hid in a box car in the

[018-148] freight yard, probably hoping to get a ride to the next station, but he was

[018-149] found and put out. After that he was seen no more. He had disappeared and left

[018-150] no trace except an ugly, stupid word, chalked on the black paint of the

[018-151] seventy-five-foot standpipe which was the reservoir for the Moonstone

[018-152] water-supply; the same word, in another tongue, that the French soldier shouted

[018-153] at Waterloo to the English officer who bade the Old Guard surrender; a comment

[018-154] on life which the defeated, along the hard roads of the world, sometimes bawl

[018-155] at the victorious.

[018-156] A week after the tramp excitement had passed over, the city water began to

[018-157] smell and to taste. The Kronborgs had a well in their back yard and did not use

[018-158] city water, but they heard the complaints of their neighbors. At first people

[018-159] said that the town well was full of rotting cottonwood roots, but the engineer

[018-160] at the pumping-station convinced the mayor that the water left the well

[018-161] untainted. Mayors reason slowly, but, the well being eliminated, the official

[018-162] mind had to travel toward the standpipe—there was no other track for it

[018-163] to go in. The standpipe amply rewarded investigation. The tramp had got even

[018-164] with Moonstone. He had climbed the standpipe by the handholds and let himself

[018-165] down into seventy-five feet of cold water, with his shoes and hat and roll of

[018-166] ticking. The city council had a mild panic and passed a new ordinance about

[018-167] tramps. But the fever had already broken out, and several adults and half a

[018-168] dozen children died of it.

[018-169] Thea had always found everything that happened in Moonstone exciting, disasters

[018-170] particularly so. It was gratifying to read sensational Moonstone items in the

[018-171] Denver paper. But she wished she had not chanced to see the tramp as he came

[018-172] into town that evening, sniffing the supper-laden air. His face remained

[018-173] unpleasantly clear in her memory, and her mind struggled with the problem of

[018-174] his behavior as if it were a hard page in arithmetic. Even when she was

[018-175] practicing, the drama of the tramp kept going on in the back of her head, and

[018-176] she was constantly trying to make herself realize what pitch of hatred or

[018-177] despair could drive a man to do such a hideous thing. She kept seeing him in

[018-178] his bedraggled clown suit, the white paint on his roughly shaven face, playing

[018-179] his accordion before the saloon. She had noticed his lean body, his high, bald

[018-180] forehead that sloped back like a curved metal lid. How could people fall so far

[018-181] out of fortune? She tried to talk to Ray Kennedy about her perplexity, but Ray

[018-182] would not discuss things of that sort with her. It was in his sentimental

[018-183] conception of women that they should be deeply religious, though men were at

[018-184] liberty to doubt and finally to deny. A picture called “The Soul

[018-185] Awakened,” popular in Moonstone parlors, pretty well interpreted

[018-186] Ray’s idea of woman’s spiritual nature.

[018-187] One evening when she was haunted by the figure of the tramp, Thea went up to

[018-188] Dr. Archie’s office. She found him sewing up two bad gashes in the face

[018-189] of a little boy who had been kicked by a mule. After the boy had been bandaged

[018-190] and sent away with his father, Thea helped the doctor wash and put away the

[018-191] surgical instruments. Then she dropped into her accustomed seat beside his desk

[018-192] and began to talk about the tramp. Her eyes were hard and green with

[018-193] excitement, the doctor noticed.

[018-194] “It seems to me, Dr. Archie, that the whole town’s to blame.

[018-195] I’m to blame, myself. I know he saw me hold my nose when he went by.

[018-196] Father’s to blame. If he believes the Bible, he ought to have gone to the

[018-197] calaboose and cleaned that man up and taken care of him. That’s what I

[018-198] can’t understand; do people believe the Bible, or don’t they? If

[018-199] the next life is all that matters, and we’re put here to get ready for

[018-200] it, then why do we try to make money, or learn things, or have a good time?

[018-201] There’s not one person in Moonstone that really lives the way the New

[018-202] Testament says. Does it matter, or don’t it?”

[018-203] Dr. Archie swung round in his chair and looked at her, honestly and leniently.

[018-204] “Well, Thea, it seems to me like this. Every people has had its religion.

[018-205] All religions are good, and all are pretty much alike. But I don’t see

[018-206] how we could live up to them in the sense you mean. I’ve thought about it

[018-207] a good deal, and I can’t help feeling that while we are in this world we

[018-208] have to live for the best things of this world, and those things are material

[018-209] and positive. Now, most religions are passive, and they tell us chiefly what we

[018-210] should not do.” The doctor moved restlessly, and his eyes hunted for

[018-211] something along the opposite wall: “See here, my girl, take out the years

[018-212] of early childhood and the time we spend in sleep and dull old age, and we only

[018-213] have about twenty able, waking years. That’s not long enough to get

[018-214] acquainted with half the fine things that have been done in the world, much

[018-215] less to do anything ourselves. I think we ought to keep the Commandments and

[018-216] help other people all we can; but the main thing is to live those twenty

[018-217] splendid years; to do all we can and enjoy all we can.”

[018-218] Dr. Archie met his little friend’s searching gaze, the look of acute

[018-219] inquiry which always touched him.

[018-220] “But poor fellows like that tramp—” she hesitated and

[018-221] wrinkled her forehead.

[018-222] The doctor leaned forward and put his hand protectingly over hers, which lay

[018-223] clenched on the green felt desktop. “Ugly accidents happen, Thea; always

[018-224] have and always will. But the failures are swept back into the pile and

[018-225] forgotten. They don’t leave any lasting scar in the world, and they

[018-226] don’t affect the future. The things that last are the good things. The

[018-227] people who forge ahead and do something, they really count.” He saw tears

[018-228] on her cheeks, and he remembered that he had never seen her cry before, not

[018-229] even when she crushed her finger when she was little. He rose and walked to the

[018-230] window, came back and sat down on the edge of his chair.

[018-231] “Forget the tramp, Thea. This is a great big world, and I want you to get

[018-232] about and see it all. You’re going to Chicago some day, and do something

[018-233] with that fine voice of yours. You’re going to be a number one musician

[018-234] and make us proud of you. Take Mary Anderson, now; even the tramps are proud of

[018-235] her. There isn’t a tramp along the ‘Q’ system who

[018-236] hasn’t heard of her. We all like people who do things, even if we only

[018-237] see their faces on a cigar-box lid.”

[018-238] They had a long talk. Thea felt that Dr. Archie had never let himself out to

[018-239] her so much before. It was the most grown-up conversation she had ever had with

[018-240] him. She left his office happy, flattered and stimulated. She ran for a long

[018-241] while about the white, moonlit streets, looking up at the stars and the bluish

[018-242] night, at the quiet houses sunk in black shade, the glittering sand hills. She

[018-243] loved the familiar trees, and the people in those little houses, and she loved

[018-244] the unknown world beyond Denver. She felt as if she were being pulled in two,

[018-245] between the desire to go away forever and the desire to stay forever. She had

[018-246] only twenty years—no time to lose.

[018-247] Many a night that summer she left Dr. Archie’s office with a desire to

[018-248] run and run about those quiet streets until she wore out her shoes, or wore out

[018-249] the streets themselves; when her chest ached and it seemed as if her heart were

[018-250] spreading all over the desert. When she went home, it was not to go to sleep.

[018-251] She used to drag her mattress beside her low window and lie awake for a long

[018-252] while, vibrating with excitement, as a machine vibrates from speed. Life rushed

[018-253] in upon her through that window—or so it seemed. In reality, of course,

[018-254] life rushes from within, not from without. There is no work of art so big or so

[018-255] beautiful that it was not once all contained in some youthful body, like this

[018-256] one which lay on the floor in the moonlight, pulsing with ardor and

[018-257] anticipation. It was on such nights that [[thea-kronborg|Thea Kronborg]] learned the thing that

[018-258] old Dumas meant when he told the Romanticists that to make a drama he needed

[018-259] but one passion and four walls.
