---
description: "Thea and Dr. Archie had been gone from Moonstone four days. On the afternoon of"
id: ch21
label: "Part 2, Chapter 1"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## I

[021-001] Thea and [[dr-archie|Dr. Archie]] had been gone from Moonstone four days. On the afternoon of

[021-002] the nineteenth of October they were in a street-car, riding through the

[021-003] depressing, unkept wastes of North [[chicago|Chicago]], on their way to call upon the

[021-004] Reverend Lars Larsen, a friend to whom Mr. Kronborg had written. Thea was still

[021-005] staying at the rooms of the Young Women’s Christian Association, and was

[021-006] miserable and homesick there. The housekeeper watched her in a way that made

[021-007] her uncomfortable. Things had not gone very well, so far. The noise and

[021-008] confusion of a big city tired and disheartened her. She had not had her trunk

[021-009] sent to the Christian Association rooms because she did not want to double

[021-010] cartage charges, and now she was running up a bill for storage on it. The

[021-011] contents of her gray telescope were becoming untidy, and it seemed impossible

[021-012] to keep one’s face and hands clean in Chicago. She felt as if she were

[021-013] still on the train, traveling without enough clothes to keep clean. She wanted

[021-014] another nightgown, and it did not occur to her that she could buy one. There

[021-015] were other clothes in her trunk that she needed very much, and she seemed no

[021-016] nearer a place to stay than when she arrived in the rain, on that first

[021-017] disillusioning morning.

[021-018] Dr. Archie had gone at once to his friend Hartley Evans, the throat specialist,

[021-019] and had asked him to tell him of a good piano teacher and direct him to a good

[021-020] boarding-house. Dr. Evans said he could easily tell him who was the best piano

[021-021] teacher in Chicago, but that most students’ boarding-houses were

[021-022] “abominable places, where girls got poor food for body and mind.”

[021-023] He gave Dr. Archie several addresses, however, and the doctor went to look the

[021-024] places over. He left Thea in her room, for she seemed tired and was not at all

[021-025] like herself. His inspection of boardinghouses was not encouraging. The only

[021-026] place that seemed to him at all desirable was full, and the mistress of the

[021-027] house could not give Thea a room in which she could have a piano. She said Thea

[021-028] might use the piano in her parlor; but when Dr. Archie went to look at the

[021-029] parlor he found a girl talking to a young man on one of the corner sofas.

[021-030] Learning that the boarders received all their callers there, he gave up that

[021-031] house, too, as hopeless.

[021-032] So when they set out to make the acquaintance of Mr. Larsen on the afternoon he

[021-033] had appointed, the question of a lodging was still undecided. The Swedish

[021-034] Reform Church was in a sloughy, weedy district, near a group of factories. The

[021-035] church itself was a very neat little building. The parsonage, next door, looked

[021-036] clean and comfortable, and there was a well-kept yard about it, with a picket

[021-037] fence. Thea saw several little children playing under a swing, and wondered why

[021-038] ministers always had so many. When they rang at the parsonage door, a

[021-039] capable-looking Swedish servant girl answered the bell and told them that Mr.

[021-040] Larsen’s study was in the church, and that he was waiting for them there.

[021-041] Mr. Larsen received them very cordially. The furniture in his study was so new

[021-042] and the pictures were so heavily framed, that Thea thought it looked more like

[021-043] the waiting-room of the fashionable Denver dentist to whom Dr. Archie had taken

[021-044] her that summer, than like a preacher’s study. There were even flowers in

[021-045] a glass vase on the desk. Mr. Larsen was a small, plump man, with a short,

[021-046] yellow beard, very white teeth, and a little turned-up nose on which he wore

[021-047] gold-rimmed eye-glasses. He looked about thirty-five, but he was growing bald,

[021-048] and his thin, hair was parted above his left ear and brought up over the bare

[021-049] spot on the top of his head. He looked cheerful and agreeable. He wore a blue

[021-050] coat and no cuffs.

[021-051] After Dr. Archie and Thea sat down on a slippery leather couch, the minister

[021-052] asked for an outline of Thea’s plans. Dr. Archie explained that she meant

[021-053] to study piano with Andor Harsanyi; that they had already seen him, that Thea

[021-054] had played for him and he said he would be glad to teach her.

[021-055] Mr. Larsen lifted his pale eyebrows and rubbed his plump white hands together.

[021-056] “But he is a concert pianist already. He will be very expensive.”

[021-057] “That’s why Miss Kronborg wants to get a church position if

[021-058] possible. She has not money enough to see her through the winter. There’s

[021-059] no use her coming all the way from Colorado and studying with a second-rate

[021-060] teacher. My friends here tell me Harsanyi is the best.”

[021-061] “Oh, very likely! I have heard him play with Thomas. You Western people

[021-062] do things on a big scale. There are half a dozen teachers that I should

[021-063] think—However, you know what you want.” Mr. Larsen showed his

[021-064] contempt for such extravagant standards by a shrug. He felt that Dr. Archie was

[021-065] trying to impress him. He had succeeded, indeed, in bringing out the

[021-066] doctor’s stiffest manner. Mr. Larsen went on to explain that he managed

[021-067] the music in his church himself, and drilled his choir, though the tenor was

[021-068] the official choirmaster. Unfortunately there were no vacancies in his choir

[021-069] just now. He had his four voices, very good ones. He looked away from Dr.

[021-070] Archie and glanced at Thea. She looked troubled, even a little frightened when

[021-071] he said this, and drew in her lower lip. She, certainly, was not pretentious,

[021-072] if her protector was. He continued to study her. She was sitting on the lounge,

[021-073] her knees far apart, her gloved hands lying stiffly in her lap, like a country

[021-074] girl. Her turban, which seemed a little too big for her, had got tilted in the

[021-075] wind,—it was always windy in that part of Chicago,—and she looked

[021-076] tired. She wore no veil, and her hair, too, was the worse for the wind and

[021-077] dust. When he said he had all the voices he required, he noticed that her

[021-078] gloved hands shut tightly. Mr. Larsen reflected that she was not, after all,

[021-079] responsible for the lofty manner of her father’s physician; that she was

[021-080] not even responsible for her father, whom he remembered as a tiresome fellow.

[021-081] As he watched her tired, worried face, he felt sorry for her.

[021-082] “All the same, I would like to try your voice,” he said, turning

[021-083] pointedly away from her companion. “I am interested in voices. Can you

[021-084] sing to the violin?”

[021-085] “I guess so,” Thea replied dully. “I don’t know. I

[021-086] never tried.”

[021-087] Mr. Larsen took his violin out of the case and began to tighten the keys.

[021-088] “We might go into the lecture-room and see how it goes. I can’t

[021-089] tell much about a voice by the organ. The violin is really the proper

[021-090] instrument to try a voice.” He opened a door at the back of his study,

[021-091] pushed Thea gently through it, and looking over his shoulder to Dr. Archie

[021-092] said, “Excuse us, sir. We will be back soon.”

[021-093] Dr. Archie chuckled. All preachers were alike, officious and on their dignity;

[021-094] liked to deal with women and girls, but not with men. He took up a thin volume

[021-095] from the minister’s desk. To his amusement it proved to be a book of

[021-096] “Devotional and Kindred Poems; by Mrs. Aurelia S. Larsen.” He

[021-097] looked them over, thinking that the world changed very little. He could

[021-098] remember when the wife of his father’s minister had published a volume of

[021-099] verses, which all the church members had to buy and all the children were

[021-100] encouraged to read. His grandfather had made a face at the book and said,

[021-101] “Puir body!” Both ladies seemed to have chosen the same subjects,

[021-102] too: Jephthah’s Daughter, Rizpah, David’s Lament for Absalom, etc.

[021-103] The doctor found the book very amusing.

[021-104] The Reverend Lars Larsen was a reactionary Swede. His father came to Iowa in

[021-105] the sixties, married a Swedish girl who was ambitious, like himself, and they

[021-106] moved to Kansas and took up land under the Homestead Act. After that, they

[021-107] bought land and leased it from the Government, acquired land in every possible

[021-108] way. They worked like horses, both of them; indeed, they would never have used

[021-109] any horse-flesh they owned as they used themselves. They reared a large family

[021-110] and worked their sons and daughters as mercilessly as they worked themselves;

[021-111] all of them but Lars. Lars was the fourth son, and he was born lazy. He seemed

[021-112] to bear the mark of overstrain on the part of his parents. Even in his cradle

[021-113] he was an example of physical inertia; anything to lie still. When he was a

[021-114] growing boy his mother had to drag him out of bed every morning, and he had to

[021-115] be driven to his chores. At school he had a model “attendance

[021-116] record,” because he found getting his lessons easier than farm work. He

[021-117] was the only one of the family who went through the high school, and by the

[021-118] time he graduated he had already made up his mind to study for the ministry,

[021-119] because it seemed to him the least laborious of all callings. In so far as he

[021-120] could see, it was the only business in which there was practically no

[021-121] competition, in which a man was not all the time pitted against other men who

[021-122] were willing to work themselves to death. His father stubbornly opposed

[021-123] Lars’s plan, but after keeping the boy at home for a year and finding how

[021-124] useless he was on the farm, he sent him to a theological seminary—as much

[021-125] to conceal his laziness from the neighbors as because he did not know what else

[021-126] to do with him.

[021-127] Larsen, like Peter Kronborg, got on well in the ministry, because he got on

[021-128] well with the women. His English was no worse than that of most young preachers

[021-129] of American parentage, and he made the most of his skill with the violin. He

[021-130] was supposed to exert a very desirable influence over young people and to

[021-131] stimulate their interest in church work. He married an American girl, and when

[021-132] his father died he got his share of the property—which was very

[021-133] considerable. He invested his money carefully and was that rare thing, a

[021-134] preacher of independent means. His white, well-kept hands were his

[021-135] result,—the evidence that he had worked out his life successfully in the

[021-136] way that pleased him. His Kansas brothers hated the sight of his hands.

[021-137] Larsen liked all the softer things of life,—in so far as he knew about

[021-138] them. He slept late in the morning, was fussy about his food, and read a great

[021-139] many novels, preferring sentimental ones. He did not smoke, but he ate a great

[021-140] deal of candy “for his throat,” and always kept a box of chocolate

[021-141] drops in the upper right-hand drawer of his desk. He always bought season

[021-142] tickets for the symphony concerts, and he played his violin for women’s

[021-143] culture clubs. He did not wear cuffs, except on Sunday, because he believed

[021-144] that a free wrist facilitated his violin practice. When he drilled his choir he

[021-145] always held his hand with the little and index fingers curved higher than the

[021-146] other two, like a noted German conductor he had seen. On the whole, the

[021-147] Reverend Larsen was not an insincere man; he merely spent his life resting and

[021-148] playing, to make up for the time his forebears had wasted grubbing in the

[021-149] earth. He was simple-hearted and kind; he enjoyed his candy and his children

[021-150] and his sacred cantatas. He could work energetically at almost any form of

[021-151] play.

[021-152] Dr. Archie was deep in “The Lament of Mary Magdalen,” when Mr.

[021-153] Larsen and Thea came back to the study. From the minister’s expression he

[021-154] judged that Thea had succeeded in interesting him.

[021-155] Mr. Larsen seemed to have forgotten his hostility toward him, and addressed him

[021-156] frankly as soon as he entered. He stood holding his violin, and as Thea sat

[021-157] down he pointed to her with his bow:—

[021-158] “I have just been telling Miss Kronborg that though I cannot promise her

[021-159] anything permanent, I might give her something for the next few months. My

[021-160] soprano is a young married woman and is temporarily indisposed. She would be

[021-161] glad to be excused from her duties for a while. I like Miss Kronborg’s

[021-162] singing very much, and I think she would benefit by the instruction in my

[021-163] choir. Singing here might very well lead to something else. We pay our soprano

[021-164] only eight dollars a Sunday, but she always gets ten dollars for singing at

[021-165] funerals. Miss Kronborg has a sympathetic voice, and I think there would be a

[021-166] good deal of demand for her at funerals. Several American churches apply to me

[021-167] for a soloist on such occasions, and I could help her to pick up quite a little

[021-168] money that way.”

[021-169] This sounded lugubrious to Dr. Archie, who had a physician’s dislike of

[021-170] funerals, but he tried to accept the suggestion cordially.

[021-171] “Miss Kronborg tells me she is having some trouble getting

[021-172] located,” Mr. Larsen went on with animation, still holding his violin.

[021-173] “I would advise her to keep away from boarding-houses altogether. Among

[021-174] my parishioners there are two German women, a mother and daughter. The daughter

[021-175] is a Swede by marriage, and clings to the Swedish Church. They live near here,

[021-176] and they rent some of their rooms. They have now a large room vacant, and have

[021-177] asked me to recommend some one. They have never taken boarders, but Mrs. Lorch,

[021-178] the mother, is a good cook,—at least, I am always glad to take supper

[021-179] with her,—and I think I could persuade her to let this young woman

[021-180] partake of the family table. The daughter, Mrs. Andersen, is musical, too, and

[021-181] sings in the Mozart Society. I think they might like to have a music student in

[021-182] the house. You speak German, I suppose?” he turned to Thea.

[021-183] “Oh, no; a few words. I don’t know the grammar,” she

[021-184] murmured.

[021-185] Dr. Archie noticed that her eyes looked alive again, not frozen as they had

[021-186] looked all morning. “If this fellow can help her, it’s not for me

[021-187] to be stand-offish,” he said to himself.

[021-188] “Do you think you would like to stay in such a quiet place, with

[021-189] old-fashioned people?” Mr. Larsen asked. “I shouldn’t think

[021-190] you could find a better place to work, if that’s what you want.”

[021-191] “I think mother would like to have me with people like that,” Thea

[021-192] replied. “And I’d be glad to settle down most anywhere. I’m

[021-193] losing time.”

[021-194] “Very well, there’s no time like the present. Let us go to see Mrs.

[021-195] Lorch and Mrs. Andersen.”

[021-196] The minister put his violin in its case and caught up a black-and-white checked

[021-197] traveling-cap that he wore when he rode his high Columbia wheel. The three left

[021-198] the church together.
