---
description: "After that evening Thea’s work with Harsanyi changed somewhat. He"
id: ch24
label: "Part 2, Chapter 4"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## IV

[024-001] After that evening Thea’s work with Harsanyi changed somewhat. He

[024-002] insisted that she should study some songs with him, and after almost every

[024-003] lesson he gave up half an hour of his own time to practicing them with her. He

[024-004] did not pretend to know much about voice production, but so far, he thought,

[024-005] she had acquired no really injurious habits. A healthy and powerful organ had

[024-006] found its own method, which was not a bad one. He wished to find out a good

[024-007] deal before he recommended a vocal teacher. He never told Thea what he thought

[024-008] about her voice, and made her general ignorance of anything worth singing his

[024-009] pretext for the trouble he took. That was in the beginning. After the first few

[024-010] lessons his own pleasure and hers were pretext enough. The singing came at the

[024-011] end of the lesson hour, and they both treated it as a form of relaxation.

[024-012] Harsanyi did not say much even to his wife about his discovery. He brooded upon

[024-013] it in a curious way. He found that these unscientific singing lessons

[024-014] stimulated him in his own study. After Miss Kronborg left him he often lay down

[024-015] in his studio for an hour before dinner, with his head full of musical ideas,

[024-016] with an effervescence in his brain which he had sometimes lost for weeks

[024-017] together under the grind of teaching. He had never got so much back for himself

[024-018] from any pupil as he did from Miss Kronborg. From the first she had stimulated

[024-019] him; something in her personality invariably affected him. Now that he was

[024-020] feeling his way toward her voice, he found her more interesting than ever

[024-021] before. She lifted the tedium of the winter for him, gave him curious fancies

[024-022] and reveries. Musically, she was sympathetic to him. Why all this was true, he

[024-023] never asked himself. He had learned that one must take where and when one can

[024-024] the mysterious mental irritant that rouses one’s imagination; that it is

[024-025] not to be had by order. She often wearied him, but she never bored him. Under

[024-026] her crudeness and brusque hardness, he felt there was a nature quite different,

[024-027] of which he never got so much as a hint except when she was at the piano, or

[024-028] when she sang. It was toward this hidden creature that he was trying, for his

[024-029] own pleasure, to find his way. In short, Harsanyi looked forward to his hour

[024-030] with Thea for the same reason that poor Wunsch had sometimes dreaded his;

[024-031] because she stirred him more than anything she did could adequately explain.

[024-032] One afternoon Harsanyi, after the lesson, was standing by the window putting

[024-033] some collodion on a cracked finger, and Thea was at the piano trying over

[024-034] “Die Lorelei” which he had given her last week to practice. It was

[024-035] scarcely a song which a singing master would have given her, but he had his own

[024-036] reasons. How she sang it mattered only to him and to her. He was playing his

[024-037] own game now, without interference; he suspected that he could not do so

[024-038] always.

[024-039] When she finished the song, she looked back over her shoulder at him and spoke

[024-040] thoughtfully. “That wasn’t right, at the end, was it?”

[024-041] “No, that should be an open, flowing tone, something like

[024-042] this,”—he waved his fingers rapidly in the air. “You get the

[024-043] idea?”

[024-044] “No, I don’t. Seems a queer ending, after the rest.”

[024-045] Harsanyi corked his little bottle and dropped it into the pocket of his velvet

[024-046] coat. “Why so? Shipwrecks come and go, *Märchen* come and go, but

[024-047] the river keeps right on. There you have your open, flowing tone.”

[024-048] Thea looked intently at the music. “I see,” she said dully.

[024-049] “Oh, I see!” she repeated quickly and turned to him a glowing

[024-050] countenance. “It is the river.—Oh, yes, I get it now!” She

[024-051] looked at him but long enough to catch his glance, then turned to the piano

[024-052] again. Harsanyi was never quite sure where the light came from when her face

[024-053] suddenly flashed out at him in that way. Her eyes were too small to account for

[024-054] it, though they glittered like green ice in the sun. At such moments her hair

[024-055] was yellower, her skin whiter, her cheeks pinker, as if a lamp had suddenly

[024-056] been turned up inside of her. She went at the song again:

[024-057] “Ich weiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten,\

[024-058] Das ich so traurig bin.”

[024-059] A kind of happiness vibrated in her voice. Harsanyi noticed how much and how

[024-060] unhesitatingly she changed her delivery of the whole song, the first part as

[024-061] well as the last. He had often noticed that she could not think a thing out in

[024-062] passages. Until she saw it as a whole, she wandered like a blind man surrounded

[024-063] by torments. After she once had her “revelation,” after she got the

[024-064] idea that to her—not always to him—explained everything, then she

[024-065] went forward rapidly. But she was not always easy to help. She was sometimes

[024-066] impervious to suggestion; she would stare at him as if she were deaf and ignore

[024-067] everything he told her to do. Then, all at once, something would happen in her

[024-068] brain and she would begin to do all that he had been for weeks telling her to

[024-069] do, without realizing that he had ever told her.

[024-070] To-night Thea forgot Harsanyi and his finger. She finished the song only to

[024-071] begin it with fresh enthusiasm.

[024-072] “Und das hat mit ihrem singen\

[024-073] Die Lorelei gethan.”

[024-074] She sat there singing it until the darkening room was so flooded with it that

[024-075] Harsanyi threw open a window.

[024-076] “You really must stop it, Miss Kronborg. I shan’t be able to get it

[024-077] out of my head to-night.”

[024-078] Thea laughed tolerantly as she began to gather up her music. “Why, I

[024-079] thought you had gone, Mr. Harsanyi. I like that song.”

[024-080] That evening at dinner Harsanyi sat looking intently into a glass of heavy

[024-081] yellow wine; boring into it, indeed, with his one eye, when his face suddenly

[024-082] broke into a smile.

[024-083] “What is it, Andor?” his wife asked.

[024-084] He smiled again, this time at her, and took up the nutcrackers and a Brazil

[024-085] nut. “Do you know,” he said in a tone so intimate and confidential

[024-086] that he might have been speaking to himself,—“do you know, I like

[024-087] to see Miss Kronborg get hold of an idea. In spite of being so talented,

[024-088] she’s not quick. But when she does get an idea, it fills her up to the

[024-089] eyes. She had my room so reeking of a song this afternoon that I couldn’t

[024-090] stay there.”

[024-091] Mrs. Harsanyi looked up quickly, “‘Die Lorelei,’ you mean?

[024-092] One couldn’t think of anything else anywhere in the house. I thought she

[024-093] was possessed. But don’t you think her voice is wonderful

[024-094] sometimes?”

[024-095] Harsanyi tasted his wine slowly. “My dear, I’ve told you before

[024-096] that I don’t know what I think about Miss Kronborg, except that I’m

[024-097] glad there are not two of her. I sometimes wonder whether she is not glad.

[024-098] Fresh as she is at it all, I’ve occasionally fancied that, if she knew

[024-099] how, she would like to—diminish.” He moved his left hand out into

[024-100] the air as if he were suggesting a *diminuendo* to an orchestra.
