---
description: "Thea reached Moonstone in the late afternoon, and all the Kronborgs were there"
id: ch29
label: "Part 2, Chapter 9"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## IX

[029-001] Thea reached Moonstone in the late afternoon, and all the Kronborgs were there

[029-002] to meet her except her two older brothers. Gus and Charley were young men now,

[029-003] and they had declared at noon that it would “look silly if the whole

[029-004] bunch went down to the train.” “There’s no use making a fuss

[029-005] over Thea just because she’s been to [[chicago|Chicago]],” Charley warned his

[029-006] mother. “She’s inclined to think pretty well of herself, anyhow,

[029-007] and if you go treating her like company, there’ll be no living in the

[029-008] house with her.” [[mrs-kronborg|Mrs. Kronborg]] simply leveled her eyes at Charley, and he

[029-009] faded away, muttering. She had, as Mr. Kronborg always said with an inclination

[029-010] of his head, good control over her children. Anna, too, wished to absent

[029-011] herself from the party, but in the end her curiosity got the better of her. So

[029-012] when Thea stepped down from the porter’s stool, a very creditable

[029-013] Kronborg representation was grouped on the platform to greet her. After they

[029-014] had all kissed her (Gunner and Axel shyly), Mr. Kronborg hurried his flock into

[029-015] the hotel omnibus, in which they were to be driven ceremoniously home, with the

[029-016] neighbors looking out of their windows to see them go by.

[029-017] All the family talked to her at once, except Thor,—impressive in new

[029-018] trousers,—who was gravely silent and who refused to sit on Thea’s

[029-019] lap. One of the first things Anna told her was that Maggie Evans, the girl who

[029-020] used to cough in prayer meeting, died yesterday, and had made a request that

[029-021] Thea sing at her funeral.

[029-022] Thea’s smile froze. “I’m not going to sing at all this

[029-023] summer, except my exercises. Bowers says I taxed my voice last winter, singing

[029-024] at funerals so much. If I begin the first day after I get home, there’ll

[029-025] be no end to it. You can tell them I caught cold on the train, or

[029-026] something.”

[029-027] Thea saw Anna glance at their mother. Thea remembered having seen that look on

[029-028] Anna’s face often before, but she had never thought anything about it

[029-029] because she was used to it. Now she realized that the look was distinctly

[029-030] spiteful, even vindictive. She suddenly realized that Anna had always disliked

[029-031] her.

[029-032] Mrs. Kronborg seemed to notice nothing, and changed the trend of the

[029-033] conversation, telling Thea that [[dr-archie|Dr. Archie]] and Mr. Upping, the jeweler, were

[029-034] both coming in to see her that evening, and that she had asked [[spanish-johnny|Spanish Johnny]]

[029-035] to come, because he had behaved well all winter and ought to be encouraged.

[029-036] The next morning Thea wakened early in her own room up under the eaves and lay

[029-037] watching the sunlight shine on the roses of her wall-paper. She wondered

[029-038] whether she would ever like a plastered room as well as this one lined with

[029-039] scantlings. It was snug and tight, like the cabin of a little boat. Her bed

[029-040] faced the window and stood against the wall, under the slant of the ceiling.

[029-041] When she went away she could just touch the ceiling with the tips of her

[029-042] fingers; now she could touch it with the palm of her hand. It was so little

[029-043] that it was like a sunny cave, with roses running all over the roof. Through

[029-044] the low window, as she lay there, she could watch people going by on the

[029-045] farther side of the street; men, going downtown to open their stores. Thor was

[029-046] over there, rattling his express wagon along the sidewalk. Tillie had put a

[029-047] bunch of French pinks in a tumbler of water on her dresser, and they gave out a

[029-048] pleasant perfume. The blue jays were fighting and screeching in the cottonwood

[029-049] tree outside her window, as they always did, and she could hear the old Baptist

[029-050] deacon across the street calling his chickens, as she had heard him do every

[029-051] summer morning since she could remember. It was pleasant to waken up in that

[029-052] bed, in that room, and to feel the brightness of the morning, while light

[029-053] quivered about the low, papered ceiling in golden spots, refracted by the

[029-054] broken mirror and the glass of water that held the pinks. “*Im

[029-055] leuchtenden Sommermorgen*”; those lines, and the face of her old

[029-056] teacher, came back to Thea, floated to her out of sleep, perhaps. She had been

[029-057] dreaming something pleasant, but she could not remember what. She would go to

[029-058] call upon Mrs. Kohler to-day, and see the pigeons washing their pink feet in

[029-059] the drip under the water tank, and flying about their house that was sure to

[029-060] have a fresh coat of white paint on it for summer. On the way home she would

[029-061] stop to see Mrs. Tellamantez. On Sunday she would coax Gunner to take her out

[029-062] to the sand hills. She had missed them in Chicago; had been homesick for their

[029-063] brilliant morning gold and for their soft colors at evening. The Lake, somehow,

[029-064] had never taken their place.

[029-065] While she lay planning, relaxed in warm drowsiness, she heard a knock at her

[029-066] door. She supposed it was Tillie, who sometimes fluttered in on her before she

[029-067] was out of bed to offer some service which the family would have ridiculed. But

[029-068] instead, Mrs. Kronborg herself came in, carrying a tray with Thea’s

[029-069] breakfast set out on one of the best white napkins. Thea sat up with some

[029-070] embarrassment and pulled her nightgown together across her chest. Mrs. Kronborg

[029-071] was always busy downstairs in the morning, and Thea could not remember when her

[029-072] mother had come to her room before.

[029-073] “I thought you’d be tired, after traveling, and might like to take

[029-074] it easy for once.” Mrs. Kronborg put the tray on the edge of the bed.

[029-075] “I took some thick cream for you before the boys got at it. They raised a

[029-076] howl.” She chuckled and sat down in the big wooden rocking chair. Her

[029-077] visit made Thea feel grown-up, and, somehow, important.

[029-078] Mrs. Kronborg asked her about Bowers and the Harsanyis. She felt a great change

[029-079] in Thea, in her face and in her manner. Mr. Kronborg had noticed it, too, and

[029-080] had spoken of it to his wife with great satisfaction while they were undressing

[029-081] last night. Mrs. Kronborg sat looking at her daughter, who lay on her side,

[029-082] supporting herself on her elbow and lazily drinking her coffee from the tray

[029-083] before her. Her short-sleeved nightgown had come open at the throat again, and

[029-084] Mrs. Kronborg noticed how white her arms and shoulders were, as if they had

[029-085] been dipped in new milk. Her chest was fuller than when she went away, her

[029-086] breasts rounder and firmer, and though she was so white where she was

[029-087] uncovered, they looked rosy through the thin muslin. Her body had the

[029-088] elasticity that comes of being highly charged with the desire to live. Her

[029-089] hair, hanging in two loose braids, one by either cheek, was just enough

[029-090] disordered to catch the light in all its curly ends.

[029-091] Thea always woke with a pink flush on her cheeks, and this morning her mother

[029-092] thought she had never seen her eyes so wide-open and bright; like clear green

[029-093] springs in the wood, when the early sunlight sparkles in them. She would make a

[029-094] very handsome woman, Mrs. Kronborg said to herself, if she would only get rid

[029-095] of that fierce look she had sometimes. Mrs. Kronborg took great pleasure in

[029-096] good looks, wherever she found them. She still remembered that, as a baby, Thea

[029-097] had been the “best-formed” of any of her children.

[029-098] “I’ll have to get you a longer bed,” she remarked, as she put

[029-099] the tray on the table. “You’re getting too long for that

[029-100] one.”

[029-101] Thea looked up at her mother and laughed, dropping back on her pillow with a

[029-102] magnificent stretch of her whole body. Mrs. Kronborg sat down again.

[029-103] “I don’t like to press you, Thea, but I think you’d better

[029-104] sing at that funeral to-morrow. I’m afraid you’ll always be sorry

[029-105] if you don’t. Sometimes a little thing like that, that seems nothing at

[029-106] the time, comes back on one afterward and troubles one a good deal. I

[029-107] don’t mean the church shall run you to death this summer, like they used

[029-108] to. I’ve spoken my mind to your father about that, and he’s very

[029-109] reasonable. But Maggie talked a good deal about you to people this winter;

[029-110] always asked what word we’d had, and said how she missed your singing and

[029-111] all. I guess you ought to do that much for her.”

[029-112] “All right, mother, if you think so.” Thea lay looking at her

[029-113] mother with intensely bright eyes.

[029-114] “That’s right, daughter.” Mrs. Kronborg rose and went over to

[029-115] get the tray, stopping to put her hand on Thea’s chest.

[029-116] “You’re filling out nice,” she said, feeling about.

[029-117] “No, I wouldn’t bother about the buttons. Leave ’em stay off.

[029-118] This is a good time to harden your chest.”

[029-119] Thea lay still and heard her mother’s firm step receding along the bare

[029-120] floor of the trunk loft. There was no sham about her mother, she reflected. Her

[029-121] mother knew a great many things of which she never talked, and all the church

[029-122] people were forever chattering about things of which they knew nothing. She

[029-123] liked her mother.

[029-124] Now for Mexican Town and the Kohlers! She meant to run in on the old woman

[029-125] without warning, and hug her.
