---
description: "While her living arrangements were so casual and fortuitous, Bowers’s"
id: ch34
label: "Part 3, Chapter 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## III

[034-001] While her living arrangements were so casual and fortuitous, Bowers’s

[034-002] studio was the one fixed thing in Thea’s life. She went out from it to

[034-003] uncertainties, and hastened to it from nebulous confusion. She was more

[034-004] influenced by Bowers than she knew. Unconsciously she began to take on

[034-005] something of his dry contempt, and to share his grudge without understanding

[034-006] exactly what it was about. His cynicism seemed to her honest, and the

[034-007] amiability of his pupils artificial. She admired his drastic treatment of his

[034-008] dull pupils. The stupid deserved all they got, and more. Bowers knew that she

[034-009] thought him a very clever man.

[034-010] One afternoon when Bowers came in from lunch Thea handed him a card on which he

[034-011] read the name, “Mr. Philip Frederick Ottenburg.”

[034-012] “He said he would be in again to-morrow and that he wanted some time. Who

[034-013] is he? I like him better than the others.”

[034-014] Bowers nodded. “So do I. He’s not a singer. He’s a beer

[034-015] prince: son of the big brewer in St. Louis. He’s been in Germany with his

[034-016] mother. I didn’t know he was back.”

[034-017] “Does he take lessons?”

[034-018] “Now and again. He sings rather well. He’s at the head of the

[034-019] [[chicago|Chicago]] branch of the Ottenburg business, but he can’t stick to work and

[034-020] is always running away. He has great ideas in beer, people tell me. He’s

[034-021] what they call an imaginative business man; goes over to Bayreuth and seems to

[034-022] do nothing but give parties and spend money, and brings back more good notions

[034-023] for the brewery than the fellows who sit tight dig out in five years. I was

[034-024] born too long ago to be much taken in by these chesty boys with flowered vests,

[034-025] but I like Fred, all the same.”

[034-026] “So do I,” said Thea positively.

[034-027] Bowers made a sound between a cough and a laugh. “Oh, he’s a

[034-028] lady-killer, all right! The girls in here are always making eyes at him. You

[034-029] won’t be the first.” He threw some sheets of music on the piano.

[034-030] “Better look that over; accompaniment’s a little tricky. It’s

[034-031] for that new woman from Detroit. And Mrs. Priest will be in this

[034-032] afternoon.”

[034-033] Thea sighed. “‘I Know that my Redeemer Liveth’?”

[034-034] “The same. She starts on her concert tour next week, and we’ll have

[034-035] a rest. Until then, I suppose we’ll have to be going over her

[034-036] programme.”

[034-037] The next day Thea hurried through her luncheon at a German bakery and got back

[034-038] to the studio at ten minutes past one. She felt sure that the young brewer

[034-039] would come early, before it was time for Bowers to arrive. He had not said he

[034-040] would, but yesterday, when he opened the door to go, he had glanced about the

[034-041] room and at her, and something in his eye had conveyed that suggestion.

[034-042] Sure enough, at twenty minutes past one the door of the reception-room opened,

[034-043] and a tall, robust young man with a cane and an English hat and ulster looked

[034-044] in expectantly. “Ah—ha!” he exclaimed, “I thought if I

[034-045] came early I might have good luck. And how are you to-day, Miss

[034-046] Kronborg?”

[034-047] Thea was sitting in the window chair. At her left elbow there was a table, and

[034-048] upon this table the young man sat down, holding his hat and cane in his hand,

[034-049] loosening his long coat so that it fell back from his shoulders. He was a

[034-050] gleaming, florid young fellow. His hair, thick and yellow, was cut very short,

[034-051] and he wore a closely trimmed beard, long enough on the chin to curl a little.

[034-052] Even his eyebrows were thick and yellow, like fleece. He had lively blue

[034-053] eyes—Thea looked up at them with great interest as he sat chatting and

[034-054] swinging his foot rhythmically. He was easily familiar, and frankly so.

[034-055] Wherever people met young Ottenburg, in his office, on shipboard, in a foreign

[034-056] hotel or railway compartment, they always felt (and usually liked) that artless

[034-057] presumption which seemed to say, “In this case we may waive formalities.

[034-058] We really haven’t time. This is to-day, but it will soon be to-morrow,

[034-059] and then we may be very different people, and in some other country.” He

[034-060] had a way of floating people out of dull or awkward situations, out of their

[034-061] own torpor or constraint or discouragement. It was a marked personal talent, of

[034-062] almost incalculable value in the representative of a great business founded on

[034-063] social amenities. Thea had liked him yesterday for the way in which he had

[034-064] picked her up out of herself and her German grammar for a few exciting moments.

[034-065] “By the way, will you tell me your first name, please? Thea? Oh, then you

[034-066] *are* a Swede, sure enough! I thought so. Let me call you Miss Thea, after

[034-067] the German fashion. You won’t mind? Of course not!” He usually made

[034-068] his assumption of a special understanding seem a tribute to the other person

[034-069] and not to himself.

[034-070] “How long have you been with Bowers here? Do you like the old grouch? So

[034-071] do I. I’ve come to tell him about a new soprano I heard at Bayreuth.

[034-072] He’ll pretend not to care, but he does. Do you warble with him? Have you

[034-073] anything of a voice? Honest? You look it, you know. What are you going in for,

[034-074] something big? Opera?”

[034-075] Thea blushed crimson. “Oh, I’m not going in for anything. I’m

[034-076] trying to learn to sing at funerals.”

[034-077] Ottenburg leaned forward. His eyes twinkled. “I’ll engage you to

[034-078] sing at mine. You can’t fool me, Miss Thea. May I hear you take your

[034-079] lesson this afternoon?”

[034-080] “No, you may not. I took it this morning.”

[034-081] He picked up a roll of music that lay behind him on the table. “Is this

[034-082] yours? Let me see what you are doing.”

[034-083] He snapped back the clasp and began turning over the songs. “All very

[034-084] fine, but tame. What’s he got you at this Mozart stuff for? I

[034-085] shouldn’t think it would suit your voice. Oh, I can make a pretty good

[034-086] guess at what will suit you! This from ‘Gioconda’ is more in your

[034-087] line. What’s this Grieg? It looks interesting. *Tak for Ditt Råd*.

[034-088] What does that mean?”

[034-089] “‘Thanks for your Advice.’ Don’t you know it?”

[034-090] “No; not at all. Let’s try it.” He rose, pushed open the door

[034-091] into the music-room, and motioned Thea to enter before him. She hung back.

[034-092] “I couldn’t give you much of an idea of it. It’s a big

[034-093] song.”

[034-094] Ottenburg took her gently by the elbow and pushed her into the other room. He

[034-095] sat down carelessly at the piano and looked over the music for a moment.

[034-096] “I think I can get you through it. But how stupid not to have the German

[034-097] words. Can you really sing the Norwegian? What an infernal language to sing.

[034-098] Translate the text for me.” He handed her the music.

[034-099] Thea looked at it, then at him, and shook her head. “I can’t. The

[034-100] truth is I don’t know either English or Swedish very well, and

[034-101] Norwegian’s still worse,” she said confidentially. She not

[034-102] infrequently refused to do what she was asked to do, but it was not like her to

[034-103] explain her refusal, even when she had a good reason.

[034-104] “I understand. We immigrants never speak any language well. But you know

[034-105] what it means, don’t you?”

[034-106] “Of course I do!”

[034-107] “Then don’t frown at me like that, but tell me.”

[034-108] Thea continued to frown, but she also smiled. She was confused, but not

[034-109] embarrassed. She was not afraid of Ottenburg. He was not one of those people

[034-110] who made her spine like a steel rail. On the contrary, he made one venturesome.

[034-111] “Well, it goes something like this: *Thanks for your advice! But I

[034-112] prefer to steer my boat into the din of roaring breakers. Even if the journey

[034-113] is my last, I may find what I have never found before. Onward must I go, for I

[034-114] yearn for the wild sea. I long to fight my way through the angry waves, and to

[034-115] see how far, and how long I can make them carry me.*”

[034-116] Ottenburg took the music and began: “Wait a moment. Is that too fast? How

[034-117] do you take it? That right?” He pulled up his cuffs and began the

[034-118] accompaniment again. He had become entirely serious, and he played with fine

[034-119] enthusiasm and with understanding.

[034-120] Fred’s talent was worth almost as much to old Otto Ottenburg as the

[034-121] steady industry of his older sons. When Fred sang the Prize Song at an

[034-122] interstate meet of the *Turnverein*, ten thousand *Turners* went

[034-123] forth pledged to Ottenburg beer.

[034-124] As Thea finished the song Fred turned back to the first page, without looking

[034-125] up from the music. “Now, once more,” he called. They began again,

[034-126] and did not hear Bowers when he came in and stood in the doorway. He stood

[034-127] still, blinking like an owl at their two heads shining in the sun. He could not

[034-128] see their faces, but there was something about his girl’s back that he

[034-129] had not noticed before: a very slight and yet very free motion, from the toes

[034-130] up. Her whole back seemed plastic, seemed to be moulding itself to the

[034-131] galloping rhythm of the song. Bowers perceived such things

[034-132] sometimes—unwillingly. He had known to-day that there was something

[034-133] afoot. The river of sound which had its source in his pupil had caught him two

[034-134] flights down. He had stopped and listened with a kind of sneering admiration.

[034-135] From the door he watched her with a half-incredulous, half-malicious smile.

[034-136] When he had struck the keys for the last time, Ottenburg dropped his hands on

[034-137] his knees and looked up with a quick breath. “I got you through. What a

[034-138] stunning song! Did I play it right?”

[034-139] Thea studied his excited face. There was a good deal of meaning in it, and

[034-140] there was a good deal in her own as she answered him. “You suited

[034-141] me,” she said ungrudgingly.

[034-142] After Ottenburg was gone, Thea noticed that Bowers was more agreeable than

[034-143] usual. She had heard the young brewer ask Bowers to dine with him at his club

[034-144] that evening, and she saw that he looked forward to the dinner with pleasure.

[034-145] He dropped a remark to the effect that Fred knew as much about food and wines

[034-146] as any man in Chicago. He said this boastfully.

[034-147] “If he’s such a grand business man, how does he have time to run

[034-148] around listening to singing-lessons?” Thea asked suspiciously.

[034-149] As she went home to her boarding-house through the February slush, she wished

[034-150] she were going to dine with them. At nine o’clock she looked up from her

[034-151] grammar to wonder what Bowers and Ottenburg were having to eat. At that moment

[034-152] they were talking of her.
