---
description: "March began badly for Thea. She had a cold during the first week, and after she"
id: ch36
label: "Part 3, Chapter 5"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## V

[036-001] March began badly for Thea. She had a cold during the first week, and after she

[036-002] got through her church duties on Sunday she had to go to bed with tonsilitis.

[036-003] She was still in the boarding-house at which young Ottenburg had called when he

[036-004] took her to see Mrs. Nathanmeyer. She had stayed on there because her room,

[036-005] although it was inconvenient and very small, was at the corner of the house and

[036-006] got the sunlight.

[036-007] Since she left Mrs. Lorch, this was the first place where she had got away from

[036-008] a north light. Her rooms had all been as damp and mouldy as they were dark,

[036-009] with deep foundations of dirt under the carpets, and dirty walls. In her

[036-010] present room there was no running water and no clothes closet, and she had to

[036-011] have the dresser moved out to make room for her piano. But there were two

[036-012] windows, one on the south and one on the west, a light wall-paper with

[036-013] morning-glory vines, and on the floor a clean matting. The landlady had tried

[036-014] to make the room look cheerful, because it was hard to let. It was so small

[036-015] that Thea could keep it clean herself, after the Hun had done her worst. She

[036-016] hung her dresses on the door under a sheet, used the washstand for a dresser,

[036-017] slept on a cot, and opened both the windows when she practiced. She felt less

[036-018] walled in than she had in the other houses.

[036-019] Wednesday was her third day in bed. The medical student who lived in the house

[036-020] had been in to see her, had left some tablets and a foamy gargle, and told her

[036-021] that she could probably go back to work on Monday. The landlady stuck her head

[036-022] in once a day, but Thea did not encourage her visits. The Hungarian chambermaid

[036-023] brought her soup and toast. She made a sloppy pretense of putting the room in

[036-024] order, but she was such a dirty creature that Thea would not let her touch her

[036-025] cot; she got up every morning and turned the mattress and made the bed herself.

[036-026] The exertion made her feel miserably ill, but at least she could lie still

[036-027] contentedly for a long while afterward. She hated the poisoned feeling in her

[036-028] throat, and no matter how often she gargled she felt unclean and disgusting.

[036-029] Still, if she had to be ill, she was almost glad that she had a contagious

[036-030] illness. Otherwise she would have been at the mercy of the people in the house.

[036-031] She knew that they disliked her, yet now that she was ill, they took it upon

[036-032] themselves to tap at her door, send her messages, books, even a miserable

[036-033] flower or two. Thea knew that their sympathy was an expression of

[036-034] self-righteousness, and she hated them for it. The divinity student, who was

[036-035] always whispering soft things to her, sent her “The Kreutzer

[036-036] Sonata.”

[036-037] The medical student had been kind to her: he knew that she did not want to pay

[036-038] a doctor. His gargle had helped her, and he gave her things to make her sleep

[036-039] at night. But he had been a cheat, too. He had exceeded his rights. She had no

[036-040] soreness in her chest, and had told him so clearly. All this thumping of her

[036-041] back, and listening to her breathing, was done to satisfy personal curiosity.

[036-042] She had watched him with a contemptuous smile. She was too sick to care; if it

[036-043] amused him—She made him wash his hands before he touched her; he was

[036-044] never very clean. All the same, it wounded her and made her feel that the world

[036-045] was a pretty disgusting place. “The Kreutzer Sonata” did not make

[036-046] her feel any more cheerful. She threw it aside with hatred. She could not

[036-047] believe it was written by the same man who wrote the novel that had thrilled

[036-048] her.

[036-049] Her cot was beside the south window, and on Wednesday afternoon she lay

[036-050] thinking about the Harsanyis, about old Mr. Nathanmeyer, and about how she was

[036-051] missing [[fred-ottenburg|Fred Ottenburg]]’s visits to the studio. That was much the worst

[036-052] thing about being sick. If she were going to the studio every day, she might be

[036-053] having pleasant encounters with Fred. He was always running away, Bowers said,

[036-054] and he might be planning to go away as soon as Mrs. Nathanmeyer’s

[036-055] evenings were over. And here she was losing all this time!

[036-056] After a while she heard the Hun’s clumsy trot in the hall, and then a

[036-057] pound on the door. Mary came in, making her usual uncouth sounds, carrying a

[036-058] long box and a big basket. Thea sat up in bed and tore off the strings and

[036-059] paper. The basket was full of fruit, with a big Hawaiian pineapple in the

[036-060] middle, and in the box there were layers of pink roses with long, woody stems

[036-061] and dark-green leaves. They filled the room with a cool smell that made another

[036-062] air to breathe. Mary stood with her apron full of paper and cardboard. When she

[036-063] saw Thea take an envelope out from under the flowers, she uttered an

[036-064] exclamation, pointed to the roses, and then to the bosom of her own dress, on

[036-065] the left side. Thea laughed and nodded. She understood that Mary associated the

[036-066] color with Ottenburg’s *boutonnière*. She pointed to the water

[036-067] pitcher,—she had nothing else big enough to hold the flowers,—and

[036-068] made Mary put it on the window sill beside her.

[036-069] After Mary was gone Thea locked the door. When the landlady knocked, she

[036-070] pretended that she was asleep. She lay still all afternoon and with drowsy eyes

[036-071] watched the roses open. They were the first hothouse flowers she had ever had.

[036-072] The cool fragrance they released was soothing, and as the pink petals curled

[036-073] back, they were the only things between her and the gray sky. She lay on her

[036-074] side, putting the room and the boarding-house behind her. Fred knew where all

[036-075] the pleasant things in the world were, she reflected, and knew the road to

[036-076] them. He had keys to all the nice places in his pocket, and seemed to jingle

[036-077] them from time to time. And then, he was young; and her friends had always been

[036-078] old. Her mind went back over them. They had all been teachers; wonderfully

[036-079] kind, but still teachers. [[ray-kennedy|Ray Kennedy]], she knew, had wanted to marry her, but

[036-080] he was the most protecting and teacher-like of them all. She moved impatiently

[036-081] in her cot and threw her braids away from her hot neck, over her pillow.

[036-082] “I don’t want him for a teacher,” she thought, frowning

[036-083] petulantly out of the window. “I’ve had such a string of them. I

[036-084] want him for a sweetheart.”
