---
description: "The faculty of observation was never highly developed in Thea Kronborg. A great"
id: ch40
label: "Part 4, Chapter 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## III

[040-001] The faculty of observation was never highly developed in [[thea-kronborg|Thea Kronborg]]. A great

[040-002] deal escaped her eye as she passed through the world. But the things which were

[040-003] for her, she saw; she experienced them physically and remembered them as if

[040-004] they had once been a part of herself. The roses she used to see in the

[040-005] florists’ shops in [[chicago|Chicago]] were merely roses. But when she thought of the

[040-006] moonflowers that grew over Mrs. Tellamantez’s door, it was as if she had

[040-007] been that vine and had opened up in white flowers every night. There were

[040-008] memories of light on the sand hills, of masses of prickly-pear blossoms she had

[040-009] found in the desert in early childhood, of the late afternoon sun pouring

[040-010] through the grape leaves and the mint bed in Mrs. Kohler’s garden, which

[040-011] she would never lose. These recollections were a part of her mind and

[040-012] personality. In Chicago she had got almost nothing that went into her

[040-013] subconscious self and took root there. But here, in [[panther-canyon|Panther Canyon]], there were

[040-014] again things which seemed destined for her.

[040-015] Panther Canyon was the home of innumerable swallows. They built nests in the

[040-016] wall far above the hollow groove in which Thea’s own rock chamber lay.

[040-017] They seldom ventured above the rim of the canyon, to the flat, wind-swept

[040-018] tableland. Their world was the blue air-river between the canyon walls. In that

[040-019] blue gulf the arrow-shaped birds swam all day long, with only an occasional

[040-020] movement of the wings. The only sad thing about them was their timidity; the

[040-021] way in which they lived their lives between the echoing cliffs and never dared

[040-022] to rise out of the shadow of the canyon walls. As they swam past her door, Thea

[040-023] often felt how easy it would be to dream one’s life out in some cleft in

[040-024] the world.

[040-025] From the ancient dwelling there came always a dignified, unobtrusive sadness;

[040-026] now stronger, now fainter,—like the aromatic smell which the dwarf cedars

[040-027] gave out in the sun,—but always present, a part of the air one breathed.

[040-028] At night, when Thea dreamed about the canyon,—or in the early morning

[040-029] when she hurried toward it, anticipating it,—her conception of it was of

[040-030] yellow rocks baking in sunlight, the swallows, the cedar smell, and that

[040-031] peculiar sadness—a voice out of the past, not very loud, that went on

[040-032] saying a few simple things to the solitude eternally.

[040-033] Standing up in her lodge, Thea could with her thumb nail dislodge flakes of

[040-034] carbon from the rock roof—the cooking-smoke of the Ancient People. They

[040-035] were that near! A timid, nest-building folk, like the swallows. How often Thea

[040-036] remembered [[ray-kennedy|Ray Kennedy]]’s moralizing about the cliff cities. He used to

[040-037] say that he never felt the hardness of the human struggle or the sadness of

[040-038] history as he felt it among those ruins. He used to say, too, that it made one

[040-039] feel an obligation to do one’s best. On the first day that Thea climbed

[040-040] the water trail she began to have intuitions about the women who had worn the

[040-041] path, and who had spent so great a part of their lives going up and down it.

[040-042] She found herself trying to walk as they must have walked, with a feeling in

[040-043] her feet and knees and loins which she had never known before,—which must

[040-044] have come up to her out of the accustomed dust of that rocky trail. She could

[040-045] feel the weight of an Indian baby hanging to her back as she climbed.

[040-046] The empty houses, among which she wandered in the afternoon, the blanketed one

[040-047] in which she lay all morning, were haunted by certain fears and desires;

[040-048] feelings about warmth and cold and water and physical strength. It seemed to

[040-049] Thea that a certain understanding of those old people came up to her out of the

[040-050] rock shelf on which she lay; that certain feelings were transmitted to her,

[040-051] suggestions that were simple, insistent, and monotonous, like the beating of

[040-052] Indian drums. They were not expressible in words, but seemed rather to

[040-053] translate themselves into attitudes of body, into degrees of muscular tension

[040-054] or relaxation; the naked strength of youth, sharp as the sunshafts; the

[040-055] crouching timorousness of age, the sullenness of women who waited for their

[040-056] captors. At the first turning of the canyon there was a half-ruined tower of

[040-057] yellow masonry, a watch-tower upon which the young men used to entice eagles

[040-058] and snare them with nets. Sometimes for a whole morning Thea could see the

[040-059] coppery breast and shoulders of an Indian youth there against the sky; see him

[040-060] throw the net, and watch the struggle with the eagle.

[040-061] Old Henry Biltmer, at the ranch, had been a great deal among the Pueblo Indians

[040-062] who are the descendants of the Cliff-Dwellers. After supper he used to sit and

[040-063] smoke his pipe by the kitchen stove and talk to Thea about them. He had never

[040-064] found any one before who was interested in his ruins. Every Sunday the old man

[040-065] prowled about in the canyon, and he had come to know a good deal more about it

[040-066] than he could account for. He had gathered up a whole chestful of Cliff-Dweller

[040-067] relics which he meant to take back to Germany with him some day. He taught Thea

[040-068] how to find things among the ruins: grinding-stones, and drills and needles

[040-069] made of turkey-bones. There were fragments of pottery everywhere. Old Henry

[040-070] explained to her that the Ancient People had developed masonry and pottery far

[040-071] beyond any other crafts. After they had made houses for themselves, the next

[040-072] thing was to house the precious water. He explained to her how all their

[040-073] customs and ceremonies and their religion went back to water. The men provided

[040-074] the food, but water was the care of the women. The stupid women carried water

[040-075] for most of their lives; the cleverer ones made the vessels to hold it. Their

[040-076] pottery was their most direct appeal to water, the envelope and sheath of the

[040-077] precious element itself. The strongest Indian need was expressed in those

[040-078] graceful jars, fashioned slowly by hand, without the aid of a wheel.

[040-079] When Thea took her bath at the bottom of the canyon, in the sunny pool behind

[040-080] the screen of cottonwoods, she sometimes felt as if the water must have

[040-081] sovereign qualities, from having been the object of so much service and desire.

[040-082] That stream was the only living thing left of the drama that had been played

[040-083] out in the canyon centuries ago. In the rapid, restless heart of it, flowing

[040-084] swifter than the rest, there was a continuity of life that reached back into

[040-085] the old time. The glittering thread of current had a kind of lightly worn,

[040-086] loosely knit personality, graceful and laughing. Thea’s bath came to have

[040-087] a ceremonial gravity. The atmosphere of the canyon was ritualistic.

[040-088] One morning, as she was standing upright in the pool, splashing water between

[040-089] her shoulder-blades with a big sponge, something flashed through her mind that

[040-090] made her draw herself up and stand still until the water had quite dried upon

[040-091] her flushed skin. The stream and the broken pottery: what was any art but an

[040-092] effort to make a sheath, a mould in which to imprison for a moment the shining,

[040-093] elusive element which is life itself,—life hurrying past us and running

[040-094] away, too strong to stop, too sweet to lose? The Indian women had held it in

[040-095] their jars. In the sculpture she had seen in the Art Institute, it had been

[040-096] caught in a flash of arrested motion. In singing, one made a vessel of

[040-097] one’s throat and nostrils and held it on one’s breath, caught the

[040-098] stream in a scale of natural intervals.
