---
description: "Thea had a superstitious feeling about the potsherds, and liked better to leave"
id: ch41
label: "Part 4, Chapter 4"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

## IV

[041-001] Thea had a superstitious feeling about the potsherds, and liked better to leave

[041-002] them in the dwellings where she found them. If she took a few bits back to her

[041-003] own lodge and hid them under the blankets, she did it guiltily, as if she were

[041-004] being watched. She was a guest in these houses, and ought to behave as such.

[041-005] Nearly every afternoon she went to the chambers which contained the most

[041-006] interesting fragments of pottery, sat and looked at them for a while. Some of

[041-007] them were beautifully decorated. This care, expended upon vessels that could

[041-008] not hold food or water any better for the additional labor put upon them, made

[041-009] her heart go out to those ancient potters. They had not only expressed their

[041-010] desire, but they had expressed it as beautifully as they could. Food, fire,

[041-011] water, and something else—even here, in this crack in the world, so far

[041-012] back in the night of the past! Down here at the beginning that painful thing

[041-013] was already stirring; the seed of sorrow, and of so much delight.

[041-014] There were jars done in a delicate overlay, like pine cones; and there were

[041-015] many patterns in a low relief, like basket-work. Some of the pottery was

[041-016] decorated in color, red and brown, black and white, in graceful geometrical

[041-017] patterns. One day, on a fragment of a shallow bowl, she found a crested

[041-018] serpent’s head, painted in red on terra-cotta. Again she found half a

[041-019] bowl with a broad band of white cliff-houses painted on a black ground. They

[041-020] were scarcely conventionalized at all; there they were in the black border,

[041-021] just as they stood in the rock before her. It brought her centuries nearer to

[041-022] these people to find that they saw their houses exactly as she saw them.

[041-023] Yes, [[ray-kennedy|Ray Kennedy]] was right. All these things made one feel that one ought to do

[041-024] one’s best, and help to fulfill some desire of the dust that slept there.

[041-025] A dream had been dreamed there long ago, in the night of ages, and the wind had

[041-026] whispered some promise to the sadness of the savage. In their own way, those

[041-027] people had felt the beginnings of what was to come. These potsherds were like

[041-028] fetters that bound one to a long chain of human endeavor.

[041-029] Not only did the world seem older and richer to Thea now, but she herself

[041-030] seemed older. She had never been alone for so long before, or thought so much.

[041-031] Nothing had ever engrossed her so deeply as the daily contemplation of that

[041-032] line of pale-yellow houses tucked into the wrinkle of the cliff. Moonstone and

[041-033] [[chicago|Chicago]] had become vague. Here everything was simple and definite, as things

[041-034] had been in childhood. Her mind was like a ragbag into which she had been

[041-035] frantically thrusting whatever she could grab. And here she must throw this

[041-036] lumber away. The things that were really hers separated themselves from the

[041-037] rest. Her ideas were simplified, became sharper and clearer. She felt united

[041-038] and strong.

[041-039] When Thea had been at the Ottenburg ranch for two months, she got a letter from

[041-040] Fred announcing that he “might be along at almost any time now.”

[041-041] The letter came at night, and the next morning she took it down into the canyon

[041-042] with her. She was delighted that he was coming soon. She had never felt so

[041-043] grateful to any one, and she wanted to tell him everything that had happened to

[041-044] her since she had been there—more than had happened in all her life

[041-045] before. Certainly she liked Fred better than any one else in the world. There

[041-046] was Harsanyi, of course—but Harsanyi was always tired. Just now, and

[041-047] here, she wanted some one who had never been tired, who could catch an idea and

[041-048] run with it.

[041-049] She was ashamed to think what an apprehensive drudge she must always have

[041-050] seemed to Fred, and she wondered why he had concerned himself about her at all.

[041-051] Perhaps she would never be so happy or so good-looking again, and she would

[041-052] like Fred to see her, for once, at her best. She had not been singing much, but

[041-053] she knew that her voice was more interesting than it had ever been before. She

[041-054] had begun to understand that—with her, at least—voice was, first of

[041-055] all, vitality; a lightness in the body and a driving power in the blood. If she

[041-056] had that, she could sing. When she felt so keenly alive, lying on that

[041-057] insensible shelf of stone, when her body bounded like a rubber ball away from

[041-058] its hardness, then she could sing. This, too, she could explain to Fred. He

[041-059] would know what she meant.

[041-060] Another week passed. Thea did the same things as before, felt the same

[041-061] influences, went over the same ideas; but there was a livelier movement in her

[041-062] thoughts, and a freshening of sensation, like the brightness which came over

[041-063] the underbrush after a shower. A persistent affirmation—or

[041-064] denial—was going on in her, like the tapping of the woodpecker in the one

[041-065] tall pine tree across the chasm. Musical phrases drove each other rapidly

[041-066] through her mind, and the song of the cicada was now too long and too sharp.

[041-067] Everything seemed suddenly to take the form of a desire for action.

[041-068] It was while she was in this abstracted state, waiting for the clock to strike,

[041-069] that Thea at last made up her mind what she was going to try to do in the

[041-070] world, and that she was going to Germany to study without further loss of time.

[041-071] Only by the merest chance had she ever got to [[panther-canyon|Panther Canyon]]. There was

[041-072] certainly no kindly Providence that directed one’s life; and one’s

[041-073] parents did not in the least care what became of one, so long as one did not

[041-074] misbehave and endanger their comfort. One’s life was at the mercy of

[041-075] blind chance. She had better take it in her own hands and lose everything than

[041-076] meekly draw the plough under the rod of parental guidance. She had seen it when

[041-077] she was at home last summer,—the hostility of comfortable, self-satisfied

[041-078] people toward any serious effort. Even to her father it seemed indecorous.

[041-079] Whenever she spoke seriously, he looked apologetic. Yet she had clung fast to

[041-080] whatever was left of Moonstone in her mind. No more of that! The Cliff-Dwellers

[041-081] had lengthened her past. She had older and higher obligations.
