---
description: "Soon Subha Datta could not sleep well for thinking of the wife and"
id: ch006
label: "Hindu Tales · Chapter Vi"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[006-001]Soon [[person-subha-datta|Subha Datta]] could not sleep well for thinking of the wife and

[006-002]children he had deserted. Suppose they were hungry when he had plenty

[006-003]to eat! It even came into his head that he might steal [[object-magic-pitcher|the pitcher]] and

[006-004]take it home with him when the fairies were away. But he had not after

[006-005]all the [[concept-bravery|courage]] to do this; for even when the beautiful girls were not

[006-006]in sight, he had a feeling that they would know if he tried to go off

[006-007]with the pitcher, and that they would be able to punish him in some

[006-008]terrible way. One night he had a dream that troubled him very much. He

[006-009]saw his wife sitting crying bitterly in the little home he used to

[006-010]love, holding the youngest child on her knee whilst the other three

[006-011]stood beside her looking at her very, very sadly. He started up from

[006-012]the ground on which he lay, determined to go home at once; but at a

[006-013]little distance off he saw the fairies dancing in the moonlight, and

[006-014]somehow he felt again he could not leave them and the pitcher. The next

[006-015]day, however, he was so miserable that the fairies noticed it, and one

[006-016]of them said to him: “Whatever is the matter? We don’t care to keep

[006-017]unhappy people here. If you can’t enjoy life as we do, you had better

[006-018]go home.”

[006-019]Then Subha Datta was very much frightened lest they should really send

[006-020]him away; so he told them about his dream and that he was afraid his

[006-021]dear ones were starving for want of the money he used to earn for them.

[006-022]“Don’t worry about them,” was the reply: “we will let your wife know

[006-023]what keeps you away. We will whisper in her ear when she is asleep, and

[006-024]she will be so [[concept-happiness|glad]] to think of your happiness that she will forget her

[006-025]own troubles.”

[006-026]11. Do you think what the fairies said to the woodcutter was likely to

[006-027]comfort him about his wife and children?

[006-028]12. If you had been in Subha Datta’s place what would you have said to

[006-029]the fairies when they made this promise?
