---
description: "Subha Datta was very much cheered by the sympathy of the fairies, so"
id: ch007
label: "Hindu Tales · Chapter Vii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[007-001][[person-subha-datta|Subha Datta]] was very much cheered by the sympathy of the fairies, so

[007-002]much so that he decided to stop with them for a little longer at least.

[007-003]Now and then he felt restless, but on the whole the time passed

[007-004]pleasantly, and [[object-magic-pitcher|the pitcher]] was a daily delight to him.

[007-005]Meanwhile his poor wife was at her wits’ end how to feed her dear

[007-006]children. If it had not been that the two boys were [[concept-bravery|brave]], plucky

[007-007]little chaps, she really would have been in despair. When their father

[007-008]did not come back and all their efforts to find him were in vain, these

[007-009]boys set to work to help their mother. They could not cut down trees,

[007-010]but they could climb them and chop off small branches with their axes;

[007-011]and this they did, making up bundles of faggots and selling them to

[007-012]their neighbours. These neighbours were touched by the courage they

[007-013]showed, and not only paid them well for the wood but often gave them

[007-014]milk and rice and other little things to help them. In time they

[007-015]actually got used to being without Subha Datta, and the little girls

[007-016]nearly forgot all about him. Little did they dream of the change that

[007-017]was soon to come into their lives.

[007-018]13. Was it a good or a bad thing for the boys that their father did not

[007-019]come back?

[007-020]14. If you think it was a good thing, will you explain why? and if it

[007-021]was a bad thing, why you think it was?
