---
description: "The lizard and the mouse could only get food in daylight; but the"
id: ch016
label: "The Story of a Cat, a Mouse, a Lizard and an Owl · Chapter Ii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[016-001]The lizard and [[animal-mouse|the mouse]] could only get food in daylight; but the

[016-002]lizard did not have to go far for the flies on which he lived, whilst

[016-003]the mouse had a very dangerous journey to take to his favourite feeding

[016-004]place. This was a barley field a short distance from the banyan tree,

[016-005]where he loved to nibble the full ears, running up the stalks to get at

[016-006]them. The mouse was the only one of the four creatures in the banyan

[016-007]tree who did not feed on others; for, like the rest of his family, he

[016-008]was a vegetarian, that is to say, he ate nothing but vegetables and

[016-009]fruit.

[016-010]Now the cat knew full well how fond the mouse was of the barley-field,

[016-011]and she used to keep watch amongst the tall stems, creeping stealthily

[016-012]about with her tail in the air and her green eyes glistening, expecting

[016-013]any moment to see the poor little mouse darting hastily along. The cat

[016-014]never dreamt that any danger could come to her, and she trod down the

[016-015]barley, making quite a clear path through it. She was quite wrong in

[016-016]thinking herself so safe, for that path got her into very serious

[016-017]trouble.

[016-018]It so happened that a hunter, whose great delight was to kill wild

[016-019]creatures, and who was very [[concept-cleverness|clever]] in finding them, noticing every

[016-020]little thing which could shew him where they had passed by, came one

[016-021]day into the barley-field. He spied the path directly and cried, “Ha!

[016-022]ha! Some wild animal has been here; not a very big one; let’s have a

[016-023]look for the footprints!” So he stooped down to the ground, and very

[016-024]soon saw the marks of [[animal-cat|pussy]]’s feet. “A cat, I do believe,” he said to

[016-025]himself, “spoiling the barley she doesn’t want to eat herself. I’ll

[016-026]soon pay her out.” The hunter waited until the evening lest the

[016-027]creature should see what he was going to do, and then in the twilight

[016-028]he set snares all over the barley-field. A snare, you know, is a string

[016-029]with a slip-knot at the end of it; and if an animal puts his head or

[016-030]one of his paws into this slip-knot and goes on without noticing it,

[016-031]the string is pulled tight and the poor creature cannot get free.

[016-032]3. Was it right or wrong of the hunter to set the snare?

[016-033]4. Do you think the cat was wrong to lie in wait for the mouse?
