---
description: "Exactly what the hunter expected happened."
id: ch017
label: "The Story of a Cat, a Mouse, a Lizard and an Owl · Chapter Iii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[017-001]Exactly what the hunter expected happened. The cat came as usual to

[017-002]watch for [[animal-mouse|the mouse]], and caught sight of him running across the end of

[017-003]the path. Puss dashed after him; and just as she thought she really had

[017-004]got him this time, she found herself caught by the neck, for she had

[017-005]put her head into one of the snares. She was nearly strangled and could

[017-006]scarcely even mew. The mouse was so close that he heard the feeble mew,

[017-007]and in a terrible fright, thinking the cat was after him, he peeped

[017-008]through the stems of the barley to make sure which way to run to get

[017-009]away from her. What was his delight when he saw his enemy in such

[017-010]trouble and quite unable to do him any harm!

[017-011]Now it so happened that [[animal-owl|the owl]] and [[animal-lizard|the lizard]] were also in the

[017-012]barley-field, not very far away from the cat, and they too saw the

[017-013]distress their hated enemy was in. They also caught sight of the little

[017-014]mouse peeping through the barley; and the owl thought to himself, “I’ll

[017-015]have you, my little friend, now puss cannot do me any harm,” whilst the

[017-016]lizard darted away into the sunshine, feeling [[concept-happiness|glad]] that the cat and the

[017-017]owl were neither of them now likely to trouble their heads about him.

[017-018]The owl flew quietly to a tree hard by to watch what would happen,

[017-019]feeling so sure of having the mouse for his dinner that he was in no

[017-020]hurry to catch him.

[017-021]5. What would you have done if you had been the mouse, when you saw the

[017-022]cat in the snare?

[017-023]6. Was the owl [[concept-wisdom|wise]] or [[concept-foolishness|foolish]] to wait before he caught the mouse?
