---
description: "You can just imagine what a surprise it was to Subha Datta’s wife and"
id: ch011
label: "Hindu Tales · Chapter Xi"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[011-001]You can just imagine what a surprise it was to [[person-subha-datta|Subha Datta]]’s wife and

[011-002]children when they saw him coming along the path leading to his home.

[011-003]He did not bring [[object-magic-pitcher|the pitcher]] with him, but had hidden it in a hollow

[011-004]tree in the wood near his cottage, for he did not mean any one to know

[011-005]that he had it. He told his wife that he had [[event-disappearance|lost]] his way in the

[011-006][[place-forest|forest]], and had been afraid he would never see her or his children

[011-007]again, but he said nothing about the fairies. When his wife asked him

[011-008]how he had got food, he told her a long story about the fruits he had

[011-009]found, and she believed all he said, and determined to make up to him

[011-010]now for all she thought he had suffered. When she called the little

[011-011]girls to come and help her get a nice meal for their father, Subha

[011-012]Datta said: “Oh, don’t bother about that! I’ve brought something back

[011-013]with me. I’ll go and fetch it, but no one is to come with me.”

[011-014]Subha Datta’s wife was sorely disappointed at this, because she loved

[011-015]her husband so much that it was a [[concept-happiness|joy]] to her to work for him. The

[011-016]children too wanted, of course, to go with their father, but he ordered

[011-017]them to stop where they were. He seized a big basket which was fall of

[011-018]fuel for the fire, tumbled all the wood in it on the floor, and went

[011-019]off alone to the pitcher. Very soon he was back again with his basket

[011-020]full of all sorts of good things, the very names of which his wife and

[011-021]children had no idea of. “There!” he cried; “what do you think of that?

[011-022]Am I not a [[concept-cleverness|clever]] father to have found all that in the forest? Those

[011-023]are the ‘fruits’ I meant when I told Mother about them.”

[011-024]21. What would you have thought about this wonderful supply of food, if

[011-025]you had been one of the woodcutter’s children?

[011-026]22. Was it a good thing for those children to have all this food

[011-027]without working for it? If not, why was it not a good thing?
