---
description: "When the woodcutter was quite sure that every one was gone and nobody"
id: ch013
label: "Hindu Tales · Chapter Xiii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[013-001]When [[person-subha-datta|the woodcutter]] was quite sure that every one was gone and nobody

[013-002]could see where he had hidden [[object-magic-pitcher|the pitcher]], he took it from the hole in

[013-003]which it lay and carried it carefully to his home. You can imagine how

[013-004]everybody rushed out to meet him when he came in sight, and crowded

[013-005]round him, so that there was danger of the pitcher being thrown to the

[013-006]ground and broken. Subha Datta however managed to get into the cottage

[013-007]without any accident, and then he began to take things out of the

[013-008]pitcher and fling them on the ground, shouting, “Am I a robber? Am I a

[013-009]robber? Who dared to call me a robber?” Then, getting more and more

[013-010]excited, he picked up the pitcher, and holding it on his shoulder began

[013-011]to dance wildly about. His wife called out to him, “Oh, take care, take

[013-012]care! You will drop it!” But he paid no attention to her. Suddenly,

[013-013]however, he began to feel giddy and fell to the ground, dropping the

[013-014]pitcher as he did so. It was broken to pieces, and a great cry of

[013-015]sorrow went up from all who saw the accident. The woodcutter himself

[013-016]was broken-hearted, for he knew that he had done the mischief himself,

[013-017]and that if only he had resisted the temptation to drink the wine he

[013-018]would still have his treasure.

[013-019]He was going to pick up the pieces to see if they could be stuck

[013-020]together, but to his very great surprise he could not touch them. He

[013-021]heard a silvery laugh, and what sounded like children clapping their

[013-022]hands, and he thought he also heard the words, “Our pitcher is ours

[013-023]again!” Could it all have been a dream? No: for there on the ground

[013-024]were the fruits and cakes that had been in the pitcher, and there were

[013-025]his wife, his children and his friends, all looking sadly and angrily

[013-026]at him. One by one the friends went away, leaving Subha Datta alone

[013-027]with his family.

[013-028]25. If you had been Subha Datta’s wife, what would you have done when

[013-029]this misfortune came to her husband?

[013-030]26. What would you have done if you had been the woodcutter?
