---
description: "The news of the Brahman’s loss spread very quickly through Sravasti;"
id: ch025
label: "A Royal Thief-Catcher · Chapter V"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[025-001]The news of the Brahman’s loss spread very quickly through [[place-sravasti|Sravasti]];

[025-002]and as is so often the case, every one who told the story made it a

[025-003]little different, so that it became very difficult to know what the

[025-004]truth really was. There was great distress in the [[place-city|town]], because the

[025-005]people thought the Brahman would go away, and they did not want him to

[025-006]do that. They were proud of having a man they thought so holy, living

[025-007]amongst them, and ashamed that he should have been robbed whilst he was

[025-008]with them. When they heard that he meant to starve himself to death,

[025-009]they were dreadfully shocked, and determined to do all they possibly

[025-010]could to prevent it. One after another of the chief men of Sravasti

[025-011]came to see him, and entreated him not to be in such a hurry to be sure

[025-012]that his treasure would never be found. They said they would all do

[025-013]everything they possibly could to get it back for him. Some of them

[025-014]thought it was very wrong of him to make such a fuss about it, and

[025-015]blamed him for being a [[concept-selfishness|miser]]. They told him it was [[concept-foolishness|foolish]] to care so

[025-016]much for what he could not take with him when he died, and one

[025-017]specially [[concept-wisdom|wise]] old man gave him a long lecture on the wickedness of

[025-018]taking away the life which had been given to him by God to prepare for

[025-019]that in the other world. “Put the idea of starving yourself out of your

[025-020]head,” he said, “and whilst we are seeking your treasure, go on as you

[025-021]did before you [[event-disappearance|lost]] it. Next time you have any money and jewels, turn

[025-022]them to good account instead of hoarding them up.”

[025-023]9. Do you think the Brahman was of any real use to the people of

[025-024]Sravasti?

[025-025]10. In what qualities do you think the Brahman was wanting when he made

[025-026]up his mind to starve himself to death?
