---
description: "As soon as the king said, “Go at once,” the servant started to his feet"
id: ch031
label: "A Royal Thief-Catcher · Chapter Xi"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[031-001]As soon as the king said, “Go at once,” the servant started to his feet

[031-002]and hastened away, as eager now to restore what he had stolen as he had

[031-003]been to hide it. He had put it in another hole in the very depths of

[031-004]the [[place-forest|forest]]; and it was a long time before he got back to the palace

[031-005]with it, for it was very heavy. He had thought the king would send some

[031-006]guards with him, to see that he did not run away, and that they would

[031-007]have helped him to carry the sack full of gold and jewels; but nobody

[031-008]followed him. It was hard work to drag the heavy load all the way

[031-009]alone; but at last, quite late in the evening, he was back at the

[031-010][[place-palace|palace gates]]. The soldiers standing there let him pass without a word,

[031-011]and soon he was once more in the room in which the king had received

[031-012]him. [[person-prasnajit|Prasnajit]] still sat on his throne, and the attendants still waited

[031-013]behind him, when the [[event-theft|thief]], so tired he could hardly stand, once more

[031-014]lay prostrate at the bottom of the steps leading up to [[object-throne|the throne]], with

[031-015]the sack beside him. How his heart did beat as he waited for what the

[031-016]king would say! It seemed a very long time before Prasnajit spoke,

[031-017]though it was only two or three minutes; and when he did, this is what

[031-018]he said, “Go back to your home now, and be a thief no more.”

[031-019]Very, very thankfully the man obeyed, scarcely able to believe that he

[031-020]was free to go and that he was not to be terribly punished. Never again

[031-021]in the rest of his life did he take what did not belong to him, and he

[031-022]was never tired of telling his children and his friends of the goodness

[031-023]of the king who had forgiven him.

[031-024]21. Do you think it would have been better for the thief to have been

[031-025]punished?

[031-026]22. What lesson did the thief learn from what had happened to him?
