---
description: "So the three wives were deserted, and had to manage as best they could"
id: ch034
label: "The Magic Shoes and Staff · Chapter Ii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[034-001]So the three wives were deserted, and had to manage as best they could

[034-002]without their husbands, who did not even trouble to wish them goodbye.

[034-003]The wives were at first very sad and lonely, but presently a great [[concept-happiness|joy]]

[034-004]came to one of them which made the other two very happy as well. This

[034-005]joy was the birth of a little boy, whose two aunts loved him almost as

[034-006]much as his mother did. The story does not tell how they all got food

[034-007]whilst the famine was going on, though it is very evident that they

[034-008]were not starved, for the baby boy grew fast and was a strong healthy

[034-009]little fellow.

[034-010]One night all the three wives had the same dream, a very wonderful one,

[034-011]in which the god Siva, who is very much honoured in [[place-india|India]], appeared to

[034-012]them. He told them that, looking down from Heaven, he had noticed how

[034-013]tenderly they cared for the new-born baby, and that he wished them to

[034-014]call him [[person-putraka|Putraka]]. Besides this he astonished them by adding that, as a

[034-015]reward for the [[concept-selfishness|unselfish]] way in which they had behaved, they would find

[034-016]one hundred thousand gold pieces under the little child’s pillow every

[034-017]morning, and that one day that little child would be a king.

[034-018]3. Do you think the three women wanted to be rewarded for loving the

[034-019]baby?

[034-020]4. Is it a good thing to have a great deal of money?
