---
description: "On and on flew Putraka, full of eager delight in the new power of"
id: ch043
label: "The Magic Shoes and Staff · Chapter Xi"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[043-001]On and on flew [[person-putraka|Putraka]], full of eager delight in the new power of

[043-002][[event-escape|flight]]. How he loved rushing through the air, cleaving it like a bird

[043-003]on the wing! All he wanted to make him perfectly [[concept-happiness|happy]] was someone to

[043-004]enjoy his new powers with him. Presently he found himself above a

[043-005]beautiful city with towers and pinnacles and minarets gleaming in the

[043-006]sunshine. “Ah!” he thought, “that is the place for me. I will go down

[043-007]there, and see if I can find a nice house to live in, and some people

[043-008]to make friends with, who will not try to kill me or to cheat me, but

[043-009]love me and be grateful to me for any [[concept-generosity|kindness]] I show them.”

[043-010]As Putraka was hovering in the air above the [[place-city|town]] to which he had taken

[043-011]such a fancy, he noticed a little house which rather pleased him; for

[043-012]though it was poor-looking, there was something cheerful and home-like

[043-013]about it. Down he sped and alighted at the door. Only one poor old

[043-014]woman lived in the house, and when Putraka knocked and asked if he

[043-015]might come in, she said “Yes” at once. He gave her some money, and told

[043-016]her he would like to live with her, if she would let him do so. She was

[043-017]only too glad to consent, for she was very lonely; and the two lived

[043-018]happily together for a long time.

[043-019]21. Do you think that if Putraka had flown home on his wonderful shoes,

[043-020]taking his staff and bowl with him, his, father and uncles would still

[043-021]have tried to kill him?

[043-022]22. How could Putraka have prevented them from doing him harm if he had

[043-023]returned to his home?
