---
description: "In the branches of a great tree, in a forest in India, lived a wise old"
id: ch069
label: "A Crow and His Three Friends · Chapter I"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[069-001]In the branches of a great tree, in a [[place-forest|forest]] in [[place-india|India]], lived a [[concept-wisdom|wise]] old

[069-002]crow in a very comfortable, well-built nest. His wife was dead, and all

[069-003]his children were getting their own living; so he had nothing to do but

[069-004]to look after himself. He led a very easy existence, but took a great

[069-005]interest in the affairs of his neighbours. One day, popping his head

[069-006]over the edge of his home, he saw a fierce-looking man stalking along,

[069-007]carrying a stick in one hand and a net in the other.

[069-008]“That fellow is up to some mischief, I’ll be bound,” thought the crow:

[069-009]“I will keep my eye on him.” The man stopped under the tree, spread the

[069-010]net on the ground; and taking a bag of rice out of his pocket, he

[069-011]scattered the grains amongst the meshes of the net. Then he hid himself

[069-012]behind the trunk of the tree from which the crow was watching,

[069-013]evidently intending to stop there and see what would happen. The crow

[069-014]felt pretty sure that the stranger had designs against [[animal-bird|birds]], and that

[069-015]the stick had something to do with the matter. He was quite right; and

[069-016]it was not long before just what he expected came to pass.

[069-017]A flock of [[animal-pigeon|pigeons]], led by a specially fine bird who had been chosen

[069-018]king because of his size and the beauty of his plumage, came flying

[069-019]rapidly along, and noticed the white rice, but did not see the net,

[069-020]because it was very much the same colour as the ground. Down swooped

[069-021]the king, and down swept all the other pigeons, eager to enjoy a good

[069-022]meal without any trouble to themselves. Alas, their [[concept-happiness|joy]] was short

[069-023]lived! They were all caught in the net and began struggling to escape,

[069-024]beating the air with their wings and uttering loud cries of distress.

[069-025]The crow and the man behind the tree kept very quiet, watching them;

[069-026]the man with his stick ready to beat the poor helpless birds to death,

[069-027]the crow watching out of mere curiosity. Now a very strange and

[069-028]wonderful thing came to pass. The king of the pigeons, who had his wits

[069-029]about him, said to the imprisoned birds:

[069-030]“Take the net up in your beaks, all of you spread out your wings at

[069-031]once, and fly straight up into the air as quickly as possible.”

[069-032]1. What special qualities did the king display when he gave these

[069-033]orders to his subjects?

[069-034]2. Can you think of any other advice the king might have given?
