---
description: "Soon after the arrival of the husband and wife at the merchant’s house,"
id: ch077
label: "A Clever Thief · Chapter Ii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[077-001]Soon after the arrival of the husband and wife at the merchant’s house,

[077-002]a very important event took place, namely, the [[event-wedding|marriage]] of the eldest

[077-003]daughter. Great were the preparations beforehand, in which [[person-vidya|Vidya]] took

[077-004]her full share, helping in the kitchen to make all manner of delicious

[077-005]dishes, and living in great luxury herself. For there was no stint in

[077-006]the wealthy home; even the humblest servants were well cared for. Vidya

[077-007]was happier than she had ever been before, now that she had plenty to

[077-008]do and plenty of good food. She became in fact quite a different

[077-009]creature, and began to wish she had been a better mother to her

[077-010]children. “When the wedding is over,” she thought, “I will go and see

[077-011]how they are getting on.” On the other hand she forgot all about her

[077-012]husband and scarcely ever saw him.

[077-013]It was all very different with [[person-hari-sarman|Hari-Sarman]] himself. He had no special

[077-014]duties to perform and nobody seemed to want him. If he went into the

[077-015]kitchen, the busy servants ordered him to get out of their way; and he

[077-016]was not made welcome by the owner of the house or his guests. The

[077-017]merchant too forgot all about him, and he felt very lonely and

[077-018]miserable. He had been thinking to himself how much he would enjoy all

[077-019]the delicious food he would get after the wedding; and now he began to

[077-020]grumble: “I’m starving in the midst of plenty, that’s what I am.

[077-021]Something will have to be done to change this horrible state of

[077-022]things.”

[077-023]Whilst the preparations for the wedding were going on, Vidya never came

[077-024]near her husband, and he lay awake a long time thinking, “What in the

[077-025]world can I do to make the master send for me?” All of a sudden an idea

[077-026]came into his head. “I’ll steal something valuable, and hide it away;

[077-027]and when everyone is being asked about the loss, the merchant will

[077-028]remember the man who can reveal secrets. Now what can I take that is

[077-029]sure to be missed? I know, I know!” And springing out of bed, he

[077-030]hastily dressed himself and crept out of the house.

[077-031]3. What would you have done if you had been Hari-Sarman?

[077-032]4. Do you think Vidya ever had any real love for her husband?
