---
description: "Kadali-Garbha never even thought about other children, because she had"
id: ch085
label: "The Hermit's Daughter · Chapter Ii"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[085-001][[person-kadali-garbha|Kadali-Garbha]] never even thought about other children, because she had

[085-002]not been used to having them with her. She was just as [[concept-happiness|happy]] as the day

[085-003]was long, and never wished for any change. But when she was about

[085-004]sixteen something happened which quite altered her whole life. One day

[085-005]her father had gone into the [[place-forest|forest]] to cut wood, and had left her

[085-006]alone. She had finished tidying the house, and got everything ready for

[085-007]the midday meal, and was sitting at the door of her home, reading to

[085-008]herself, with [[animal-bird|birds]] fluttering about her head and a pet doe lying

[085-009]beside her, when she heard the noise of a horse’s feet approaching. She

[085-010]looked up, and there on the other side of the fence was a very handsome

[085-011]young man seated on a great black horse, which he had reined up when he

[085-012]caught sight of her. He looked at her without speaking, and she looked

[085-013]back at him with her big black eyes full of surprise at his sudden

[085-014]appearance. She made a beautiful picture, with the green creepers

[085-015]covering the hut behind her, and the doe, which had started up in fear

[085-016]of the horse, pressing against her.

[085-017]The man was the king of the country, whose name was [[person-dridha-varman|Dridha-Varman]]. He

[085-018]had been hunting and had got separated from his attendants. He was very

[085-019]much surprised to find anyone living in the very depths of the forest,

[085-020]and was going to ask the young girl who she was, when Kadali-Garbha saw

[085-021]her father coming along the path leading to his home. Jumping up, she

[085-022]ran to meet him, glad that he had come; for she had never before seen a

[085-023]young man and was as shy as any of the wild creatures of the woods. Now

[085-024]that [[person-mana-kanaka|Mana Kanaka]] was with her, she got over her fright, and felt quite

[085-025]safe, clinging to his arm as he and the king talked together.

[085-026]3. Can you describe just how Kadali-Garbha felt when she saw the king?

[085-027]4. Do you think it would have been a good or a bad thing for her to

[085-028]live all the rest of her life in the forest?
