---
id: ch004
label: "Section 4"
type: chapter
description: "The house was but just large enough to be called a mansion, and was"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[004-001]The house was but just large enough to be called a mansion, and was

[004-002]moderately rented, having no manor attached to it, and being rather

[004-003]difficult to let with its sombre furniture and faded upholstery. But

[004-004]inside and outside it was what no beholder could suppose to be

[004-005]inhabited by retired trades-people: a certainty which was worth many

[004-006]conveniences to tenants who not only had the taste that shrinks from

[004-007]new finery, but also were in that border-territory of rank where

[004-008]annexation is a burning topic: and to take up her abode in a house

[004-009]which had once sufficed for dowager countesses gave a perceptible tinge

[004-010]to [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]]’s satisfaction in having an establishment of her own.

[004-011]This, rather mysteriously to [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], appeared suddenly possible on

[004-012]the death of her step-father, Captain Davilow, who had for the last

[004-013]nine years joined his family only in a brief and fitful manner, enough

[004-014]to reconcile them to his long absences; but she cared much more for the

[004-015]fact than for the explanation. All her prospects had become more

[004-016]agreeable in consequence. She had disliked their former way of life,

[004-017]roving from one foreign watering-place or Parisian apartment to

[004-018]another, always feeling new antipathies to new suites of hired

[004-019]furniture, and meeting new people under conditions which made her

[004-020]appear of little importance; and the variation of having passed two

[004-021]years at a showy school, where, on all occasions of display, she had

[004-022]been put foremost, had only deepened her sense that so exceptional a

[004-023]person as herself could hardly remain in ordinary circumstances or in a

[004-024]social position less than advantageous. Any fear of this latter evil

[004-025]was banished now that her mamma was to have an establishment; for on

[004-026]the point of birth Gwendolen was quite easy. She had no notion how her

[004-027]maternal grandfather got the fortune inherited by his two daughters;

[004-028]but he had been a West Indian—which seemed to exclude further

[004-029]question; and she knew that her father’s family was so high as to take

[004-030]no notice of her mamma, who nevertheless preserved with much pride the

[004-031]miniature of a Lady Molly in that connection. She would probably have

[004-032]known much more about her father but for a little incident which

[004-033]happened when she was twelve years old. Mrs. Davilow had brought out,

[004-034]as she did only at wide intervals, various memorials of her first

[004-035]husband, and while showing his miniature to Gwendolen recalled with a

[004-036]fervor which seemed to count on a peculiar filial sympathy, the fact

[004-037]that dear papa had died when his little daughter was in long clothes.

[004-038]Gwendolen, immediately thinking of the unlovable step-father whom she

[004-039]had been acquainted with the greater part of her life while her frocks

[004-040]were short, said,

[004-041]“Why did you marry again, mamma? It would have been nicer if you had

[004-042]not.”

[004-043]Mrs. Davilow colored deeply, a slight convulsive movement passed over

[004-044]her face, and straightway shutting up the memorials she said, with a

[004-045]violence quite unusual in her,

[004-046]“You have no feeling, child!”

[004-047]Gwendolen, who was fond of her mamma, felt hurt and ashamed, and had

[004-048]never since dared to ask a question about her father.

[004-049]This was not the only instance in which she had brought on herself the

[004-050]pain of some filial compunction. It was always arranged, when possible,

[004-051]that she should have a small bed in her mamma’s room; for Mrs.

[004-052]Davilow’s motherly tenderness clung chiefly to her eldest girl, who had

[004-053]been born in her happier time. One night under an attack of pain she

[004-054]found that the specific regularly placed by her bedside had been

[004-055]forgotten, and begged Gwendolen to get out of bed and reach it for her.

[004-056]That healthy young lady, snug and warm as a rosy infant in her little

[004-057]couch, objected to step out into the cold, and lying perfectly still,

[004-058]grumbling a refusal. Mrs. Davilow went without the medicine and never

[004-059]reproached her daughter; but the next day Gwendolen was keenly

[004-060]conscious of what must be in her mamma’s mind, and tried to make amends

[004-061]by caresses which cost her no effort. Having always been the pet and

[004-062]pride of the household, waited on by mother, sisters, governess and

[004-063]maids, as if she had been a princess in exile, she naturally found it

[004-064]difficult to think her own pleasure less important than others made it,

[004-065]and when it was positively thwarted felt an astonished resentment apt,

[004-066]in her cruder days, to vent itself in one of those passionate acts

[004-067]which look like a contradiction of habitual tendencies. Though never

[004-068]even as a child thoughtlessly cruel, nay delighting to rescue drowning

[004-069]insects and watch their recovery, there was a disagreeable silent

[004-070]remembrance of her having strangled her sister’s canary-bird in a final

[004-071]fit of exasperation at its shrill [[music|singing]] which had again and again

[004-072]jarringly interrupted her own. She had taken pains to buy a white mouse

[004-073]for her sister in retribution, and though inwardly excusing herself on

[004-074]the ground of a peculiar sensitiveness which was a mark of her general

[004-075]superiority, the thought of that infelonious murder had always made her

[004-076]wince. Gwendolen’s nature was not remorseless, but she liked to make

[004-077]her penances easy, and now that she was twenty and more, some of her

[004-078]native force had turned into a self-control by which she guarded

[004-079]herself from penitential [[shame|humiliation]]. There was more show of fire and

[004-080]will in her than ever, but there was more calculation underneath it.

[004-081]On this day of arrival at [[Offendene]], which not even Mrs. Davilow had

[004-082]seen before—the place having been taken for her by her brother-in-law,

[004-083][[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]]—when all had got down from the carriage, and were

[004-084]standing under the porch in front of the open door, so that they could

[004-085]have a general view of the place and a glimpse of the stone hall and

[004-086]staircase hung with sombre pictures, but enlivened by a bright wood

[004-087]fire, no one spoke; mamma, the four sisters and the governess all

[004-088]looked at Gwendolen, as if their feelings depended entirely on her

[004-089]decision. Of the girls, from Alice in her sixteenth year to Isabel in

[004-090]her tenth, hardly anything could be said on a first view, but that they

[004-091]were girlish, and that their black dresses were getting shabby. Miss

[004-092]Merry was elderly and altogether neutral in expression. Mrs. Davilow’s

[004-093]worn beauty seemed the more pathetic for the look of entire appeal

[004-094]which she cast at Gwendolen, who was glancing round at the house, the

[004-095]landscape and the entrance hall with an air of rapid judgment. Imagine

[004-096]a young race-horse in the paddock among untrimmed ponies and patient

[004-097]hacks.

[004-098]“Well, dear, what do you think of the place,” said Mrs. Davilow at

[004-099]last, in a gentle, deprecatory tone.

[004-100]“I think it is charming,” said Gwendolen, quickly. “A romantic place;

[004-101]anything delightful may happen in it; it would be a good background for

[004-102]anything. No one need be ashamed of living here.”

[004-103]“There is certainly nothing common about it.”

[004-104]“Oh, it would do for fallen royalty or any sort of grand poverty. We

[004-105]ought properly to have been living in splendor, and have come down to

[004-106]this. It would have been as romantic as could be. But I thought my

[004-107]uncle and aunt Gascoigne would be here to meet us, and my cousin Anna,”

[004-108]added Gwendolen, her tone changed to sharp surprise.

[004-109]“We are early,” said Mrs. Davilow, and entering the hall, she said to

[004-110]the housekeeper who came forward, “You expect Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne?”

[004-111]“Yes, madam; they were here yesterday to give particular orders about

[004-112]the fires and the dinner. But as to fires, I’ve had ’em in all the

[004-113]rooms for the last week, and everything is well aired. I could wish

[004-114]some of the furniture paid better for all the cleaning it’s had, but I

[004-115]_think_ you’ll see the brasses have been done justice to. I _think_

[004-116]when Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne come, they’ll tell you nothing has been

[004-117]neglected. They’ll be here at five, for certain.”

[004-118]This satisfied Gwendolen, who was not prepared to have their arrival

[004-119]treated with indifference; and after tripping a little way up the

[004-120]matted stone staircase to take a survey there, she tripped down again,

[004-121]and followed by all the girls looked into each of the rooms opening

[004-122]from the hall—the dining-room all dark oak and worn red satin damask,

[004-123]with a copy of snarling, worrying dogs from Snyders over the

[004-124]side-board, and a Christ breaking bread over the mantel-piece; the

[004-125]library with a general aspect and smell of old brown-leather; and

[004-126]lastly, the drawing-room, which was entered through a small antechamber

[004-127]crowded with venerable knick-knacks.

[004-128]“Mamma, mamma, pray come here!” said Gwendolen, Mrs. Davilow having

[004-129]followed slowly in talk with the housekeeper. “Here is an organ. I will

[004-130]be Saint Cecilia: some one shall paint me as Saint Cecilia. Jocosa

[004-131](this was her name for Miss Merry), let down my hair. See, mamma?”

[004-132]She had thrown off her hat and gloves, and seated herself before the

[004-133]organ in an admirable pose, looking upward; while the submissive and

[004-134]sad Jocosa took out the one comb which fastened the coil of hair, and

[004-135]then shook out the mass till it fell in a smooth light-brown stream far

[004-136]below its owner’s slim waist.

[004-137]Mrs. Davilow smiled and said, “A charming picture, my dear!” not

[004-138]indifferent to the display of her pet, even in the presence of a

[004-139]housekeeper. Gwendolen rose and laughed with delight. All this seemed

[004-140]quite to the purpose on entering a new house which was so excellent a

[004-141]background.

[004-142]“What a queer, quaint, picturesque room!” she went on, looking about

[004-143]her. “I like these old embroidered chairs, and the garlands on the

[004-144]wainscot, and the pictures that may be anything. That one with the

[004-145]ribs—nothing but ribs and darkness—I should think that is Spanish,

[004-146]mamma.”

[004-147]“Oh, Gwendolen!” said the small Isabel, in a tone of astonishment,

[004-148]while she held open a hinged panel of the wainscot at the other end of

[004-149]the room.

[004-150]Every one, Gwendolen first, went to look. The opened panel had

[004-151]disclosed the picture of an upturned dead face, from which an obscure

[004-152]figure seemed to be fleeing with outstretched arms. “How horrible!”

[004-153]said Mrs. Davilow, with a look of mere disgust; but Gwendolen shuddered

[004-154]silently, and Isabel, a plain and altogether inconvenient child with an

[004-155]alarming memory, said,

[004-156]“You will never stay in this room by yourself, Gwendolen.”

[004-157]“How dare you open things which were meant to be shut up, you perverse

[004-158]little creature?” said Gwendolen, in her angriest tone. Then snatching

[004-159]the panel out of the hand of the culprit, she closed it hastily,

[004-160]saying, “There is a lock—where is the key? Let the key be found, or

[004-161]else let one be made, and let nobody open it again; or rather, let the

[004-162]key be brought to me.”

[004-163]At this command to everybody in general Gwendolen turned with a face

[004-164]which was flushed in reaction from her chill shudder, and said, “Let us

[004-165]go up to our own room, mamma.”

[004-166]The housekeeper on searching found the key in the drawer of the cabinet

[004-167]close by the panel, and presently handed it to Bugle, the lady’s-maid,

[004-168]telling her significantly to give it to her Royal Highness.

[004-169]“I don’t know what you mean, Mrs. Startin,” said Bugle, who had been

[004-170]busy up-stairs during the scene in the drawing-room, and was rather

[004-171]offended at this irony in a new servant.

[004-172]“I mean the young lady that’s to command us all—and well worthy for

[004-173]looks and figure,” replied Mrs. Startin in propitiation. “She’ll know

[004-174]what key it is.”

[004-175]“If you have laid out what we want, go and see to the others, Bugle,”

[004-176]Gwendolen had said, when she and Mrs. Davilow entered their black and

[004-177]yellow bedroom, where a pretty little white couch was prepared by the

[004-178]side of the black and yellow catafalque known as the best bed. “I will

[004-179]help mamma.”

[004-180]But her first movement was to go to the tall mirror between the

[004-181]windows, which reflected herself and the room completely, while her

[004-182]mamma sat down and also looked at the reflection.
