---
id: ch001
label: "Section 1"
type: chapter
description: "DANIEL DERONDA"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[001-001]DANIEL DERONDA

[001-002]By George Eliot

[001-003]Let thy chief terror be of thine own soul:

[001-004]There, ’mid the throng of hurrying desires

[001-005]That trample on the dead to seize their spoil,

[001-006]Lurks vengeance, footless, irresistible

[001-007]As exhalations laden with slow death,

[001-008]And o’er the fairest troop of captured joys

[001-009]Breathes pallid pestilence.

[001-010]CONTENTS.

[001-011]BOOK I.—THE SPOILED CHILD

[001-012]„ II.—MEETING STREAMS

[001-013]„ III.—MAIDENS CHOOSING

[001-014]„ IV.—GWENDOLEN GETS HER CHOICE

[001-015]„ V.—MORDECAI

[001-016]„ VI.—REVELATIONS

[001-017]„ VII.—THE MOTHER AND THE SON

[001-018]„ VIII.—FRUIT AND SEED

[001-019]DANIEL DERONDA.

[001-020]BOOK I.—THE SPOILED CHILD.

[001-021]CHAPTER I.

[001-022]Men can do nothing without the make-believe of a beginning. Even

[001-023]science, the strict measurer, is obliged to start with a make-believe

[001-024]unit, and must fix on a point in the stars’ unceasing journey when his

[001-025]sidereal clock shall pretend that time is at Nought. His less accurate

[001-026]grandmother Poetry has always been understood to start in the middle;

[001-027]but on reflection it appears that her proceeding is not very different

[001-028]from his; since Science, too, reckons backward as well as forward,

[001-029]divides his unit into billions, and with his clock-finger at Nought

[001-030]really sets off _in medias res_. No retrospect will take us to

[001-031]the true beginning; and whether our prologue be in heaven or on earth,

[001-032]it is but a fraction of that all-presupposing fact with which our

[001-033]story sets out.

[001-034]Was she beautiful or not beautiful? and what was the secret of form or

[001-035]expression which gave the dynamic quality to her glance? Was the good

[001-036]or the evil genius dominant in those beams? Probably the evil; else why

[001-037]was the effect that of unrest rather than of undisturbed charm? Why was

[001-038]the wish to look again felt as coercion and not as a longing in which

[001-039]the whole being consents?

[001-040]She who raised these questions in [[Daniel-Deronda|Daniel Deronda]]’s mind was occupied in

[001-041]gambling: not in the open air under a southern sky, tossing coppers on

[001-042]a ruined wall, with rags about her limbs; but in one of those splendid

[001-043]resorts which the enlightenment of ages has prepared for the same

[001-044]species of pleasure at a heavy cost of gilt mouldings, dark-toned

[001-045]color and chubby nudities, all correspondingly heavy—forming a

[001-046]suitable condenser for human breath belonging, in great part, to the

[001-047]highest fashion, and not easily procurable to be breathed in elsewhere

[001-048]in the like proportion, at least by persons of little fashion.

[001-049]It was near four o’clock on a September day, so that the atmosphere was

[001-050]well-brewed to a visible haze. There was deep stillness, broken only by

[001-051]a light rattle, a light chink, a small sweeping sound, and an

[001-052]occasional monotone in French, such as might be expected to issue from

[001-053]an ingeniously constructed automaton. Round two long tables were

[001-054]gathered two serried crowds of human beings, all save one having their

[001-055]faces and attention bent on the tables. The one exception was a

[001-056]melancholy little boy, with his knees and calves simply in their

[001-057]natural clothing of epidermis, but for the rest of his person in a

[001-058]fancy dress. He alone had his face turned toward the doorway, and

[001-059]fixing on it the blank gaze of a bedizened child stationed as a

[001-060]masquerading advertisement on the platform of an itinerant show, stood

[001-061]close behind a lady deeply engaged at the [[gambling|roulette]]-table.

[001-062][[About]] this table fifty or sixty persons were assembled, many in the

[001-063]outer rows, where there was occasionally a deposit of new-comers, being

[001-064]mere spectators, only that one of them, usually a woman, might now and

[001-065]then be observed putting down a five-franc with a simpering air, just

[001-066]to see what the passion of gambling really was. Those who were taking

[001-067]their pleasure at a higher strength, and were absorbed in play, showed

[001-068]very distant varieties of European type: Livonian and Spanish,

[001-069]Graeco-Italian and miscellaneous German, English aristocratic and

[001-070]English plebeian. Here certainly was a striking admission of human

[001-071]equality. The white bejewelled fingers of an English countess were very

[001-072]near touching a bony, yellow, crab-like hand stretching a bared wrist

[001-073]to clutch a heap of coin—a hand easy to sort with the square, gaunt

[001-074]face, deep-set eyes, grizzled eyebrows, and ill-combed scanty hair

[001-075]which seemed a slight metamorphosis of the vulture. And where else

[001-076]would her ladyship have graciously consented to sit by that dry-lipped

[001-077]feminine figure prematurely old, withered after short bloom like her

[001-078]artificial flowers, holding a shabby velvet reticule before her, and

[001-079]occasionally putting in her mouth the point with which she pricked her

[001-080]card? There too, very near the fair countess, was a respectable [[london|London]]

[001-081]tradesman, blonde and soft-handed, his sleek hair scrupulously parted

[001-082]behind and before, conscious of circulars addressed to the nobility and

[001-083]gentry, whose distinguished patronage enabled him to take his holidays

[001-084]fashionably, and to a certain extent in their distinguished company.

[001-085]Not his the gambler’s passion that nullifies appetite, but a well-fed

[001-086]leisure, which, in the intervals of winning money in business and

[001-087]spending it showily, sees no better resource than winning money in play

[001-088]and spending it yet more showily—reflecting always that Providence had

[001-089]never manifested any disapprobation of his amusement, and dispassionate

[001-090]enough to leave off if the sweetness of winning much and seeing others

[001-091]lose had turned to the sourness of losing much and seeing others win.

[001-092]For the vice of gambling lay in losing money at it. In his bearing

[001-093]there might be something of the tradesman, but in his pleasures he was

[001-094]fit to rank with the owners of the oldest titles. Standing close to his

[001-095]chair was a handsome Italian, calm, statuesque, reaching across him to

[001-096]place the first pile of napoleons from a new bagful just brought him by

[001-097]an envoy with a scrolled mustache. The pile was in half a minute pushed

[001-098]over to an old bewigged woman with eye-glasses pinching her nose. There

[001-099]was a slight gleam, a faint mumbling smile about the lips of the old

[001-100]woman; but the statuesque Italian remained impassive, and—probably

[001-101]secure in an infallible system which placed his foot on the neck of

[001-102]chance—immediately prepared a new pile. So did a man with the air of

[001-103]an emaciated beau or worn-out libertine, who looked at life through one

[001-104]eye-glass, and held out his hand tremulously when he asked for change.

[001-105]It could surely be no severity of system, but rather some dream of

[001-106]white crows, or the induction that the eighth of the month was lucky,

[001-107]which inspired the fierce yet tottering impulsiveness of his play.

[001-108]But, while every single player differed markedly from every other,

[001-109]there was a certain uniform negativeness of expression which had the

[001-110]effect of a mask—as if they had all eaten of some root that for the

[001-111]time compelled the brains of each to the same narrow monotony of action.

[001-112]Deronda’s first thought when his eyes fell on this scene of dull,

[001-113]gas-poisoned absorption, was that the gambling of Spanish shepherd-boys

[001-114]had seemed to him more enviable:—so far Rousseau might be justified in

[001-115]maintaining that art and science had done a poor service to mankind.

[001-116]But suddenly he felt the moment become dramatic. His attention was

[001-117]arrested by a young lady who, standing at an angle not far from him,

[001-118]was the last to whom his eyes traveled. She was bending and speaking

[001-119]English to a middle-aged lady seated at play beside her: but the next

[001-120]instant she returned to her play, and showed the full height of a

[001-121]graceful figure, with a face which might possibly be looked at without

[001-122]admiration, but could hardly be passed with indifference.

[001-123]The inward debate which she raised in Deronda gave to his eyes a

[001-124]growing expression of scrutiny, tending farther and farther away from

[001-125]the glow of mingled undefined sensibilities forming admiration. At one

[001-126]moment they followed the movements of the figure, of the arms and

[001-127]hands, as this problematic sylph bent forward to deposit her stake with

[001-128]an air of firm choice; and the next they returned to the face which, at

[001-129]present unaffected by beholders, was directed steadily toward the game.

[001-130]The sylph was a winner; and as her taper fingers, delicately gloved in

[001-131]pale-gray, were adjusting the coins which had been pushed toward her in

[001-132]order to pass them back again to the winning point, she looked round

[001-133]her with a survey too markedly cold and neutral not to have in it a

[001-134]little of that nature which we call art concealing an inward exultation.

[001-135]But in the course of that survey her eyes met Deronda’s, and instead of

[001-136]averting them as she would have desired to do, she was unpleasantly

[001-137]conscious that they were arrested—how long? The darting sense that he

[001-138]was measuring her and looking down on her as an inferior, that he was of

[001-139]different quality from the human dross around her, that he felt himself

[001-140]in a region outside and above her, and was examining her as a specimen

[001-141]of a lower order, roused a tingling resentment which stretched the

[001-142]moment with conflict. It did not bring the blood to her cheeks, but it

[001-143]sent it away from her lips. She controlled herself by the help of an

[001-144]inward defiance, and without other sign of emotion than this

[001-145]lip-paleness turned to her play. But Deronda’s gaze seemed to have acted

[001-146]as an evil eye. Her stake was gone. No matter; she had been winning ever

[001-147]since she took to roulette with a few napoleons at command, and had a

[001-148]considerable reserve. She had begun to believe in her luck, others had

[001-149]begun to believe in it: she had visions of being followed by a _cortège_

[001-150]who would worship her as a goddess of luck and watch her play as a

[001-151]directing augury. Such things had been known of male gamblers; why

[001-152]should not a woman have a like supremacy? Her friend and chaperon who

[001-153]had not wished her to play at first was beginning to approve, only

[001-154]administering the prudent advice to stop at the right moment and carry

[001-155]money back to England—advice to which [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] had replied that she

[001-156]cared for the excitement of play, not the winnings. On that supposition

[001-157]the present moment ought to have made the flood-tide in her eager

[001-158]experience of gambling. Yet, when her next stake was swept away, she

[001-159]felt the orbits of her eyes getting hot, and the certainty she had

[001-160](without looking) of that man still watching her was something like a

[001-161]pressure which begins to be torturing. The more reason to her why she

[001-162]should not flinch, but go on playing as if she were indifferent to loss

[001-163]or gain. Her friend touched her elbow and proposed that they should quit

[001-164]the table. For reply Gwendolen put ten louis on the same spot: she was

[001-165]in that mood of defiance in which the mind loses sight of any end beyond

[001-166]the satisfaction of enraged resistance; and with the puerile stupidity

[001-167]of a dominant impulse includes luck among its objects of defiance. Since

[001-168]she was not winning strikingly, the next best thing was to lose

[001-169]strikingly. She controlled her muscles, and showed no tremor of mouth or

[001-170]hands. Each time her stake was swept off she doubled it. Many were now

[001-171]watching her, but the sole observation she was conscious of was

[001-172]Deronda’s, who, though she never looked toward him, she was sure had not

[001-173]moved away. Such a drama takes no long while to play out: development

[001-174]and catastrophe can often be measured by nothing clumsier than the

[001-175]moment-hand. “Faites votre jeu, mesdames et messieurs,” said the

[001-176]automatic voice of destiny from between the mustache and imperial of the

[001-177]croupier: and Gwendolen’s arm was stretched to deposit her last poor

[001-178]heap of napoleons. “Le jeu ne va plus,” said destiny. And in five

[001-179]seconds Gwendolen turned from the table, but turned resolutely with her

[001-180]face toward Deronda and looked at him. There was a smile of irony in his

[001-181]eyes as their glances met; but it was at least better that he should

[001-182]have kept his attention fixed on her than that he disregarded her as one

[001-183]of an insect swarm who had no individual physiognomy. Besides, in spite

[001-184]of his superciliousness and irony, it was difficult to believe that he

[001-185]did not admire her spirit as well as her person: he was young, handsome,

[001-186]distinguished in appearance—not one of these ridiculous and dowdy

[001-187]Philistines who thought it incumbent on them to blight the gaming-table

[001-188]with a sour look of protest as they passed by it. The general conviction

[001-189]that we are admirable does not easily give way before a single negative;

[001-190]rather when any of Vanity’s large family, male or female, find their

[001-191][[art|performance]] received coldly, they are apt to believe that a little more

[001-192]of it will win over the unaccountable dissident. In Gwendolen’s habits

[001-193]of mind it had been taken for granted that she knew what was admirable

[001-194]and that she herself was admired. This basis of her thinking had

[001-195]received a disagreeable concussion, and reeled a little, but was not

[001-196]easily to be overthrown.
