---
id: ch005
label: "Section 5"
type: chapter
description: "“That is a becoming glass, Gwendolen; or is it the black and gold color"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[005-001]“That is a becoming glass, [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]; or is it the black and gold color

[005-002]that sets you off?” said [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], as Gwendolen stood obliquely

[005-003]with her three-quarter face turned toward the mirror, and her left hand

[005-004]brushing back the stream of hair.

[005-005]“I should make a tolerable St. Cecilia with some white roses on my

[005-006]head,” said Gwendolen,—“only how about my nose, mamma? I think saint’s

[005-007]noses never in the least turn up. I wish you had given me your

[005-008]perfectly straight nose; it would have done for any sort of

[005-009]character—a nose of all work. Mine is only a happy nose; it would not

[005-010]do so well for tragedy.”

[005-011]“Oh, my dear, any nose will do to be miserable with in this world,”

[005-012]said Mrs. Davilow, with a deep, weary sigh, throwing her black bonnet

[005-013]on the table, and resting her elbow near it.

[005-014]“Now, mamma,” said Gwendolen, in a strongly remonstrant tone, turning

[005-015]away from the glass with an air of vexation, “don’t begin to be dull

[005-016]here. It spoils all my pleasure, and everything may be so happy now.

[005-017]What have you to be gloomy about _now_?”

[005-018]“Nothing, dear,” said Mrs. Davilow, seeming to rouse herself, and

[005-019]beginning to take off her dress. “It is always enough for me to see you

[005-020]happy.”

[005-021]“But you should be happy yourself,” said Gwendolen, still

[005-022]discontentedly, though going to help her mamma with caressing touches.

[005-023]“Can nobody be happy after they are quite young? You have made me feel

[005-024]sometimes as if nothing were of any use. With the girls so troublesome,

[005-025]and Jocosa so dreadfully wooden and ugly, and everything make-shift

[005-026]about us, and you looking so dull—what was the use of my being

[005-027]anything? But now you _might_ be happy.”

[005-028]“So I shall, dear,” said Mrs. Davilow, patting the cheek that was

[005-029]bending near her.

[005-030]“Yes, but really. Not with a sort of make-believe,” said Gwendolen,

[005-031]with resolute perseverance. “See what a hand and arm!—much more

[005-032]beautiful than mine. Any one can see you were altogether more

[005-033]beautiful.”

[005-034]“No, no, dear; I was always heavier. Never half so charming as you are.”

[005-035]“Well, but what is the use of my being charming, if it is to end in my

[005-036]being dull and not minding anything? Is that what marriage always comes

[005-037]to?”

[005-038]“No, child, certainly not. Marriage is the only happy state for a

[005-039]woman, as I trust you will prove.”

[005-040]“I will not put up with it if it is not a happy state. I am determined

[005-041]to be happy—at least not to go on muddling away my life as other

[005-042]people do, being and doing nothing remarkable. I have made up my mind

[005-043]not to let other people interfere with me as they have done. Here is

[005-044]some warm water ready for you, mamma,” Gwendolen ended, proceeding to

[005-045]take off her own dress and then waiting to have her hair wound up by

[005-046]her mamma.

[005-047]There was silence for a minute or two, till Mrs. Davilow said, while

[005-048]coiling the daughter’s hair, “I am sure I have never crossed you,

[005-049]Gwendolen.”

[005-050]“You often want me to do what I don’t like.”

[005-051]“You mean, to give Alice lessons?”

[005-052]“Yes. And I have done it because you asked me. But I don’t see why I

[005-053]should, else. It bores me to death, she is so slow. She has no ear for

[005-054][[art|music]], or language, or anything else. It would be much better for her

[005-055]to be ignorant, mamma: it is her _rôle_, she would do it well.”

[005-056]“That is a hard thing to say of your poor sister, Gwendolen, who is so

[005-057]good to you, and waits on you hand and foot.”

[005-058]“I don’t see why it is hard to call things by their right names, and

[005-059]put them in their proper places. The hardship is for me to have to

[005-060]waste my time on her. Now let me fasten up your hair, mamma.”

[005-061]“We must make haste; your uncle and aunt will be here soon. For

[005-062]heaven’s sake, don’t be scornful to _them_, my dear child! or to your

[005-063]cousin Anna, whom you will always be going out with. Do promise me,

[005-064]Gwendolen. You know, you can’t expect Anna to be equal to you.”

[005-065]“I don’t want her to be equal,” said Gwendolen, with a toss of her head

[005-066]and a smile, and the discussion ended there.

[005-067]When Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne and their daughter came, Gwendolen, far

[005-068]from being scornful, behaved as prettily as possible to them. She was

[005-069]introducing herself anew to relatives who had not seen her since the

[005-070]comparatively unfinished age of sixteen, and she was anxious—no, not

[005-071]anxious, but resolved that they should admire her.

[005-072]Mrs. Gascoigne bore a family likeness to her sister. But she was darker

[005-073]and slighter, her face was unworn by grief, her movements were less

[005-074]languid, her expression more alert and critical as that of a rector’s

[005-075]wife bound to exert a beneficent authority. Their closest resemblance

[005-076]lay in a non-resistant disposition, inclined to imitation and

[005-077]obedience; but this, owing to the difference in their circumstances,

[005-078]had led them to very different issues. The younger sister had been

[005-079]indiscreet, or at least unfortunate in her marriages; the elder

[005-080]believed herself the most enviable of wives, and her pliancy had ended

[005-081]in her sometimes taking shapes of surprising definiteness. Many of her

[005-082]opinions, such as those on church government and the character of

[005-083]Archbishop Laud, seemed too decided under every alteration to have been

[005-084]arrived at otherwise than by a wifely receptiveness. And there was much

[005-085]to encourage trust in her husband’s authority. He had some agreeable

[005-086]virtues, some striking advantages, and the failings that were imputed

[005-087]to him all leaned toward the side of success.

[005-088]One of his advantages was a fine person, which perhaps was even more

[005-089]impressive at fifty-seven than it had been earlier in life. There were

[005-090]no distinctively clerical lines in the face, no tricks of starchiness

[005-091]or of affected ease: in his Inverness cape he could not have been

[005-092]identified except as a gentleman with handsome dark features, a nose

[005-093]which began with an intention to be aquiline but suddenly became

[005-094]straight, and iron-gray hair. Perhaps he owed this freedom from the

[005-095]sort of professional make-up which penetrates skin, tones and gestures

[005-096]and defies all drapery, to the fact that he had once been Captain

[005-097]Gaskin, having taken orders and a diphthong but shortly before his

[005-098]engagement to Miss Armyn. If any one had objected that his preparation

[005-099]for the clerical function was inadequate, his friends might have asked

[005-100]who made a better figure in it, who preached better or had more

[005-101]authority in his parish? He had a native gift for administration, being

[005-102]tolerant both of opinions and conduct, because he felt himself able to

[005-103]overrule them, and was free from the irritations of conscious

[005-104]feebleness. He smiled pleasantly at the foible of a taste which he did

[005-105]not share—at floriculture or antiquarianism for example, which were

[005-106]much in vogue among his fellow-clergyman in the diocese: for himself,

[005-107]he preferred following the history of a campaign, or divining from his

[005-108]knowledge of Nesselrode’s motives what would have been his conduct if

[005-109]our cabinet had taken a different course. [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]]’s tone of

[005-110]thinking after some long-quieted fluctuations had become ecclesiastical

[005-111]rather than theological; not the modern Anglican, but what he would

[005-112]have called sound English, free from nonsense; such as became a man who

[005-113]looked at a national religion by daylight, and saw it in its relation

[005-114]to other things. No clerical magistrate had greater weight at sessions,

[005-115]or less of mischievous impracticableness in relation to worldly

[005-116]affairs. Indeed, the worst imputation thrown out against him was

[005-117]worldliness: it could not be proved that he forsook the less fortunate,

[005-118]but it was not to be denied that the friendships he cultivated were of

[005-119]a kind likely to be useful to the father of six sons and two daughters;

[005-120]and bitter observers—for in [[wessex|Wessex]], say ten years ago, there were

[005-121]persons whose bitterness may now seem incredible—remarked that the

[005-122]color of his opinions had changed in consistency with this principle of

[005-123]action. But cheerful, successful worldliness has a false air of being

[005-124]more selfish than the acrid, unsuccessful kind, whose secret history is

[005-125]summed up in the terrible words, “Sold, but not paid for.”

[005-126]Gwendolen wondered that she had not better remembered how very fine a

[005-127]man her uncle was; but at the age of sixteen she was a less capable and

[005-128]more indifferent judge. At present it was a matter of extreme interest

[005-129]to her that she was to have the near countenance of a dignified male

[005-130]relative, and that the family life would cease to be entirely,

[005-131]insipidly feminine. She did not intend that her uncle should control

[005-132]her, but she saw at once that it would be altogether agreeable to her

[005-133]that he should be proud of introducing her as his niece. And there was

[005-134]every sign of his being likely to feel that pride. He certainly looked

[005-135]at her with admiration as he said,

[005-136]“You have outgrown Anna, my dear,” putting his arm tenderly round his

[005-137]daughter, whose shy face was a tiny copy of his own, and drawing her

[005-138]forward. “She is not so old as you by a year, but her growing days are

[005-139]certainly over. I hope you will be excellent companions.”

[005-140]He did give a comparing glance at his daughter, but if he saw her

[005-141]inferiority, he might also see that Anna’s timid appearance and

[005-142]miniature figure must appeal to a different taste from that which was

[005-143]attracted by Gwendolen, and that the girls could hardly be rivals.

[005-144]Gwendolen at least, was aware of this, and kissed her cousin with real

[005-145]cordiality as well as grace, saying, “A companion is just what I want.

[005-146]I am so glad we are come to live here. And mamma will be much happier

[005-147]now she is near you, aunt.”

[005-148]The aunt trusted indeed that it would be so, and felt it a blessing

[005-149]that a suitable home had been vacant in their uncle’s parish. Then, of

[005-150]course, notice had to be taken of the four other girls, whom Gwendolen

[005-151]had always felt to be superfluous: all of a girlish average that made

[005-152]four units utterly unimportant, and yet from her earliest days an

[005-153]obtrusive influential fact in her life. She was conscious of having

[005-154]been much kinder to them than could have been expected. And it was

[005-155]evident to her that her uncle and aunt also felt it a pity there were

[005-156]so many girls:—what rational person could feel otherwise, except poor

[005-157]mamma, who never would see how Alice set up her shoulders and lifted

[005-158]her eyebrows till she had no forehead left, how Bertha and Fanny

[005-159]whispered and tittered together about everything, or how Isabel was

[005-160]always listening and staring and forgetting where she was, and treading

[005-161]on the toes of her suffering elders?

[005-162]“You have brothers, Anna,” said Gwendolen, while the sisters were being

[005-163]noticed. “I think you are enviable there.”

[005-164]“Yes,” said Anna, simply. “I am very fond of them; but of course their

[005-165]education is a great anxiety to papa. He used to say they made me a

[005-166]tomboy. I really was a great romp with Rex. I think you will like Rex.

[005-167]He will come home before Christmas.”

[005-168]“I remember I used to think you rather wild and shy; but it is

[005-169]difficult now to imagine you a romp,” said Gwendolen, smiling.

[005-170]“Of course, I am altered now; I am come out, and all that. But in

[005-171]reality I like to go blackberrying with Edwy and Lotta as well as ever.

[005-172]I am not very fond of going out; but I dare say I shall like it better

[005-173]now you will be often with me. I am not at all clever, and I never know

[005-174]what to say. It seems so useless to say what everybody knows, and I can

[005-175]think of nothing else, except what papa says.”
