---
id: ch009
label: "Section 9"
type: chapter
description: "“I should be very much obliged to him for telling me the worst,” said"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[009-001]“I should be very much obliged to him for telling me the worst,” said

[009-002][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], recovering herself. “I dare say I have been extremely ill

[009-003]taught, in addition to having no talent—only liking for [[art|music]].” This

[009-004]was very well expressed considering that it had never entered her mind

[009-005]before.

[009-006]“Yes, it is true: you have not been well taught,” said [[Herr-Klesmer|Herr Klesmer]],

[009-007]quietly. Woman was dear to him, but music was dearer. “Still, you are

[009-008]not quite without gifts. You sing in tune, and you have a pretty fair

[009-009]organ. But you produce your notes badly; and that music which you sing

[009-010]is beneath you. It is a form of melody which expresses a puerile state

[009-011]of culture—a dawdling, canting, see-saw kind of stuff—the passion and

[009-012]thought of people without any breadth of horizon. There is a sort of

[009-013]self-satisfied folly about every phrase of such melody; no cries of

[009-014]deep, mysterious passion—no conflict—no sense of the universal. It

[009-015]makes men small as they listen to it. Sing now something larger. And I

[009-016]shall see.”

[009-017]“Oh, not now—by-and-by,” said Gwendolen, with a sinking of heart at

[009-018]the sudden width of horizon opened round her small musical performance.

[009-019]For a lady desiring to lead, this first encounter in her campaign was

[009-020]startling. But she was bent on not behaving foolishly, and Miss

[009-021]Arrowpoint helped her by saying, “Yes, by-and-by. I always require half

[009-022]an hour to get up my courage after being criticised by Herr Klesmer. We

[009-023]will ask him to play to us now: he is bound to show us what is good

[009-024]music.”

[009-025]To be quite safe on this point Herr Klesmer played a composition of his

[009-026]own, a fantasia called _Freudvoll, Leidvoll, Gedankenvoll_—an

[009-027]extensive commentary on some melodic ideas not too grossly evident; and

[009-028]he certainly fetched as much variety and depth of passion out of the

[009-029]piano as that moderately responsive instrument lends itself to, having

[009-030]an imperious magic in his fingers that seem to send a nerve-thrill

[009-031]through ivory key and wooden hammer, and compel the strings to make a

[009-032]quivering lingering speech for him. Gwendolen, in spite of her wounded

[009-033]egoism, had fullness of nature enough to feel the power of this

[009-034]playing, and it gradually turned her inward sob of [[shame|mortification]] into

[009-035]an excitement which lifted her for the moment into a desperate

[009-036]indifference about her own doings, or at least a determination to get a

[009-037]superiority over them by laughing at them as if they belonged to

[009-038]somebody else. Her eyes had become brighter, her cheeks slightly

[009-039]flushed, and her tongue ready for any mischievous remarks.

[009-040]“I wish you would sing to us again, Miss Harleth,” said young Clintock,

[009-041]the archdeacon’s classical son, who had been so fortunate as to take

[009-042]her to dinner, and came up to renew conversation as soon as Herr

[009-043]Klesmer’s performance was ended, “That is the style of music for me. I

[009-044]never can make anything of this tip-top playing. It is like a jar of

[009-045]leeches, where you can never tell either beginnings or endings. I could

[009-046]listen to your [[music|singing]] all day.”

[009-047]“Yes, we should be glad of something popular now—another song from you

[009-048]would be a relaxation,” said Mrs. Arrowpoint, who had also come near

[009-049]with polite intentions.

[009-050]“That must be because you are in a puerile state of culture, and have

[009-051]no breadth of horizon. I have just learned that. I have been taught how

[009-052]bad my taste is, and am feeling growing pains. They are never

[009-053]pleasant,” said Gwendolen, not taking any notice of Mrs. Arrowpoint,

[009-054]and looking up with a bright smile at young Clintock.

[009-055]Mrs. Arrowpoint was not insensible to this rudeness, but merely said,

[009-056]“Well, we will not press anything disagreeably,” and as there was a

[009-057]perceptible outburst of imprisoned conversation just then, and a

[009-058]movement of guests seeking each other, she remained seated where she

[009-059]was, and looked around her with the relief of a hostess at finding she

[009-060]is not needed.

[009-061]“I am glad you like this neighborhood,” said young Clintock,

[009-062]well-pleased with his station in front of Gwendolen.

[009-063]“Exceedingly. There seems to be a little of everything and not much of

[009-064]anything.”

[009-065]“That is rather equivocal praise.”

[009-066]“Not with me. I like a little of everything; a little absurdity, for

[009-067]example, is very amusing. I am thankful for a few queer people; but

[009-068]much of them is a bore.”

[009-069](Mrs. Arrowpoint, who was hearing this dialogue, perceived quite a new

[009-070]tone in Gwendolen’s speech, and felt a revival of doubt as to her

[009-071]interest in Tasso’s madness.)

[009-072]“I think there should be more croquet, for one thing,” said young Clintock;

[009-073]“I am usually away, but if I were more here I should go in for a

[009-074]croquet club. You are one of the archers, I think. But depend upon it

[009-075]croquet is the game of the future. It wants writing up, though. One of

[009-076]our best men has written a poem on it, in four cantos;—as good as

[009-077]Pope. I want him to publish it—You never read anything better.”

[009-078]“I shall study croquet to-morrow. I shall take to it instead of

[009-079]singing.”

[009-080]“No, no, not that; but do take to croquet. I will send you Jenning’s

[009-081]poem if you like. I have a manuscript copy.”

[009-082]“Is he a great friend of yours?”

[009-083]“Well, rather.”

[009-084]“Oh, if he is only rather, I think I will decline. Or, if you send it

[009-085]to me, will you promise not to catechise me upon it and ask me which

[009-086]part I like best? Because it is not so easy to know a poem without

[009-087]reading it as to know a sermon without listening.”

[009-088]“Decidedly,” Mrs. Arrowpoint thought, “this girl is double and

[009-089]satirical. I shall be on my guard against her.”

[009-090]But Gwendolen, nevertheless, continued to receive polite attentions

[009-091]from the family at [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]], not merely because invitations have larger

[009-092]grounds than those of personal liking, but because the trying little

[009-093]scene at the piano had awakened a kindly solicitude toward her in the

[009-094]gentle mind of [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]], who managed all the invitations and

[009-095]visits, her mother being otherwise occupied.

[009-096]CHAPTER VI.

[009-097]“Croyez-vous m’avoir humiliée pour m’avoir appris que la terre tourne

[009-098]autour du soleil? Je vous jure que je ne m’en estime pas moins.”

[009-099]—FONTENELLE: _Pluralité des Mondes_.

[009-100]That lofty criticism had caused Gwendolen a new sort of pain. She would

[009-101]not have chosen to confess how unfortunate she thought herself in not

[009-102]having had Miss Arrowpoint’s musical advantages, so as to be able to

[009-103]question Herr Klesmer’s taste with the confidence of thorough

[009-104]knowledge; still less, to admit even to herself that Miss Arrowpoint

[009-105]each time they met raised an unwonted feeling of jealousy in her: not

[009-106]in the least because she was an heiress, but because it was really

[009-107]provoking that a girl whose appearance you could not characterize

[009-108]except by saying that her figure was slight and of middle stature, her

[009-109]features small, her eyes tolerable, and her complexion sallow, had

[009-110]nevertheless a certain mental superiority which could not be explained

[009-111]away—an exasperating thoroughness in her musical accomplishment, a

[009-112]fastidious discrimination in her general tastes, which made it

[009-113]impossible to force her admiration and kept you in awe of her standard.

[009-114]This insignificant-looking young lady of four-and-twenty, whom any

[009-115]one’s eyes would have passed over negligently if she had not been Miss

[009-116]Arrowpoint, might be suspected of a secret opinion that Miss Harleth’s

[009-117]acquirements were rather of a common order, and such an opinion was not

[009-118]made agreeable to think of by being always veiled under a perfect

[009-119]kindness of manner.

[009-120]But Gwendolen did not like to dwell on facts which threw an unfavorable

[009-121]light on itself. The musical Magus who had so suddenly widened her

[009-122]horizon was not always on the scene; and his being constantly backward

[009-123]and forward between [[london|London]] and Quetcham soon began to be thought of as

[009-124]offering opportunities for converting him to a more admiring state of

[009-125]mind. Meanwhile, in the manifest pleasure her singing gave at

[009-126]Brackenshaw Castle, the Firs, and elsewhere, she recovered her

[009-127]equanimity, being disposed to think approval more trustworthy than

[009-128]objection, and not being one of the exceptional persons who have a

[009-129]parching thirst for a perfection undemanded by their neighbors. Perhaps

[009-130]it would have been rash to say then that she was at all exceptional

[009-131]inwardly, or that the unusual in her was more than her rare grace of

[009-132]movement and bearing, and a certain daring which gave piquancy to a

[009-133]very common egoistic ambition, such as exists under many clumsy

[009-134]exteriors and is taken no notice of. For I suppose that the set of the

[009-135]head does not really determine the hunger of the inner self for

[009-136]supremacy: it only makes a difference sometimes as to the way in which

[009-137]the supremacy is held attainable, and a little also to the degree in

[009-138]which it can be attained; especially when the hungry one is a girl,

[009-139]whose passion for doing what is remarkable has an ideal limit in

[009-140]consistency with the highest breeding and perfect freedom from the

[009-141]sordid need of income. Gwendolen was as inwardly rebellious against the

[009-142]restraints of family conditions, and as ready to look through

[009-143]obligations into her own fundamental want of feeling for them, as if

[009-144]she had been sustained by the boldest speculations; but she really had

[009-145]no such speculations, and would at once have marked herself off from

[009-146]any sort of theoretical or practically reforming women by satirizing

[009-147]them. She rejoiced to feel herself exceptional; but her horizon was

[009-148]that of the genteel romance where the heroine’s soul poured out in her

[009-149]journal is full of vague power, originality, and general rebellion,

[009-150]while her life moves strictly in the sphere of fashion; and if she

[009-151]wanders into a swamp, the pathos lies partly, so to speak, in her

[009-152]having on her satin shoes. Here is a restraint which nature and society

[009-153]have provided on the pursuit of striking adventure; so that a soul

[009-154]burning with a sense of what the universe is not, and ready to take all

[009-155]existence as fuel, is nevertheless held captive by the ordinary

[009-156]wirework of social forms and does nothing particular.

[009-157]This commonplace result was what Gwendolen found herself threatened

[009-158]with even in the novelty of the first winter at [[Offendene]]. What she was

[009-159]clear upon was, that she did not wish to lead the same sort of life as

[009-160]ordinary young ladies did; but what she was not clear upon was, how she

[009-161]should set about leading any other, and what were the particular acts

[009-162]which she would assert her freedom by doing. Offendene remained a good

[009-163]background, if anything would happen there; but on the whole the

[009-164]neighborhood was in fault.

[009-165]Beyond the effect of her beauty on a first presentation, there was not

[009-166]much excitement to be got out of her earliest invitations, and she came

[009-167]home after little sallies of satire and knowingness, such as had

[009-168]offended Mrs. Arrowpoint, to fill the intervening days with the most

[009-169]girlish devices. The strongest assertion she was able to make of her

[009-170]individual claims was to leave out Alice’s lessons (on the principle

[009-171]that Alice was more likely to excel in ignorance), and to employ her

[009-172]with Miss Merry, and the maid who was understood to wait on all the

[009-173]ladies, in helping to arrange various dramatic costumes which Gwendolen

[009-174]pleased herself with having in readiness for some future occasions of

[009-175]acting in charades or theatrical pieces, occasions which she meant to

[009-176]bring about by force of will or contrivance. She had never acted—only

[009-177]made a figure in _tableaux vivans_ at school; but she felt assured that

[009-178]she could act well, and having been once or twice to the Théâtre

[009-179]Français, and also heard her mamma speak of Rachel, her waking dreams

[009-180]and cogitations as to how she would manage her destiny sometimes turned

[009-181]on the question whether she would become an actress like Rachel, since

[009-182]she was more beautiful than that thin Jewess. Meanwhile the wet days

[009-183]before Christmas were passed pleasantly in the preparation of costumes,

[009-184]Greek, Oriental, and Composite, in which Gwendolen attitudinized and

[009-185]speechified before a domestic audience, including even the housekeeper,

[009-186]who was once pressed into it that she might swell the notes of

[009-187]applause; but having shown herself unworthy by observing that Miss

[009-188]Harleth looked far more like a queen in her own dress than in that

[009-189]baggy thing with her arms all bare, she was not invited a second time.
