---
id: ch006
label: "Section 6"
type: chapter
description: "“I shall like going out with you very much,” said Gwendolen, well"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[006-001]“I shall like going out with you very much,” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], well

[006-002]disposed toward this _naïve_ cousin. “Are you fond of riding?”

[006-003]“Yes, but we have only one Shetland pony amongst us. Papa says he can’t

[006-004]afford more, besides the carriage-horses and his own nag; he has so

[006-005]many expenses.”

[006-006]“I intend to have a horse and ride a great deal now,” said Gwendolen,

[006-007]in a tone of decision. “Is the society pleasant in this neighborhood?”

[006-008]“Papa says it is, very. There are the clergymen all about, you know;

[006-009]and the Quallons, and the Arrowpoints, and Lord Brackenshaw, and Sir

[006-010]Hugo Mallinger’s place, where there is nobody—that’s very nice,

[006-011]because we make picnics there—and two or three families at Wanchester:

[006-012]oh, and old Mrs. Vulcany, at Nuttingwood, and—”

[006-013]But Anna was relieved of this tax on her descriptive powers by the

[006-014]announcement of dinner, and Gwendolen’s question was soon indirectly

[006-015]answered by her uncle, who dwelt much on the advantages he had secured

[006-016]for them in getting a place like [[Offendene]]. Except the rent, it

[006-017]involved no more expense than an ordinary house at Wanchester would

[006-018]have done.

[006-019]“And it is always worth while to make a little sacrifice for a good

[006-020]style of house,” said [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]], in his easy, pleasantly confident

[006-021]tone, which made the world in general seem a very manageable place of

[006-022]residence: “especially where there is only a lady at the head. All the

[006-023]best people will call upon you; and you need give no expensive dinners.

[006-024]Of course, I have to spend a good deal in that way; it is a large item.

[006-025]But then I get my house for nothing. If I had to pay three hundred a

[006-026]year for my house I could not keep a table. My boys are too great a

[006-027]drain on me. You are better off than we are, in proportion; there is no

[006-028]great drain on you now, after your house and carriage.”

[006-029]“I assure you, Fanny, now that the children are growing up, I am

[006-030]obliged to cut and contrive,” said Mrs. Gascoigne. “I am not a good

[006-031]manager by nature, but Henry has taught me. He is wonderful for making

[006-032]the best of everything; he allows himself no extras, and gets his

[006-033]curates for nothing. It is rather hard that he has not been made a

[006-034]prebendary or something, as others have been, considering the friends

[006-035]he has made and the need there is for men of moderate opinions in all

[006-036]respects. If the Church is to keep its position, ability and character

[006-037]ought to tell.”

[006-038]“Oh, my dear Nancy, you forget the old story—thank Heaven, there are

[006-039]three hundred as good as I. And ultimately, we shall have no reason to

[006-040]complain, I am pretty sure. There could hardly be a more thorough

[006-041]friend than Lord Brackenshaw—your landlord, you know, Fanny. Lady

[006-042]Brackenshaw will call upon you. And I have spoken for Gwendolen to be a

[006-043]member of our Archery Club—the Brackenshaw Archery Club—the most

[006-044]select thing anywhere. That is, if she has no objection,” added Mr.

[006-045]Gascoigne, looking at Gwendolen with pleasant irony.

[006-046]“I should like it of all things,” said Gwendolen. “There is nothing I

[006-047]enjoy more than taking aim—and hitting,” she ended, with a pretty nod

[006-048]and smile.

[006-049]“Our Anna, poor child, is too short-sighted for archery. But I consider

[006-050]myself a first-rate shot, and you shall practice with me. I must make

[006-051]you an accomplished archer before our great meeting in July. In fact,

[006-052]as to neighborhood, you could hardly be better placed. There are the

[006-053]Arrowpoints—they are some of our best people. [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]] is a

[006-054]delightful girl—she has been presented at Court. They have a

[006-055]magnificent place—[[quetcham-hall|Quetcham Hall]]—worth seeing in point of art; and

[006-056]their parties, to which you are sure to be invited, are the best things

[006-057]of the sort we have. The archdeacon is intimate there, and they have

[006-058]always a good kind of people staying in the house. Mrs. Arrowpoint is

[006-059]peculiar, certainly; something of a caricature, in fact; but

[006-060]well-meaning. And Miss Arrowpoint is as nice as possible. It is not all

[006-061]young ladies who have mothers as handsome and graceful as yours and

[006-062]Anna’s.”

[006-063][[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] smiled faintly at this little compliment, but the husband

[006-064]and wife looked affectionately at each other, and Gwendolen thought,

[006-065]“My uncle and aunt, at least, are happy: they are not dull and dismal.”

[006-066]Altogether, she felt satisfied with her prospects at Offendene, as a

[006-067]great improvement on anything she had known. Even the cheap curates,

[006-068]she incidentally learned, were almost always young men of family, and

[006-069]Mr. Middleton, the actual curate, was said to be quite an acquisition:

[006-070]it was only a pity he was so soon to leave.

[006-071]But there was one point which she was so anxious to gain that she could

[006-072]not allow the evening to pass without taking her measures toward

[006-073]securing it. Her mamma, she knew, intended to submit entirely to her

[006-074]uncle’s judgment with regard to expenditure; and the submission was not

[006-075]merely prudential, for Mrs. Davilow, conscious that she had always been

[006-076]seen under a cloud as poor dear Fanny, who had made a sad blunder with

[006-077]her second marriage, felt a hearty satisfaction in being frankly and

[006-078]cordially identified with her sister’s family, and in having her

[006-079]affairs canvassed and managed with an authority which presupposed a

[006-080]genuine interest. Thus the question of a suitable saddle-horse, which

[006-081]had been sufficiently discussed with mamma, had to be referred to Mr.

[006-082]Gascoigne; and after Gwendolen had played on the piano, which had been

[006-083]provided from Wanchester, had sung to her hearers’ admiration, and had

[006-084]induced her uncle to join her in a duet—what more softening influence

[006-085]than this on any uncle who would have sung finely if his time had not

[006-086]been too much taken up by graver matters?—she seized the opportune

[006-087]moment for saying, “Mamma, you have not spoken to my uncle about my

[006-088]riding.”

[006-089]“Gwendolen desires above all things to have a horse to ride—a pretty,

[006-090]light, lady’s horse,” said Mrs. Davilow, looking at Mr. Gascoigne. “Do

[006-091]you think we can manage it?”

[006-092]Mr. Gascoigne projected his lower lip and lifted his handsome eyebrows

[006-093]sarcastically at Gwendolen, who had seated herself with much grace on

[006-094]the elbow of her mamma’s chair.

[006-095]“We could lend her the pony sometimes,” said Mrs. Gascoigne, watching

[006-096]her husband’s face, and feeling quite ready to disapprove if he did.

[006-097]“That might be inconveniencing others, aunt, and would be no pleasure

[006-098]to me. I cannot endure ponies,” said Gwendolen. “I would rather give up

[006-099]some other indulgence and have a horse.” (Was there ever a young lady

[006-100]or gentleman not ready to give up an unspecified indulgence for the

[006-101]sake of the favorite one specified?)

[006-102]“She rides so well. She has had lessons, and the riding-master said she

[006-103]had so good a seat and hand she might be trusted with any mount,” said

[006-104]Mrs. Davilow, who, even if she had not wished her darling to have the

[006-105]horse, would not have dared to be lukewarm in trying to get it for her.

[006-106]“There is the price of the horse—a good sixty with the best chance,

[006-107]and then his keep,” said Mr. Gascoigne, in a tone which, though

[006-108]demurring, betrayed the inward presence of something that favored the

[006-109]demand. “There are the carriage-horses—already a heavy item. And

[006-110]remember what you ladies cost in toilet now.”

[006-111]“I really wear nothing but two black dresses,” said Mrs. Davilow,

[006-112]hastily. “And the younger girls, of course, require no toilet at

[006-113]present. Besides, Gwendolen will save me so much by giving her sisters

[006-114]lessons.” Here Mrs. Davilow’s delicate cheek showed a rapid blush. “If

[006-115]it were not for that, I must really have a more expensive governess,

[006-116]and masters besides.”

[006-117]Gwendolen felt some anger with her mamma, but carefully concealed it.

[006-118]“That is good—that is decidedly good,” said Mr. Gascoigne, heartily,

[006-119]looking at his wife. And Gwendolen, who, it must be owned, was a deep

[006-120]young lady, suddenly moved away to the other end of the long

[006-121]drawing-room, and busied herself with arranging pieces of [[art|music]].

[006-122]“The dear child has had no indulgences, no pleasures,” said Mrs.

[006-123]Davilow, in a pleading undertone. “I feel the expense is rather

[006-124]imprudent in this first year of our settling. But she really needs the

[006-125]exercise—she needs cheering. And if you were to see her on horseback,

[006-126]it is something splendid.”

[006-127]“It is what we could not afford for Anna,” said Mrs. Gascoigne. “But

[006-128]she, dear child, would ride Lotta’s donkey and think it good enough.”

[006-129](Anna was absorbed in a game with Isabel, who had hunted out an old

[006-130]back-gammon-board, and had begged to sit up an extra hour.)

[006-131]“Certainly, a fine woman never looks better than on horseback,” said

[006-132]Mr. Gascoigne. “And Gwendolen has the figure for it. I don’t say the

[006-133]thing should not be considered.”

[006-134]“We might try it for a time, at all events. It can be given up, if

[006-135]necessary,” said Mrs. Davilow.

[006-136]“Well, I will consult Lord Brackenshaw’s head groom. He is my _fidus

[006-137]Achates_ in the horsey way.”

[006-138]“Thanks,” said Mrs. Davilow, much relieved. “You are very kind.”

[006-139]“That he always is,” said Mrs. Gascoigne. And later that night, when

[006-140]she and her husband were in private, she said,

[006-141]“I thought you were almost too indulgent about the horse for Gwendolen.

[006-142]She ought not to claim so much more than your own daughter would think

[006-143]of. Especially before we see how Fanny manages on her income. And you

[006-144]really have enough to do without taking all this trouble on yourself.”

[006-145]“My dear Nancy, one must look at things from every point of view. This

[006-146]girl is really worth some expense: you don’t often see her equal. She

[006-147]ought to make a first-rate marriage, and I should not be doing my duty

[006-148]if I spared my trouble in helping her forward. You know yourself she

[006-149]has been under a disadvantage with such a father-in-law, and a second

[006-150]family, keeping her always in the shade. I feel for the girl, And I

[006-151]should like your sister and her family now to have the benefit of your

[006-152]having married rather a better specimen of our kind than she did.”

[006-153]“Rather better! I should think so. However, it is for me to be grateful

[006-154]that you will take so much on your shoulders for the sake of my sister

[006-155]and her children. I am sure I would not grudge anything to poor Fanny.

[006-156]But there is one thing I have been thinking of, though you have never

[006-157]mentioned it.”

[006-158]“What is that?”

[006-159]“The boys. I hope they will not be falling in love with Gwendolen.”

[006-160]“Don’t presuppose anything of the kind, my dear, and there will be no

[006-161]danger. Rex will never be at home for long together, and Warham is

[006-162]going to India. It is the wiser plan to take it for granted that

[006-163]cousins will not fall in love. If you begin with precautions, the

[006-164]affair will come in spite of them. One must not undertake to act for

[006-165]Providence in these matters, which can no more be held under the hand

[006-166]than a brood of chickens. The boys will have nothing, and Gwendolen

[006-167]will have nothing. They can’t marry. At the worst there would only be a

[006-168]little crying, and you can’t save boys and girls from that.”

[006-169]Mrs. Gascoigne’s mind was satisfied: if anything did happen, there was

[006-170]the comfort of feeling that her husband would know what was to be done,

[006-171]and would have the energy to do it.

[006-172]CHAPTER IV.

[006-173]“_Gorgibus._— * * * Je te dis que le mariage est une chose sainte

[006-174]et sacrée: et que c’est faire en honnêtes gens, que de débuter par là.

[006-175]“_Madelon._—Mon Dieu! que si tout le monde vous ressemblait, un

[006-176]roman serait bientôt fini! La belle chose que ce serait, si d’abord

[006-177]Cyrus épousait Mandane, et qu’Aronce de plain-pied fût marié à Clélie!

[006-178]* * * Laissez-nous faire à loisir le tissu de notre roman, et n’en

[006-179]pressez pas tant la conclusion.”

[006-180]MOLIÈRE. _Les Précieuses Ridicules._
