---
id: ch008
label: "Section 8"
type: chapter
description: "“Who is that with Gascoigne?” said the archdeacon, neglecting a"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[008-001]“Who is that with Gascoigne?” said the archdeacon, neglecting a

[008-002]discussion of military manoeuvres on which, as a clergyman, he was

[008-003]naturally appealed to. And his son, on the other side of the room—a

[008-004]hopeful young scholar, who had already suggested some “not less elegant

[008-005]than ingenious,” emendations of Greek texts—said nearly at the same

[008-006]time, “By George! who is that girl with the awfully well-set head and

[008-007]jolly figure?”

[008-008]But to a mind of general benevolence, wishing everybody to look well,

[008-009]it was rather exasperating to see how [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] eclipsed others: how

[008-010]even the handsome Miss Lawe, explained to be the daughter of Lady Lawe,

[008-011]looked suddenly broad, heavy and inanimate; and how [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]],

[008-012]unfortunately also dressed in white, immediately resembled a

[008-013]_carte-de-visite_ in which one would fancy the skirt alone to have been

[008-014]charged for. Since Miss Arrowpoint was generally liked for the amiable

[008-015]unpretending way in which she wore her fortunes, and made a softening

[008-016]screen for the oddities of her mother, there seemed to be some

[008-017]unfitness in Gwendolen’s looking so much more like a person of social

[008-018]importance.

[008-019]“She is not really so handsome if you come to examine her features,”

[008-020]said Mrs. Arrowpoint, later in the evening, confidentially to Mrs.

[008-021]Vulcany. “It is a certain style she has, which produces a great effect

[008-022]at first, but afterward she is less agreeable.”

[008-023]In fact, Gwendolen, not intending it, but intending the contrary, had

[008-024]offended her hostess, who, though not a splenetic or vindictive woman,

[008-025]had her susceptibilities. Several conditions had met in the Lady of

[008-026][[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]] which to the reasoners in that neighborhood seemed to have an

[008-027]essential connection with each other. It was occasionally recalled that

[008-028]she had been the heiress of a fortune gained by some moist or dry

[008-029]business in the city, in order fully to account for her having a squat

[008-030]figure, a harsh parrot-like voice, and a systematically high

[008-031]head-dress; and since these points made her externally rather

[008-032]ridiculous, it appeared to many only natural that she should have what

[008-033]are called literary tendencies. A little comparison would have shown

[008-034]that all these points are to be found apart; daughters of aldermen

[008-035]being often well-grown and well-featured, pretty women having sometimes

[008-036]harsh or husky voices, and the production of feeble literature being

[008-037]found compatible with the most diverse forms of _physique_, masculine

[008-038]as well as feminine.

[008-039]Gwendolen, who had a keen sense of absurdity in others, but was kindly

[008-040]disposed toward any one who could make life agreeable to her, meant to

[008-041]win Mrs. Arrowpoint by giving her an interest and attention beyond what

[008-042]others were probably inclined to show. But self-confidence is apt to

[008-043]address itself to an imaginary dullness in others; as people who are

[008-044]well off speak in a cajoling tone to the poor, and those who are in the

[008-045]prime of life raise their voice and talk artificially to seniors,

[008-046]hastily conceiving them to be deaf and rather imbecile. Gwendolen, with

[008-047]all her cleverness and purpose to be agreeable, could not escape that

[008-048]form of stupidity: it followed in her mind, unreflectingly, that

[008-049]because Mrs. Arrowpoint was ridiculous she was also likely to be

[008-050]wanting in penetration, and she went through her little scenes without

[008-051]suspicion that the various shades of her behavior were all noted.

[008-052]“You are fond of books as well as of [[art|music]], riding, and archery, I

[008-053]hear,” Mrs. Arrowpoint said, going to her for a _tête-à-tête_ in the

[008-054]drawing-room after dinner. “Catherine will be very glad to have so

[008-055]sympathetic a neighbor.” This little speech might have seemed the most

[008-056]graceful politeness, spoken in a low, melodious tone; but with a twang,

[008-057]fatally loud, it gave Gwendolen a sense of exercising patronage when

[008-058]she answered, gracefully:

[008-059]“It is I who am fortunate. Miss Arrowpoint will teach me what good

[008-060]music is. I shall be entirely a learner. I hear that she is a thorough

[008-061]musician.”

[008-062]“Catherine has certainly had every advantage. We have a first-rate

[008-063]musician in the house now—[[Herr-Klesmer|Herr Klesmer]]; perhaps you know all his

[008-064]compositions. You must allow me to introduce him to you. You sing, I

[008-065]believe. Catherine plays three instruments, but she does not sing. I

[008-066]hope you will let us hear you. I understand you are an accomplished

[008-067]singer.”

[008-068]“Oh, no!—‘die Kraft ist schwach, allein die Lust ist gross,’ as

[008-069]Mephistopheles says.”

[008-070]“Ah, you are a student of Goethe. Young ladies are so advanced now. I

[008-071]suppose you have read everything.”

[008-072]“No, really. I shall be so glad if you will tell me what to read. I

[008-073]have been looking into all the books in the library at [[Offendene]], but

[008-074]there is nothing readable. The leaves all stick together and smell

[008-075]musty. I wish I could write books to amuse myself, as you can! How

[008-076]delightful it must be to write books after one’s own taste instead of

[008-077]reading other people’s! Home-made books must be so nice.”

[008-078]For an instant Mrs. Arrowpoint’s glance was a little sharper, but the

[008-079]perilous resemblance to satire in the last sentence took the hue of

[008-080]girlish simplicity when Gwendolen added,

[008-081]“I would give anything to write a book!”

[008-082]“And why should you not?” said Mrs. Arrowpoint, encouragingly. “You

[008-083]have but to begin as I did. Pen, ink, and paper are at everybody’s

[008-084]command. But I will send you all I have written with pleasure.”

[008-085]“Thanks. I shall be so glad to read your writings. Being acquainted

[008-086]with authors must give a peculiar understanding of their books: one

[008-087]would be able to tell then which parts were funny and which serious. I

[008-088]am sure I often laugh in the wrong place.” Here Gwendolen herself

[008-089]became aware of danger, and added quickly, “In [[shakespeare-in-deronda|Shakespeare]], you know,

[008-090]and other great writers that we can never see. But I always want to

[008-091]know more than there is in the books.”

[008-092]“If you are interested in any of my subjects I can lend you many extra

[008-093]sheets in manuscript,” said Mrs. Arrowpoint—while Gwendolen felt

[008-094]herself painfully in the position of the young lady who professed to

[008-095]like potted sprats.

[008-096]“These are things I dare say I shall publish eventually: several

[008-097]friends have urged me to do so, and one doesn’t like to be obstinate.

[008-098]My Tasso, for example—I could have made it twice the size.”

[008-099]“I dote on Tasso,” said Gwendolen.

[008-100]“Well, you shall have all my papers, if you like. So many, you know,

[008-101]have written about Tasso; but they are all wrong. As to the particular

[008-102]nature of his madness, and his feelings for [[Leonora-Halm-Eberstein|Leonora]], and the real cause

[008-103]of his imprisonment, and the character of Leonora, who, in my opinion,

[008-104]was a cold-hearted woman, else she would have married him in spite of

[008-105]her brother—they are all wrong. I differ from everybody.”

[008-106]“How very interesting!” said Gwendolen. “I like to differ from

[008-107]everybody. I think it is so stupid to agree. That is the worst of

[008-108]writing your opinions; you make people agree with you.” This speech

[008-109]renewed a slight suspicion in Mrs. Arrowpoint, and again her glance

[008-110]became for a moment examining. But Gwendolen looked very innocent, and

[008-111]continued with a docile air:

[008-112]“I know nothing of Tasso except the _Gerusalemme Liberata_, which we

[008-113]read and learned by heart at school.”

[008-114]“Ah, his life is more interesting than his poetry, I have constructed

[008-115]the early part of his life as a sort of romance. When one thinks of his

[008-116]father Bernardo, and so on, there is much that must be true.”

[008-117]“Imagination is often truer than fact,” said Gwendolen, decisively,

[008-118]though she could no more have explained these glib words than if they

[008-119]had been Coptic or Etruscan. “I shall be so glad to learn all about

[008-120]Tasso—and his madness especially. I suppose poets are always a little

[008-121]mad.”

[008-122]“To be sure—‘the poet’s eye in a fine frenzy rolling’; and somebody

[008-123]says of Marlowe,

[008-124]‘For that fine madness still he did maintain,

[008-125]Which always should possess the poet’s brain.’”

[008-126]“But it was not always found out, was it?” said Gwendolen innocently.

[008-127]“I suppose some of them rolled their eyes in private. Mad people are

[008-128]often very cunning.”

[008-129]Again a shade flitted over Mrs. Arrowpoint’s face; but the entrance of

[008-130]the gentlemen prevented any immediate mischief between her and this too

[008-131]quick young lady, who had over-acted her _naïveté_.

[008-132]“Ah, here comes Herr Klesmer,” said Mrs. Arrowpoint, rising; and

[008-133]presently bringing him to Gwendolen, she left them to a dialogue which

[008-134]was agreeable on both sides, Herr Klesmer being a felicitous

[008-135]combination of the German, the Sclave and the Semite, with grand

[008-136]features, brown hair floating in artistic fashion, and brown eyes in

[008-137]spectacles. His English had little foreignness except its fluency; and

[008-138]his alarming cleverness was made less formidable just then by a certain

[008-139]softening air of silliness which will sometimes befall even Genius in

[008-140]the desire of being agreeable to Beauty.

[008-141][[music|Music]] was soon begun. Miss Arrowpoint and Herr Klesmer played a

[008-142]four-handed piece on two pianos, which convinced the company in general

[008-143]that it was long, and Gwendolen in particular that the neutral,

[008-144]placid-faced Miss Arrowpoint had a mastery of the instrument which put

[008-145]her own execution out of question—though she was not discouraged as to

[008-146]her often-praised touch and style. After this every one became anxious

[008-147]to hear Gwendolen sing; especially Mr. Arrowpoint; as was natural in a

[008-148]host and a perfect gentleman, of whom no one had anything to say but

[008-149]that he married Miss Cuttler and imported the best cigars; and he led

[008-150]her to the piano with easy politeness. Herr Klesmer closed the

[008-151]instrument in readiness for her, and smiled with pleasure at her

[008-152]approach; then placed himself at a distance of a few feet so that he

[008-153]could see her as she sang.

[008-154]Gwendolen was not nervous; what she undertook to do she did without

[008-155]trembling, and singing was an enjoyment to her. Her voice was a

[008-156]moderately powerful soprano (some one had told her it was like Jenny

[008-157]Lind’s), her ear good, and she was able to keep in tune, so that her

[008-158]singing gave pleasure to ordinary hearers, and she had been used to

[008-159]unmingled applause. She had the rare advantage of looking almost

[008-160]prettier when she was singing than at other times, and that Herr

[008-161]Klesmer was in front of her seemed not disagreeable. Her song,

[008-162]determined on beforehand, was a favorite aria of Belini’s, in which she

[008-163]felt quite sure of herself.

[008-164]“Charming!” said Mr. Arrowpoint, who had remained near, and the word

[008-165]was echoed around without more insincerity than we recognize in a

[008-166]brotherly way as human. But Herr Klesmer stood like a statue—if a

[008-167]statue can be imagined in spectacles; at least, he was as mute as a

[008-168]statue. Gwendolen was pressed to keep her seat and double the general

[008-169]pleasure, and she did not wish to refuse; but before resolving to do

[008-170]so, she moved a little toward Herr Klesmer, saying with a look of

[008-171]smiling appeal, “It would be too cruel to a great musician. You cannot

[008-172]like to hear poor amateur singing.”

[008-173]“No, truly; but that makes nothing,” said Herr Klesmer, suddenly

[008-174]speaking in an odious German fashion with staccato endings, quite

[008-175]unobservable in him before, and apparently depending on a change of

[008-176]mood, as Irishmen resume their strongest brogue when they are fervid or

[008-177]quarrelsome. “That makes nothing. It is always acceptable to see you

[008-178]sing.”

[008-179]Was there ever so unexpected an assertion of superiority—at least

[008-180]before the late Teutonic conquest? Gwendolen colored deeply, but, with

[008-181]her usual presence of mind, did not show an ungraceful resentment by

[008-182]moving away immediately; and Miss Arrowpoint, who had been near enough

[008-183]to overhear (and also to observe that Herr Klesmer’s mode of looking at

[008-184]Gwendolen was more conspicuously admiring than was quite consistent

[008-185]with good taste), now with the utmost tact and kindness came close to

[008-186]her and said,

[008-187]“Imagine what I have to go through with this professor! He can hardly

[008-188]tolerate anything we English do in music. We can only put up with his

[008-189]severity, and make use of it to find out the worst that can be said of

[008-190]us. It is a little comfort to know that; and one can bear it when every

[008-191]one else is admiring.”
