---
id: ch014
label: "Section 14"
type: chapter
description: "Mr. Gascoigne was inwardly going through some self-rebuke for not being"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[014-001][[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]] was inwardly going through some self-rebuke for not being

[014-002]more wary, and was now really sorry for the lad; but every

[014-003]consideration was subordinate to that of using the wisest tactics in

[014-004]the case. He had quickly made up his mind and to answer the more

[014-005]quietly,

[014-006]“My dear boy, you are too young to be taking momentous, decisive steps

[014-007]of that sort. This is a fancy which you have got into your head during

[014-008]an idle week or two: you must set to work at something and dismiss it.

[014-009]There is every reason against it. An engagement at your age would be

[014-010]totally rash and unjustifiable; and moreover, alliances between first

[014-011]cousins are undesirable. Make up your mind to a brief disappointment.

[014-012]Life is full of them. We have all got to be broken in; and this is a

[014-013]mild beginning for you.”

[014-014]“No, not mild. I can’t bear it. I shall be good for nothing. I

[014-015]shouldn’t mind anything, if it were settled between us. I could do

[014-016]anything then,” said Rex, impetuously. “But it’s of no use to pretend

[014-017]that I will obey you. I can’t do it. If I said I would, I should be

[014-018]sure to break my word. I should see [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] again.”

[014-019]“Well, wait till to-morrow morning, that we may talk of the matter

[014-020]again—you will promise me that,” said Mr. Gascoigne, quietly; and Rex

[014-021]did not, could not refuse.

[014-022]The rector did not even tell his wife that he had any other reason for

[014-023]going to [[Offendene]] that evening than his desire to ascertain that

[014-024]Gwendolen had got home safely. He found her more than safe—elated. Mr.

[014-025]Quallon, who had won the brush, had delivered the trophy to her, and

[014-026]she had brought it before her, fastened on the saddle; more than that,

[014-027]Lord Brackenshaw had conducted her home, and had shown himself

[014-028]delighted with her spirited riding. All this was told at once to her

[014-029]uncle, that he might see how well justified she had been in acting

[014-030]against his advice; and the prudential rector did feel himself in a

[014-031]slight difficulty, for at that moment he was particularly sensible that

[014-032]it was his niece’s serious interest to be well regarded by the

[014-033]Brackenshaws, and their opinion as to her following the hounds really

[014-034]touched the essence of his objection. However, he was not obliged to

[014-035]say anything immediately, for [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] followed up Gwendolen’s

[014-036]brief triumphant phrases with,

[014-037]“Still, I do hope you will not do it again, Gwendolen. I should never

[014-038]have a moment’s quiet. Her father died by an accident, you know.”

[014-039]Here Mrs. Davilow had turned away from Gwendolen, and looked at Mr.

[014-040]Gascoigne.

[014-041]“Mamma, dear,” said Gwendolen, kissing her merrily, and passing over

[014-042]the question of the fears which Mrs. Davilow had meant to account for,

[014-043]“children don’t take after their parents in broken legs.”

[014-044]Not one word had yet been said about Rex. In fact there had been no

[014-045]anxiety about him at Offendene. Gwendolen had observed to her mamma,

[014-046]“Oh, he must have been left far behind, and gone home in despair,” and

[014-047]it could not be denied that this was fortunate so far as it made way

[014-048]for Lord Brackenshaw’s bringing her home. But now Mr. Gascoigne said,

[014-049]with some emphasis, looking at Gwendolen,

[014-050]“Well, the exploit has ended better for you than for Rex.”

[014-051]“Yes, I dare say he had to make a terrible round. You have not taught

[014-052]Primrose to take the fences, uncle,” said Gwendolen, without the

[014-053]faintest shade of alarm in her looks and tone.

[014-054]“Rex has had a fall,” said Mr. Gascoigne, curtly, throwing himself into

[014-055]an arm-chair resting his elbows and fitting his palms and fingers

[014-056]together, while he closed his lips and looked at Gwendolen, who said,

[014-057]“Oh, poor fellow! he is not hurt, I hope?” with a correct look of

[014-058]anxiety such as elated mortals try to super-induce when their pulses

[014-059]are all the while quick with triumph; and Mrs. Davilow, in the same

[014-060]moment, uttered a low “Good heavens! There!”

[014-061]Mr. Gascoigne went on: “He put his shoulder out, and got some bruises,

[014-062]I believe.” Here he made another little pause of observation; but

[014-063]Gwendolen, instead of any such symptoms as pallor and silence, had only

[014-064]deepened the compassionateness of her brow and eyes, and said again,

[014-065]“Oh, poor fellow! it is nothing serious, then?” and Mr. Gascoigne held

[014-066]his diagnosis complete. But he wished to make assurance doubly sure,

[014-067]and went on still with a purpose.

[014-068]“He got his arm set again rather oddly. Some blacksmith—not a

[014-069]parishioner of mine—was on the field—a loose fish, I suppose, but

[014-070]handy, and set the arm for him immediately. So after all, I believe, I

[014-071]and Primrose come off worst. The horse’s knees are cut to pieces. He

[014-072]came down in a hole, it seems, and pitched Rex over his head.”

[014-073]Gwendolen’s face had allowably become contented again, since Rex’s arm

[014-074]had been reset; and now, at the descriptive suggestions in the latter

[014-075]part of her uncle’s speech, her elated spirits made her features less

[014-076]unmanageable than usual; the smiles broke forth, and finally a

[014-077]descending scale of laughter.

[014-078]“You are a pretty young lady—to laugh at other people’s calamities,”

[014-079]said Mr. Gascoigne, with a milder sense of disapprobation than if he

[014-080]had not had counteracting reasons to be glad that Gwendolen showed no

[014-081]deep feeling on the occasion.

[014-082]“Pray forgive me, uncle. Now Rex is safe, it is so droll to fancy the

[014-083]figure he and Primrose would cut—in a lane all by themselves—only a

[014-084]blacksmith running up. It would make a capital caricature of ‘Following

[014-085]the Hounds.’”

[014-086]Gwendolen rather valued herself on her superior freedom in laughing

[014-087]where others might only see matter for seriousness. Indeed, the

[014-088]laughter became her person so well that her opinion of its gracefulness

[014-089]was often shared by others; and it even entered into her uncle’s course

[014-090]of thought at this moment, that it was no wonder a boy should be

[014-091]fascinated by this young witch—who, however, was more mischievous than

[014-092]could be desired.

[014-093]“How can you laugh at broken bones, child?” said Mrs. Davilow, still

[014-094]under her dominant anxiety. “I wish we had never allowed you to have

[014-095]the horse. You will see that we were wrong,” she added, looking with a

[014-096]grave nod at Mr. Gascoigne—“at least I was, to encourage her in asking

[014-097]for it.”

[014-098]“Yes, seriously, Gwendolen,” said Mr. Gascoigne, in a judicious tone of

[014-099]rational advice to a person understood to be altogether rational, “I

[014-100]strongly recommend you—I shall ask you to oblige me so far—not to

[014-101]repeat your adventure of to-day. Lord Brackenshaw is very kind, but I

[014-102]feel sure that he would concur with me in what I say. To be spoken of

[014-103]as ‘the young lady who hunts’ by way of exception, would give a tone to

[014-104]the language about you which I am sure you would not like. Depend upon

[014-105]it, his lordship would not choose that Lady Beatrice or Lady Maria

[014-106]should hunt in this part of the country, if they were old enough to do

[014-107]so. When you are married, it will be different: you may do whatever

[014-108]your husband sanctions. But if you intend to hunt, you must marry a man

[014-109]who can keep horses.”

[014-110]“I don’t know why I should do anything so horrible as to marry without

[014-111]_that_ prospect, at least,” said Gwendolen, pettishly. Her uncle’s

[014-112]speech had given her annoyance, which she could not show more directly;

[014-113]but she felt that she was committing herself, and after moving

[014-114]carelessly to another part of the room, went out.

[014-115]“She always speaks in that way about marriage,” said Mrs. Davilow; “but

[014-116]it will be different when she has seen the right person.”

[014-117]“Her heart has never been in the least touched, that you know of?” said

[014-118]Mr. Gascoigne.

[014-119]Mrs. Davilow shook her head silently. “It was only last night she said

[014-120]to me, ‘Mamma, I wonder how girls manage to fall in love. It is easy to

[014-121]make them do it in books. But men are too ridiculous.’”

[014-122]Mr. Gascoigne laughed a little, and made no further remark on the

[014-123]subject. The next morning at breakfast he said,

[014-124]“How are your bruises, Rex?”

[014-125]“Oh, not very mellow yet, sir; only beginning to turn a little.”

[014-126]“You don’t feel quite ready for a journey to Southampton?”

[014-127]“Not quite,” answered Rex, with his heart metaphorically in his mouth.

[014-128]“Well, you can wait till to-morrow, and go to say good-bye to them at

[014-129]Offendene.”

[014-130]Mrs. Gascoigne, who now knew the whole affair, looked steadily at her

[014-131]coffee lest she also should begin to cry, as Anna was doing already.

[014-132]Mr. Gascoigne felt that he was applying a sharp remedy to poor Rex’s

[014-133]acute attack, but he believed it to be in the end the kindest. To let

[014-134]him know the hopelessness of his love from Gwendolen’s own lips might

[014-135]be curative in more ways than one.

[014-136]“I can only be thankful that she doesn’t care about him,” said Mrs.

[014-137]Gascoigne, when she joined her husband in his study. “There are things

[014-138]in Gwendolen I cannot reconcile myself to. My Anna is worth two of her,

[014-139]with all her beauty and talent. It looks very ill in her that she will

[014-140]not help in the schools with Anna—not even in the Sunday-school. What

[014-141]you or I advise is of no consequence to her: and poor Fannie is

[014-142]completely under her thumb. But I know you think better of her,” Mrs.

[014-143]Gascoigne ended with a deferential hesitation.

[014-144]“Oh, my dear, there is no harm in the girl. It is only that she has a

[014-145]high spirit, and it will not do to hold the reins too tight. The point

[014-146]is, to get her well married. She has a little too much fire in her for

[014-147]her present life with her mother and sisters. It is natural and right

[014-148]that she should be married soon—not to a poor man, but one who can

[014-149]give her a fitting position.”

[014-150]Presently Rex, with his arm in a sling, was on his two miles’ walk to

[014-151]Offendene. He was rather puzzled by the unconditional permission to see

[014-152]Gwendolen, but his father’s real ground of action could not enter into

[014-153]his conjectures. If it had, he would first have thought it horribly

[014-154]cold-blooded, and then have disbelieved in his father’s conclusions.

[014-155]When he got to the house, everybody was there but Gwendolen. The four

[014-156]girls, hearing him speak in the hall, rushed out of the library, which

[014-157]was their school-room, and hung round him with compassionate inquiries

[014-158]about his arm. Mrs. Davilow wanted to know exactly what had happened,

[014-159]and where the blacksmith lived, that she might make him a present;

[014-160]while Miss Merry, who took a subdued and melancholy part in all family

[014-161]affairs, doubted whether it would not be giving too much encouragement

[014-162]to that kind of character. Rex had never found the family troublesome

[014-163]before, but just now he wished them all away and Gwendolen there, and

[014-164]he was too uneasy for good-natured feigning. When at last he had said,

[014-165]“Where is Gwendolen?” and Mrs. Davilow had told Alice to go and see if

[014-166]her sister were come down, adding, “I sent up her breakfast this

[014-167]morning. She needed a long rest.” Rex took the shortest way out of his

[014-168]endurance by saying, almost impatiently, “Aunt, I want to speak to

[014-169]Gwendolen—I want to see her alone.”

[014-170]“Very well, dear; go into the drawing-room. I will send her there,”

[014-171]said Mrs. Davilow, who had observed that he was fond of being with

[014-172]Gwendolen, as was natural, but had not thought of this as having any

[014-173]bearing on the realities of life: it seemed merely part of the

[014-174]Christmas holidays which were spinning themselves out.

[014-175]Rex for his part thought that the realities of life were all hanging on

[014-176]this interview. He had to walk up and down the drawing-room in

[014-177]expectation for nearly ten minutes—ample space for all imaginative

[014-178]fluctuations; yet, strange to say, he was unvaryingly occupied in

[014-179]thinking what and how much he could do, when Gwendolen had accepted

[014-180]him, to satisfy his father that the engagement was the most prudent

[014-181]thing in the world, since it inspired him with double energy for work.

[014-182]He was to be a lawyer, and what reason was there why he should not rise

[014-183]as high as Eldon did? He was forced to look at life in the light of his

[014-184]father’s mind.
