---
id: ch013
label: "Section 13"
type: chapter
description: "“You might do just as you liked if you married a man who loved you more"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[013-001]“You might do just as you liked if you married a man who loved you more

[013-002]dearly than anything else in the world,” said [[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]], who, poor youth, was

[013-003]moving in themes outside the curriculum in which he had promised to win

[013-004]distinction. “I know one who does.”

[013-005]“Don’t talk of Mr. Middleton, for heaven’s sake,” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]],

[013-006]hastily, a quick blush spreading over her face and neck; “that is

[013-007]Anna’s chant. I hear the hounds. Let us go on.”

[013-008]She put her chestnut to a canter, and Rex had no choice but to follow

[013-009]her. Still he felt encouraged. Gwendolen was perfectly aware that her

[013-010]cousin was in love with her; but she had no idea that the matter was of

[013-011]any consequence, having never had the slightest visitation of painful

[013-012]love herself. She wished the small romance of Rex’s devotion to fill up

[013-013]the time of his stay at [[pennicote-rectory|Pennicote]], and to avoid explanations which

[013-014]would bring it to an untimely end. Besides, she objected, with a sort

[013-015]of physical repulsion, to being directly made love to. With all her

[013-016]imaginative delight in being adored, there was a certain fierceness of

[013-017]maidenhood in her.

[013-018]But all other thoughts were soon lost for her in the excitement of the

[013-019]scene at the Three Barns. Several gentlemen of the hunt knew her, and

[013-020]she exchanged pleasant greetings. Rex could not get another word with

[013-021]her. The color, the stir of the field had taken possession of Gwendolen

[013-022]with a strength which was not due to habitual associations, for she had

[013-023]never yet ridden after the hounds—only said she should like to do it,

[013-024]and so drawn forth a prohibition; her mamma dreading the danger, and

[013-025]her uncle declaring that for his part he held that kind of violent

[013-026]exercise unseemly in a woman, and that whatever might be done in other

[013-027]parts of the country, no lady of good position followed the [[wessex|Wessex]]

[013-028]hunt: no one but Mrs. Gadsby, the yeomanry captain’s wife, who had been

[013-029]a kitchenmaid and still spoke like one. This last argument had some

[013-030]effect on Gwendolen, and had kept her halting between her desire to

[013-031]assert her freedom and her horror of being classed with Mrs. Gadsby.

[013-032]Some of the most unexceptionable women in the neighborhood occasionally

[013-033]went to see the hounds throw off; but it happened that none of them

[013-034]were present this morning to abstain from following, while Mrs. Gadsby,

[013-035]with her doubtful antecedents, grammatical and otherwise, was not

[013-036]visible to make following seem unbecoming. Thus Gwendolen felt no check

[013-037]on the animal stimulus that came from the stir and tongue of the

[013-038]hounds, the pawing of the horses, the varying voices of men, the

[013-039]movement hither and thither of vivid color on the background of green

[013-040]and gray stillness:—that utmost excitement of the coming chase which

[013-041]consists in feeling something like a combination of dog and horse, with

[013-042]the superadded thrill of social vanities and consciousness of

[013-043]centaur-power which belongs to humankind.

[013-044]Rex would have felt more of the same enjoyment if he could have kept

[013-045]nearer to Gwendolen, and not seen her constantly occupied with

[013-046]acquaintances, or looked at by would-be acquaintances, all on lively

[013-047]horses which veered about and swept the surrounding space as

[013-048]effectually as a revolving lever.

[013-049]“Glad to see you here this fine morning, Miss Harleth,” said Lord

[013-050]Brackenshaw, a middle-aged peer of aristocratic seediness in stained

[013-051]pink, with easy-going manners which would have made the threatened

[013-052]deluge seem of no consequence. “We shall have a first-rate run. A pity

[013-053]you didn’t go with us. Have you ever tried your little chestnut at a

[013-054]ditch? you wouldn’t be afraid, eh?”

[013-055]“Not the least in the world,” said Gwendolen. And that was true: she

[013-056]was never fearful in action and companionship. “I have often taken him

[013-057]at some rails and a ditch too, near—”

[013-058]“Ah, by Jove!” said his lordship, quietly, in notation that something

[013-059]was happening which must break off the dialogue: and as he reined off

[013-060]his horse, Rex was bringing his sober hackney up to Gwendolen’s side

[013-061]when—the hounds gave tongue, and the whole field was in motion as if

[013-062]the whirl of the earth were carrying it; Gwendolen along with

[013-063]everything else; no word of notice to Rex, who without a second thought

[013-064]followed too. Could he let Gwendolen go alone? under other

[013-065]circumstances he would have enjoyed the run, but he was just now

[013-066]perturbed by the check which had been put on the impetus to utter his

[013-067]love, and get utterance in return, an impetus which could not at once

[013-068]resolve itself into a totally different sort of chase, at least with

[013-069]the consciousness of being on his father’s gray nag, a good horse

[013-070]enough in his way, but of sober years and ecclesiastical habits.

[013-071]Gwendolen on her spirited little chestnut was up with the best, and

[013-072]felt as secure as an immortal goddess, having, if she had thought of

[013-073]risk, a core of confidence that no ill luck would happen to her. But

[013-074]she thought of no such thing, and certainly not of any risk there might

[013-075]be for her cousin. If she had thought of him, it would have struck her

[013-076]as a droll picture that he should be gradually falling behind, and

[013-077]looking round in search of gates: a fine lithe youth, whose heart must

[013-078]be panting with all the spirit of a beagle, stuck as if under a

[013-079]wizard’s spell on a stiff clerical hackney, would have made her laugh

[013-080]with a sense of fun much too strong for her to reflect on his

[013-081][[shame|mortification]]. But Gwendolen was apt to think rather of those who saw

[013-082]her than of those whom she could not see; and Rex was soon so far

[013-083]behind that if she had looked she would not have seen him. For I grieve

[013-084]to say that in the search for a gate, along a lane lately mended,

[013-085]Primrose fell, broke his knees, and undesignedly threw Rex over his

[013-086]head.

[013-087]Fortunately a blacksmith’s son who also followed the hounds under

[013-088]disadvantages, namely, on foot (a loose way of hunting which had struck

[013-089]some even frivolous minds as immoral), was naturally also in the rear,

[013-090]and happened to be within sight of Rex’s misfortune. He ran to give

[013-091]help which was greatly needed, for Rex was a great deal stunned, and

[013-092]the complete recovery of sensation came in the form of pain. Joel Dagge

[013-093]on this occasion showed himself that most useful of personages, whose

[013-094]knowledge is of a kind suited to the immediate occasion: he not only

[013-095]knew perfectly well what was the matter with the horse, how far they

[013-096]were both from the nearest public-house and from Pennicote Rectory, and

[013-097]could certify to Rex that his shoulder was only a bit out of joint, but

[013-098]also offered experienced surgical aid.

[013-099]“Lord, sir, let me shove it in again for you! I’s seen Nash, the

[013-100]bone-setter, do it, and done it myself for our little Sally twice over.

[013-101]It’s all one and the same, shoulders is. If you’ll trusten to me and

[013-102]tighten your mind up a bit, I’ll do it for you in no time.”

[013-103]“Come then, old fellow,” said Rex, who could tighten his mind better

[013-104]than his seat in the saddle. And Joel managed the operation, though not

[013-105]without considerable expense of pain to his patient, who turned so

[013-106]pitiably pale while tightening his mind, that Joel remarked, “Ah, sir,

[013-107]you aren’t used to it, that’s how it is. I’s see lots and lots o’

[013-108]joints out. I see a man with his eye pushed out once—that was a rum go

[013-109]as ever I see. You can’t have a bit o’ fun wi’out such sort o’ things.

[013-110]But it went in again. I’s swallowed three teeth mysen, as sure as I’m

[013-111]alive. Now, sirrey” (this was addressed to Primrose), “come alonk—you

[013-112]musn’t make believe as you can’t.”

[013-113]Joel being clearly a low character, it is, happily, not necessary to

[013-114]say more of him to the refined reader, than that he helped Rex to get

[013-115]home with as little delay as possible. There was no alternative but to

[013-116]get home, though all the while he was in anxiety about Gwendolen, and

[013-117]more miserable in the thought that she, too, might have had an

[013-118]accident, than in the pain of his own bruises and the annoyance he was

[013-119]about to cause his father. He comforted himself about her by reflecting

[013-120]that every one would be anxious to take care of her, and that some

[013-121]acquaintance would be sure to conduct her home.

[013-122]Mr. Gascoigne was already at home, and was writing letters in his

[013-123]study, when he was interrupted by seeing poor Rex come in with a face

[013-124]which was not the less handsome and ingratiating for being pale and a

[013-125]little distressed. He was secretly the favorite son, and a young

[013-126]portrait of the father; who, however, never treated him with any

[013-127]partiality—rather, with an extra rigor. Mr. Gascoigne having inquired

[013-128]of Anna, knew that Rex had gone with Gwendolen to the meet at the Three

[013-129]Barns.

[013-130]“What is the matter?” he said hastily, not laying down his pen.

[013-131]“I’m very sorry, sir; Primrose has fallen down and broken his knees.”

[013-132]“Where have you been with him?” said Mr. Gascoigne, with a touch of

[013-133]severity. He rarely gave way to temper.

[013-134]“To the Three Barns to see the hounds throw off.”

[013-135]“And you were fool enough to follow?”

[013-136]“Yes, sir. I didn’t go at any fences, but the horse got his leg into a

[013-137]hole.”

[013-138]“And you got hurt yourself, I hope, eh!”

[013-139]“I got my shoulder put out, but a young blacksmith put it in again for

[013-140]me. I’m just a little battered, that’s all.”

[013-141]“Well, sit down.”

[013-142]“I’m very sorry about the horse, sir; I knew it would be a vexation to

[013-143]you.”

[013-144]“And what has become of Gwendolen?” said Mr. Gascoigne, abruptly. Rex,

[013-145]who did not imagine that his father had made any inquiries about him,

[013-146]answered at first with a blush, which was the more remarkable for his

[013-147]previous paleness. Then he said, nervously,

[013-148]“I am anxious to know—I should like to go or send at once to

[013-149][[Offendene]]—but she rides so well, and I think she would keep up—there

[013-150]would most likely be many round her.”

[013-151]“I suppose it was she who led you on, eh?” said Mr. Gascoigne, laying

[013-152]down his pen, leaning back in his chair, and looking at Rex with more

[013-153]marked examination.

[013-154]“It was natural for her to want to go: she didn’t intend it

[013-155]beforehand—she was led away by the spirit of the thing. And, of

[013-156]course, I went when she went.”

[013-157]Mr. Gascoigne left a brief interval of silence, and then said, with

[013-158]quiet irony,—“But now you observe, young gentleman, that you are not

[013-159]furnished with a horse which will enable you to play the squire to your

[013-160]cousin. You must give up that amusement. You have spoiled my nag for

[013-161]me, and that is enough mischief for one vacation. I shall beg you to

[013-162]get ready to start for Southampton to-morrow and join Stilfox, till you

[013-163]go up to Oxford with him. That will be good for your bruises as well as

[013-164]your studies.”

[013-165]Poor Rex felt his heart swelling and comporting itself as if it had

[013-166]been no better than a girl’s.

[013-167]“I hope you will not insist on my going immediately, sir.”

[013-168]“Do you feel too ill?”

[013-169]“No, not that—but—” here Rex bit his lips and felt the tears

[013-170]starting, to his great vexation; then he rallied and tried to say more

[013-171]firmly, “I want to go to Offendene, but I can go this evening.”

[013-172]“I am going there myself. I can bring word about Gwendolen, if that is

[013-173]what you want.”

[013-174]Rex broke down. He thought he discerned an intention fatal to his

[013-175]happiness, nay, his life. He was accustomed to believe in his father’s

[013-176]penetration, and to expect firmness. “Father, I can’t go away without

[013-177]telling her that I love her, and knowing that she loves me.”
