---
id: ch018
label: "Section 18"
type: chapter
description: "The irony of this speech was of the doubtful sort that has some genuine"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[018-001]The irony of this speech was of the doubtful sort that has some genuine

[018-002]belief mixed up with it. Poor [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] felt uncomfortable under it.

[018-003]Her own meanings being usually literal and in intention innocent; and

[018-004]she said with a distressed brow:

[018-005]“Don’t talk in that way, child, for heaven’s sake! you do read such

[018-006]books—they give you such ideas of everything. I declare when your aunt

[018-007]and I were your age we knew nothing about wickedness. I think it was

[018-008]better so.”

[018-009]“Why did you not bring me up in that way, mamma?” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]. But

[018-010]immediately perceiving in the crushed look and rising sob that she had

[018-011]given a deep wound, she tossed down her hat and knelt at her mother’s

[018-012]feet crying,

[018-013]“Mamma, mamma! I was only speaking in fun. I meant nothing.”

[018-014]“How could I, Gwendolen?” said poor Mrs. Davilow, unable to hear the

[018-015]retraction, and sobbing violently while she made the effort to speak.

[018-016]“Your will was always too strong for me—if everything else had been

[018-017]different.”

[018-018]This disjoined logic was intelligible enough to the daughter. “Dear

[018-019]mamma, I don’t find fault with you—I love you,” said Gwendolen, really

[018-020]compunctious. “How can you help what I am? Besides, I am very charming.

[018-021]Come, now.” Here Gwendolen with her handkerchief gently rubbed away her

[018-022]mother’s tears. “Really—I am contented with myself. I like myself

[018-023]better than I should have liked my aunt and you. How dreadfully dull

[018-024]you must have been!”

[018-025]Such tender cajolery served to quiet the mother, as it had often done

[018-026]before after like collisions. Not that the collisions had often been

[018-027]repeated at the same point; for in the memory of both they left an

[018-028]association of dread with the particular topics which had occasioned

[018-029]them: Gwendolen dreaded the unpleasant sense of compunction toward her

[018-030]mother, which was the nearest approach to self-condemnation and

[018-031]self-distrust that she had known; and Mrs. Davilow’s timid maternal

[018-032]conscience dreaded whatever had brought on the slightest hint of

[018-033]reproach. Hence, after this little scene, the two concurred in

[018-034]excluding [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]] from their conversation.

[018-035]When [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]] once or twice referred to him, Mrs. Davilow feared

[018-036]least Gwendolen should betray some of her alarming keen-sightedness

[018-037]about what was probably in her uncle’s mind; but the fear was not

[018-038]justified. Gwendolen knew certain differences in the characters with

[018-039]which she was concerned as birds know climate and weather; and for the

[018-040]very reason that she was determined to evade her uncle’s control, she

[018-041]was determined not to clash with him. The good understanding between

[018-042]them was much fostered by their enjoyment of archery together: Mr.

[018-043]Gascoigne, as one of the best bowmen in [[wessex|Wessex]], was gratified to find

[018-044]the elements of like skill in his niece; and Gwendolen was the more

[018-045]careful not to lose the shelter of his fatherly indulgence, because

[018-046]since the trouble with Rex both Mrs. Gascoigne and Anna had been unable

[018-047]to hide what she felt to be a very unreasonable [[exile|alienation]] from her.

[018-048]Toward Anna she took some pains to behave with a regretful

[018-049]affectionateness; but neither of them dared to mention Rex’s name, and

[018-050]Anna, to whom the thought of him was part of the air she breathed, was

[018-051]ill at ease with the lively cousin who had ruined his happiness. She

[018-052]tried dutifully to repress any sign of her changed feeling; but who in

[018-053]pain can imitate the glance and hand-touch of pleasure.

[018-054]This unfair resentment had rather a hardening effect on Gwendolen, and

[018-055]threw her into a more defiant temper. Her uncle too might be offended

[018-056]if she refused the next person who fell in love with her; and one day

[018-057]when that idea was in her mind she said,

[018-058]“Mamma, I see now why girls are glad to be married—to escape being

[018-059]expected to please everybody but themselves.”

[018-060]Happily, Mr. Middleton was gone without having made any avowal; and

[018-061]notwithstanding the admiration for the handsome Miss Harleth, extending

[018-062]perhaps over thirty square miles in a part of Wessex well studded with

[018-063]families whose numbers included several disengaged young men, each glad

[018-064]to seat himself by the lively girl with whom it was so easy to get on

[018-065]in conversation,—notwithstanding these grounds for arguing that

[018-066]Gwendolen was likely to have other suitors more explicit than the

[018-067]cautious curate, the fact was not so.

[018-068]Care has been taken not only that the trees should not sweep the stars

[018-069]down, but also that every man who admires a fair girl should not be

[018-070]enamored of her, and even that every man who is enamored should not

[018-071]necessarily declare himself. There are various refined shapes in which

[018-072]the price of corn, known to be potent cause in their relation, might,

[018-073]if inquired into, show why a young lady, perfect in person,

[018-074]accomplishments, and costume, has not the trouble of rejecting many

[018-075]offers; and nature’s order is certainly benignant in not obliging us

[018-076]one and all to be desperately in love with the most admirable mortal we

[018-077]have ever seen. Gwendolen, we know, was far from holding that supremacy

[018-078]in the minds of all observers. Besides, it was but a poor eight months

[018-079]since she had come to [[Offendene]], and some inclinations become manifest

[018-080]slowly, like the sunward creeping of plants.

[018-081]In face of this fact that not one of the eligible young men already in

[018-082]the neighborhood had made Gwendolen an offer, why should Mr. Grandcourt

[018-083]be thought of as likely to do what they had left undone?

[018-084]Perhaps because he was thought of as still more eligible; since a great

[018-085]deal of what passes for likelihood in the world is simply the reflex of

[018-086]a wish. Mr. and Mrs. Arrowpoint, for example, having no anxiety that

[018-087]Miss Harleth should make a brilliant marriage, had quite a different

[018-088]likelihood in their minds.

[018-089]CHAPTER X.

[018-090]_1st Gent._ What woman should be? Sir, consult the taste

[018-091]Of marriageable men. This planet’s store

[018-092]In iron, cotton, wool, or chemicals—

[018-093]All matter rendered to our plastic skill,

[018-094]Is wrought in shapes responsive to demand;

[018-095]The market’s pulse makes index high or low,

[018-096]By rule sublime. Our daughters must be wives,

[018-097]And to the wives must be what men will choose;

[018-098]Men’s taste is woman’s test. You mark the phrase?

[018-099]’Tis good, I think?—the sense well-winged and poised

[018-100]With t’s and s’s.

[018-101]_2nd Gent._ Nay, but turn it round;

[018-102]Give us the test of taste. A fine _menu_—

[018-103]Is it to-day what Roman epicures

[018-104]Insisted that a gentleman must eat

[018-105]To earn the dignity of dining well?

[018-106]Brackenshaw Park, where the archery meeting was held, looked out from

[018-107]its gentle heights far over the neighboring valley to the outlying

[018-108]eastern downs and the broad, slow rise of cultivated country, hanging

[018-109]like a vast curtain toward the west. The castle which stood on the

[018-110]highest platform of the clustered hills, was built of rough-hewn

[018-111]limestone, full of lights and shadows made by the dark dust of lichens

[018-112]and the washings of the rain. Masses of beech and fir sheltered it on

[018-113]the north, and spread down here and there along the green slopes like

[018-114]flocks seeking the water which gleamed below. The archery-ground was a

[018-115]carefully-kept enclosure on a bit of table-land at the farthest end of

[018-116]the park, protected toward the south-west by tall elms and a thick

[018-117]screen of hollies, which kept the gravel walk and the bit of newly-mown

[018-118]turf where the targets were placed in agreeable afternoon shade. The

[018-119]Archery Hall with an arcade in front showed like a white temple against

[018-120]the greenery on the north side.

[018-121]What could make a better background for the flower-groups of ladies,

[018-122]moving and bowing and turning their necks as it would become the

[018-123]leisurely lilies to do if they took to locomotion. The sounds too were

[018-124]very pleasant to hear, even when the military band from Wanchester

[018-125]ceased to play: musical laughs in all the registers and a harmony of

[018-126]happy, friendly speeches, now rising toward mild excitement, now

[018-127]sinking to an agreeable murmur.

[018-128]No open-air amusement could be much freer from those noisy, crowding

[018-129]conditions which spoil most modern pleasures; no Archery Meeting could

[018-130]be more select, the number of friends accompanying the members being

[018-131]restricted by an award of tickets, so as to keep the maximum within the

[018-132]limits of convenience for the dinner and ball to be held in the castle.

[018-133]Within the enclosure no plebeian spectators were admitted except Lord

[018-134]Brackenshaw’s tenants and their families, and of these it was chiefly

[018-135]the feminine members who used the privilege, bringing their little boys

[018-136]and girls or younger brothers and sisters. The males among them

[018-137]relieved the insipidity of the entertainment by imaginative betting, in

[018-138]which the stake was “anything you like,” on their favorite archers; but

[018-139]the young maidens, having a different principle of discrimination, were

[018-140]considering which of those sweetly-dressed ladies they would choose to

[018-141]be, if the choice were allowed them. Probably the form these rural

[018-142]souls would most have striven for as a tabernacle, was some other than

[018-143]Gwendolen’s—one with more pink in her cheeks and hair of the most

[018-144]fashionable yellow; but among the male judges in the ranks immediately

[018-145]surrounding her there was unusual unanimity in pronouncing her the

[018-146]finest girl present.

[018-147]No wonder she enjoyed her existence on that July day. Pre-eminence is

[018-148]sweet to those who love it, even under mediocre circumstances. Perhaps

[018-149]it was not quite mythical that a slave has been proud to be bought

[018-150]first; and probably a barn-door fowl on sale, though he may not have

[018-151]understood himself to be called the best of a bad lot, may have a

[018-152]self-informed consciousness of his relative importance, and strut

[018-153]consoled. But for complete enjoyment the outward and the inward must

[018-154]concur. And that concurrence was happening to Gwendolen.

[018-155]Who can deny that bows and arrows are among the prettiest weapons in

[018-156]the world for feminine forms to play with? They prompt attitudes full

[018-157]of grace and power, where that fine concentration of energy seen in all

[018-158]markmanship, is freed from associations of bloodshed. The time-honored

[018-159]British resource of “killing something” is no longer carried on with

[018-160]bow and quiver; bands defending their passes against an invading nation

[018-161]fight under another sort of shade than a cloud of arrows; and poisoned

[018-162]darts are harmless survivals either in rhetoric or in regions

[018-163]comfortably remote. Archery has no ugly smell of brimstone; breaks

[018-164]nobody’s shins, breeds no athletic monsters; its only danger is that of

[018-165]failing, which for generous blood is enough to mould skilful action.

[018-166]And among the Brackenshaw archers the prizes were all of the nobler

[018-167]symbolic kind; not properly to be carried off in a parcel, degrading

[018-168]honor into gain; but the gold arrow and the silver, the gold star and

[018-169]the silver, to be worn for a long time in sign of achievement and then

[018-170]transferred to the next who did excellently. These signs of

[018-171]pre-eminence had the virtue of wreaths without their inconveniences,

[018-172]which might have produced a melancholy effect in the heat of the

[018-173]ball-room. Altogether the Brackenshaw Archery Club was an institution

[018-174]framed with good taste, so as not to have by necessity any ridiculous

[018-175]incidents.

[018-176]And to-day all incalculable elements were in its favor. There was mild

[018-177]warmth, and no wind to disturb either hair or drapery or the course of

[018-178]the arrow; all skillful preparation had fair play, and when there was a

[018-179]general march to extract the arrows, the promenade of joyous young

[018-180]creatures in light speech and laughter, the graceful movement in common

[018-181]toward a common object, was a show worth looking at. Here Gwendolen

[018-182]seemed a Calypso among her nymphs. It was in her attitudes and

[018-183]movements that every one was obliged to admit her surpassing charm.

[018-184]“That girl is like a high-mettled racer,” said Lord Brackenshaw to

[018-185]young Clintock, one of the invited spectators.

[018-186]“First chop! tremendously pretty too,” said the elegant Grecian, who

[018-187]had been paying her assiduous attention; “I never saw her look better.”
