---
id: ch017
label: "Section 17"
type: chapter
description: "It is the uneven allotment of nature that the male bird alone has the"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[017-001]It is the uneven allotment of nature that the male bird alone has the

[017-002]tuft, but we have not yet followed the advice of hasty philosophers who

[017-003]would have us copy nature entirely in these matters; and if Mr.

[017-004]Mallinger [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] became a baronet or a peer, his wife would share

[017-005]the title—which in addition to his actual fortune was certainly a

[017-006]reason why that wife, being at present unchosen, should be thought of

[017-007]by more than one person with a sympathetic interest as a woman sure to

[017-008]be well provided for.

[017-009]Some readers of this history will doubtless regard it as incredible

[017-010]that people should construct matrimonial prospects on the mere report

[017-011]that a bachelor of good fortune and possibilities was coming within

[017-012]reach, and will reject the statement as a mere outflow of gall: they

[017-013]will aver that neither they nor their first cousins have minds so

[017-014]unbridled; and that in fact this is not human nature, which would know

[017-015]that such speculations might turn out to be fallacious, and would

[017-016]therefore not entertain them. But, let it be observed, nothing is here

[017-017]narrated of human nature generally: the history in its present stage

[017-018]concerns only a few people in a corner of [[wessex|Wessex]]—whose reputation,

[017-019]however, was unimpeached, and who, I am in the proud position of being

[017-020]able to state, were all on visiting terms with persons of rank.

[017-021]There were the Arrowpoints, for example, in their beautiful place at

[017-022][[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]]: no one could attribute sordid views in relation to their

[017-023]daughter’s marriage to parents who could leave her at least half a

[017-024]million; but having affectionate anxieties about their [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Catherine]]’s

[017-025]position (she having resolutely refused Lord Slogan, an unexceptionable

[017-026]Irish peer, whose estate wanted nothing but drainage and population),

[017-027]they wondered, perhaps from something more than a charitable impulse,

[017-028]whether Mr. Grandcourt was good-looking, of sound constitution,

[017-029]virtuous, or at least reformed, and if liberal-conservative, not too

[017-030]liberal-conservative; and without wishing anybody to die, thought his

[017-031]succession to the title an event to be desired.

[017-032]If the Arrowpoints had such ruminations, it is the less surprising that

[017-033]they were stimulated in [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]], who for being a clergyman was

[017-034]not the less subject to the anxieties of a parent and guardian; and we

[017-035]have seen how both he and Mrs. Gascoigne might by this time have come

[017-036]to feel that he was overcharged with the management of young creatures

[017-037]who were hardly to be held in with bit or bridle, or any sort of

[017-038]metaphor that would stand for judicious advice.

[017-039]Naturally, people did not tell each other all they felt and thought

[017-040]about young Grandcourt’s advent: on no subject is this openness found

[017-041]prudently practicable—not even on the generation of acids, or the

[017-042]destination of the fixed stars: for either your contemporary with a

[017-043]mind turned toward the same subjects may find your ideas ingenious and

[017-044]forestall you in applying them, or he may have other views on acids and

[017-045]fixed stars, and think ill of you in consequence. Mr. Gascoigne did not

[017-046]ask Mr. Arrowpoint if he had any trustworthy source of information

[017-047]about Grandcourt considered as a husband for a charming girl; nor did

[017-048]Mrs. Arrowpoint observe to [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] that if the possible peer

[017-049]sought a wife in the neighborhood of [[diplow-hall|Diplow]], the only reasonable

[017-050]expectation was that he would offer his hand to Catherine, who,

[017-051]however, would not accept him unless he were in all respects fitted to

[017-052]secure her happiness. Indeed, even to his wife the rector was silent as

[017-053]to the contemplation of any matrimonial result, from the probability

[017-054]that Mr. Grandcourt would see [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] at the next Archery Meeting;

[017-055]though Mrs. Gascoigne’s mind was very likely still more active in the

[017-056]same direction. She had said interjectionally to her sister, “It would

[017-057]be a mercy, Fanny, if that girl were well married!” to which Mrs.

[017-058]Davilow discerning some criticism of her darling in the fervor of that

[017-059]wish, had not chosen to make any audible reply, though she had said

[017-060]inwardly, “You will not get her to marry for your pleasure”; the mild

[017-061]mother becoming rather saucy when she identified herself with her

[017-062]daughter.

[017-063]To her husband Mrs. Gascoigne said, “I hear Mr. Grandcourt has got two

[017-064]places of his own, but he comes to Diplow for the hunting. It is to be

[017-065]hoped he will set a good example in the neighborhood. Have you heard

[017-066]what sort of a young man he is, Henry?”

[017-067]Mr. Gascoigne had not heard; at least, if his male acquaintances had

[017-068]gossiped in his hearing, he was not disposed to repeat their gossip, or

[017-069]to give it any emphasis in his own mind. He held it futile, even if it

[017-070]had been becoming, to show any curiosity as to the past of a young man

[017-071]whose birth, wealth, and consequent leisure made many habits venial

[017-072]which under other circumstances would have been inexcusable. Whatever

[017-073]Grandcourt had done, he had not ruined himself; and it is well-known

[017-074]that in gambling, for example, whether of the business or holiday sort,

[017-075]a man who has the strength of mind to leave off when he has only ruined

[017-076]others, is a reformed character. This is an illustration merely: Mr.

[017-077]Gascoigne had not heard that Grandcourt had been a gambler; and we can

[017-078]hardly pronounce him singular in feeling that a landed proprietor with

[017-079]a mixture of noble blood in his veins was not to be an object of

[017-080]suspicious inquiry like a reformed character who offers himself as your

[017-081]butler or footman. Reformation, where a man can afford to do without

[017-082]it, can hardly be other than genuine. Moreover, it was not certain on

[017-083]any other showing hitherto, that Mr. Grandcourt had needed reformation

[017-084]more than other young men in the ripe youth of five-and-thirty; and, at

[017-085]any rate, the significance of what he had been must be determined by

[017-086]what he actually was.

[017-087]Mrs. Davilow, too, although she would not respond to her sister’s

[017-088]pregnant remark, could not be inwardly indifferent to an advent that

[017-089]might promise a brilliant lot for Gwendolen. A little speculation on

[017-090]“what may be” comes naturally, without encouragement—comes inevitably

[017-091]in the form of images, when unknown persons are mentioned; and Mr.

[017-092]Grandcourt’s name raised in Mrs. Davilow’s mind first of all the

[017-093]picture of a handsome, accomplished, excellent young man whom she would

[017-094]be satisfied with as a husband for her daughter; but then came the

[017-095]further speculation—would Gwendolen be satisfied with him? There was

[017-096]no knowing what would meet that girl’s taste or touch her

[017-097]affections—it might be something else than excellence; and thus the

[017-098]image of the perfect suitor gave way before a fluctuating combination

[017-099]of qualities that might be imagined to win Gwendolen’s heart. In the

[017-100]difficulty of arriving at the particular combination which would insure

[017-101]that result, the mother even said to herself, “It would not signify

[017-102]about her being in love, if she would only accept the right person.”

[017-103]For whatever marriage had been for herself, how could she the less

[017-104]desire it for her daughter? The difference her own misfortunes made

[017-105]was, that she never dared to dwell much to Gwendolen on the

[017-106]desirableness of marriage, dreading an answer something like that of

[017-107]the future Madame Roland, when her gentle mother urging the acceptance

[017-108]of a suitor, said, “Tu seras heureuse, ma chère.” “Oui, maman, comme

[017-109]toi.”

[017-110]In relation to the problematic Mr. Grandcourt least of all would Mrs.

[017-111]Davilow have willingly let fall a hint of the aerial castle-building

[017-112]which she had the good taste to be ashamed of; for such a hint was

[017-113]likely enough to give an adverse poise to Gwendolen’s own thought, and

[017-114]make her detest the desirable husband beforehand. Since that scene

[017-115]after poor Rex’s farewell visit, the mother had felt a new sense of

[017-116]peril in touching the mystery of her child’s feeling, and in rashly

[017-117]determining what was her welfare: only she could think of welfare in no

[017-118]other shape than marriage.

[017-119]The discussion of the dress that Gwendolen was to wear at the Archery

[017-120]Meeting was a relevant topic, however; and when it had been decided

[017-121]that as a touch of color on her white cashmere, nothing, for her

[017-122]complexion, was comparable to pale green—a feather which she was

[017-123]trying in her hat before the looking-glass having settled the

[017-124]question—Mrs. Davilow felt her ears tingle when Gwendolen, suddenly

[017-125]throwing herself into the attitude of drawing her bow, said with a look

[017-126]of comic enjoyment,

[017-127]“How I pity all the other girls at the Archery Meeting—all thinking of

[017-128]Mr. Grandcourt! And they have not a shadow of a chance.”

[017-129]Mrs. Davilow had not the presence of mind to answer immediately, and

[017-130]Gwendolen turned round quickly toward her, saying, wickedly,

[017-131]“Now you know they have not, mamma. You and my uncle and aunt—you all

[017-132]intend him to fall in love with me.”

[017-133]Mrs. Davilow, piqued into a little stratagem, said, “Oh, my dear, that

[017-134]is not so certain. Miss Arrowpoint has charms which you have not.”

[017-135]“I know, but they demand thought. My arrow will pierce him before he

[017-136]has time for thought. He will declare himself my slave—I shall send

[017-137]him round the world to bring me back the wedding ring of a happy

[017-138]woman—in the meantime all the men who are between him and the title

[017-139]will die of different diseases—he will come back Lord Grandcourt—but

[017-140]without the ring—and fall at my feet. I shall laugh at him—he will

[017-141]rise in resentment—I shall laugh more—he will call for his steed and

[017-142]ride to Quetcham, where he will find Miss Arrowpoint just married to a

[017-143]needy musician, Mrs. Arrowpoint tearing her cap off, and Mr. Arrowpoint

[017-144]standing by. Exit Lord Grandcourt, who returns to Diplow, and, like M.

[017-145]Jabot, _change de linge_.”

[017-146]Was ever any young witch like this? You thought of hiding things from

[017-147]her—sat upon your secret and looked innocent, and all the while she

[017-148]knew by the corner of your eye that it was exactly five pounds ten you

[017-149]were sitting on! As well turn the key to keep out the damp! It was

[017-150]probable that by dint of divination she already knew more than any one

[017-151]else did of Mr. Grandcourt. That idea in Mrs. Davilow’s mind prompted

[017-152]the sort of question which often comes without any other apparent

[017-153]reason than the faculty of speech and the not knowing what to do with

[017-154]it.

[017-155]“Why, what kind of a man do you imagine him to be, Gwendolen?”

[017-156]“Let me see!” said the witch, putting her forefinger to her lips, with

[017-157]a little frown, and then stretching out the finger with decision.

[017-158]“Short—just above my shoulder—trying to make himself tall by turning

[017-159]up his mustache and keeping his beard long—a glass in his right eye to

[017-160]give him an air of distinction—a strong opinion about his waistcoat,

[017-161]but uncertain and trimming about the weather, on which he will try to

[017-162]draw me out. He will stare at me all the while, and the glass in his

[017-163]eye will cause him to make horrible faces, especially when he smiles in

[017-164]a flattering way. I shall cast down my eyes in consequence, and he will

[017-165]perceive that I am not indifferent to his attentions. I shall dream

[017-166]that night that I am looking at the extraordinary face of a magnified

[017-167]insect—and the next morning he will make an offer of his hand; the

[017-168]sequel as before.”

[017-169]“That is a portrait of some one you have seen already, Gwen. Mr.

[017-170]Grandcourt may be a delightful young man for what you know.”

[017-171]“Oh, yes,” said Gwendolen, with a high note of careless admission,

[017-172]taking off her best hat and turning it round on her hand

[017-173]contemplatively. “I wonder what sort of behavior a delightful young man

[017-174]would have? I know he would have hunters and racers, and a [[london|London]] house

[017-175]and two country-houses—one with battlements and another with a

[017-176]veranda. And I feel sure that with a little murdering he might get a

[017-177]title.”
