---
id: ch019
label: "Section 19"
type: chapter
description: "Perhaps she had never looked so well. Her face was beaming with young"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[019-001]Perhaps she had never looked so well. Her face was beaming with young

[019-002]pleasure in which there was no malign rays of discontent; for being

[019-003]satisfied with her own chances, she felt kindly toward everybody and

[019-004]was satisfied with the universe. Not to have the highest distinction in

[019-005]rank, not to be marked out as an heiress, like [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]], gave an

[019-006]added triumph in eclipsing those advantages. For personal

[019-007]recommendation she would not have cared to change the family group

[019-008]accompanying her for any other: her mamma’s appearance would have

[019-009]suited an amiable duchess; her uncle and aunt Gascoigne with Anna made

[019-010]equally gratifying figures in their way; and [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] was too full of

[019-011]joyous belief in herself to feel in the least jealous though Miss

[019-012]Arrowpoint was one of the best archeresses.

[019-013]Even the reappearance of the formidable [[Herr-Klesmer|Herr Klesmer]], which caused some

[019-014]surprise in the rest of the company, seemed only to fall in with

[019-015]Gwendolen’s inclination to be amused. Short of Apollo himself, what

[019-016]great musical _maestro_ could make a good figure at an archery meeting?

[019-017]There was a very satirical light in Gwendolen’s eyes as she looked

[019-018]toward the Arrowpoint party on their first entrance, when the contrast

[019-019]between Klesmer and the average group of English country people seemed

[019-020]at its utmost intensity in the close neighborhood of his hosts—or

[019-021]patrons, as Mrs. Arrowpoint would have liked to hear them called, that

[019-022]she might deny the possibility of any longer patronizing genius, its

[019-023]royalty being universally acknowledged. The contrast might have amused

[019-024]a graver personage than Gwendolen. We English are a miscellaneous

[019-025]people, and any chance fifty of us will present many varieties of

[019-026]animal architecture or facial ornament; but it must be admitted that

[019-027]our prevailing expression is not that of a lively, impassioned race,

[019-028]preoccupied with the ideal and carrying the real as a mere make-weight.

[019-029]The strong point of the English gentleman pure is the easy style of his

[019-030]figure and clothing; he objects to marked ins and outs in his costume,

[019-031]and he also objects to looking inspired.

[019-032]Fancy an assemblage where the men had all that ordinary stamp of the

[019-033]well-bred Englishman, watching the entrance of Herr Klesmer—his mane

[019-034]of hair floating backward in massive inconsistency with the chimney-pot

[019-035]hat, which had the look of having been put on for a joke above his

[019-036]pronounced but well-modeled features and powerful clear-shaven mouth

[019-037]and chin; his tall, thin figure clad in a way which, not being strictly

[019-038]English, was all the worse for its apparent emphasis of intention.

[019-039]Draped in a loose garment with a Florentine _berretta_ on his head, he

[019-040]would have been fit to stand by the side of Leonardo de Vinci; but how

[019-041]when he presented himself in trousers which were not what English

[019-042]feeling demanded about the knees?—and when the fire that showed itself

[019-043]in his glances and the movements of his head, as he looked round him

[019-044]with curiosity, was turned into comedy by a hat which ruled that

[019-045]mankind should have well-cropped hair and a staid demeanor, such, for

[019-046]example, as Mr. Arrowsmith’s, whose nullity of face and perfect

[019-047]tailoring might pass everywhere without ridicule? One feels why it is

[019-048]often better for greatness to be dead, and to have got rid of the

[019-049]outward man.

[019-050]Many present knew Klesmer, or knew of him; but they had only seen him

[019-051]on candle-light occasions when he appeared simply as a musician, and he

[019-052]had not yet that supreme, world-wide celebrity which makes an artist

[019-053]great to the most ordinary people by their knowledge of his great

[019-054]expensiveness. It was literally a new light for them to see him

[019-055]in—presented unexpectedly on this July afternoon in an exclusive

[019-056]society: some were inclined to laugh, others felt a little disgust at

[019-057]the want of judgment shown by the Arrowpoints in this use of an

[019-058]introductory card.

[019-059]“What extreme guys those artistic fellows usually are!” said young

[019-060]Clintock to Gwendolen. “Do look at the figure he cuts, bowing with his

[019-061]hand on his heart to Lady Brackenshaw—and Mrs. Arrowpoint’s feather

[019-062]just reaching his shoulder.”

[019-063]“You are one of the profane,” said Gwendolen. “You are blind to the

[019-064]majesty of genius. Herr Klesmer smites me with awe; I feel crushed in

[019-065]his presence; my courage all oozes from me.”

[019-066]“Ah, you understand all about his [[art|music]].”

[019-067]“No, indeed,” said Gwendolen, with a light laugh; “it is he who

[019-068]understands all about mine and thinks it pitiable.” Klesmer’s verdict

[019-069]on her [[music|singing]] had been an easier joke to her since he had been struck

[019-070]by her _plastik_.

[019-071]“It is not addressed to the ears of the future, I suppose. I’m glad of

[019-072]that: it suits mine.”

[019-073]“Oh, you are very kind. But how remarkably well Miss Arrowpoint looks

[019-074]to-day! She would make quite a fine picture in that gold-colored dress.”

[019-075]“Too splendid, don’t you think?”

[019-076]“Well, perhaps a little too symbolical—too much like the figure of

[019-077]Wealth in an allegory.”

[019-078]This speech of Gwendolen’s had rather a malicious sound, but it was not

[019-079]really more than a bubble of fun. She did not wish Miss Arrowpoint or

[019-080]any one else to be out of the way, believing in her own good fortune

[019-081]even more than in her skill. The belief in both naturally grew stronger

[019-082]as the shooting went on, for she promised to achieve one of the best

[019-083]scores—a success which astonished every one in a new member; and to

[019-084]Gwendolen’s temperament one success determined another. She trod on

[019-085]air, and all things pleasant seemed possible. The hour was enough for

[019-086]her, and she was not obliged to think what she should do next to keep

[019-087]her life at the due pitch.

[019-088]“How does the scoring stand, I wonder?” said Lady Brackenshaw, a

[019-089]gracious personage who, adorned with two little girls and a boy of

[019-090]stout make, sat as lady paramount. Her lord had come up to her in one

[019-091]of the intervals of shooting. “It seems to me that Miss Harleth is

[019-092]likely to win the gold arrow.”

[019-093]“Gad, I think she will, if she carries it on! she is running Juliet

[019-094]Fenn hard. It is wonderful for one in her first year. Catherine is not

[019-095]up to her usual mark,” continued his lordship, turning to the heiress’s

[019-096]mother who sat near. “But she got the gold arrow last time. And there’s

[019-097]a luck even in these games of skill. That’s better. It gives the hinder

[019-098]ones a chance.”

[019-099]“Catherine will be very glad for others to win,” said Mrs. Arrowpoint,

[019-100]“she is so magnanimous. It was entirely her considerateness that made

[019-101]us bring Herr Klesmer instead of Canon Stopley, who had expressed a

[019-102]wish to come. For her own pleasure, I am sure she would rather have

[019-103]brought the Canon; but she is always thinking of others. I told her it

[019-104]was not quite _en règle_ to bring one so far out of our own set; but

[019-105]she said, ‘Genius itself is not _en règle_; it comes into the world to

[019-106]make new rules.’ And one must admit that.”

[019-107]“Ay, to be sure,” said Lord Brackenshaw, in a tone of careless

[019-108]dismissal, adding quickly, “For my part, I am not magnanimous; I should

[019-109]like to win. But, confound it! I never have the chance now. I’m getting

[019-110]old and idle. The young ones beat me. As old Nestor says—the gods

[019-111]don’t give us everything at one time: I was a young fellow once, and

[019-112]now I am getting an old and wise one. Old, at any rate; which is a gift

[019-113]that comes to everybody if they live long enough, so it raises no

[019-114]jealousy.” The Earl smiled comfortably at his wife.

[019-115]“Oh, my lord, people who have been neighbors twenty years must not talk

[019-116]to each other about age,” said Mrs. Arrowpoint. “Years, as the Tuscans

[019-117]say, are made for the letting of houses. But where is our new neighbor?

[019-118]I thought [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]] was to be here to-day.”

[019-119]“Ah, by the way, so he was. The time’s getting on too,” said his

[019-120]lordship, looking at his watch. “But he only got to [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] the other

[019-121]day. He came to us on Tuesday and said he had been a little bothered.

[019-122]He may have been pulled in another direction. Why, Gascoigne!”—the

[019-123]rector was just then crossing at a little distance with Gwendolen on

[019-124]his arm, and turned in compliance with the call—“this is a little too

[019-125]bad; you not only beat us yourself, but you bring up your niece to beat

[019-126]all the archeresses.”

[019-127]“It _is_ rather scandalous in her to get the better of elder members,”

[019-128]said [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]], with much inward satisfaction curling his short

[019-129]upper lip. “But it is not my doing, my lord. I only meant her to make a

[019-130]tolerable figure, without surpassing any one.”

[019-131]“It is not my fault, either,” said Gwendolen, with pretty archness. “If

[019-132]I am to aim, I can’t help hitting.”

[019-133]“Ay, ay, that may be a fatal business for some people,” said Lord

[019-134]Brackenshaw, good-humoredly; then taking out his watch and looking at

[019-135]Mrs. Arrowpoint again—“The time’s getting on, as you say. But

[019-136]Grandcourt is always late. I notice in town he’s always late, and he’s

[019-137]no bowman—understands nothing about it. But I told him he must come;

[019-138]he would see the flower of the neighborhood here. He asked about

[019-139]you—had seen Arrowpoint’s card. I think you had not made his

[019-140]acquaintance in town. He has been a good deal abroad. People don’t know

[019-141]him much.”

[019-142]“No; we are strangers,” said Mrs. Arrowpoint. “But that is not what

[019-143]might have been expected. For his uncle [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo Mallinger]] and I are

[019-144]great friends when we meet.”

[019-145]“I don’t know; uncles and nephews are not so likely to be seen together

[019-146]as uncles and nieces,” said his lordship, smiling toward the rector.

[019-147]“But just come with me one instant, Gascoigne, will you? I want to

[019-148]speak a word about the clout-shooting.”

[019-149]Gwendolen chose to go too and be deposited in the same group with her

[019-150]mamma and aunt until she had to shoot again. That Mr. Grandcourt might

[019-151]after all not appear on the archery-ground, had begun to enter into

[019-152]Gwendolen’s thought as a possible deduction from the completeness of

[019-153]her pleasure. Under all her saucy satire, provoked chiefly by her

[019-154]divination that her friends thought of him as a desirable match for

[019-155]her, she felt something very far from indifference as to the impression

[019-156]she would make on him. True, he was not to have the slightest power

[019-157]over her (for Gwendolen had not considered that the desire to conquer

[019-158]is itself a sort of subjection); she had made up her mind that he was

[019-159]to be one of those complimentary and assiduously admiring men of whom

[019-160]even her narrow experience had shown her several with various-colored

[019-161]beards and various styles of bearing; and the sense that her friends

[019-162]would want her to think him delightful, gave her a resistant

[019-163]inclination to presuppose him ridiculous. But that was no reason why

[019-164]she could spare his presence: and even a passing prevision of trouble

[019-165]in case she despised and refused him, raised not the shadow of a wish

[019-166]that he should save her that trouble by showing no disposition to make

[019-167]her an offer. Mr. Grandcourt taking hardly any notice of her, and

[019-168]becoming shortly engaged to Miss Arrowpoint, was not a picture which

[019-169]flattered her imagination.

[019-170]Hence Gwendolen had been all ear to Lord Brackenshaw’s mode of

[019-171]accounting for Grandcourt’s non-appearance; and when he did arrive, no

[019-172]consciousness—not even Mrs. Arrowpoint’s or Mr. Gascoigne’s—was more

[019-173]awake to the fact than hers, although she steadily avoided looking

[019-174]toward any point where he was likely to be. There should be no

[019-175]slightest shifting of angles to betray that it was of any consequence

[019-176]to her whether the much-talked-of Mr. Mallinger Grandcourt presented

[019-177]himself or not. She became again absorbed in the shooting, and so

[019-178]resolutely abstained from looking round observantly that, even

[019-179]supposing him to have taken a conspicuous place among the spectators,

[019-180]it might be clear she was not aware of him. And all the while the

[019-181]certainty that he was there made a distinct thread in her

[019-182]consciousness. Perhaps her shooting was the better for it: at any rate,

[019-183]it gained in precision, and she at last raised a delightful storm of

[019-184]clapping and applause by three hits running in the gold—a feat which

[019-185]among the Brackenshaw archers had not the vulgar reward of a shilling

[019-186]poll-tax, but that of a special gold star to be worn on the breast.

[019-187]That moment was not only a happy one to herself—it was just what her

[019-188]mamma and her uncle would have chosen for her. There was a general

[019-189]falling into ranks to give her space that she might advance

[019-190]conspicuously to receive the gold star from the hands of Lady

[019-191]Brackenshaw; and the perfect movement of her fine form was certainly a

[019-192]pleasant thing to behold in the clear afternoon light when the shadows

[019-193]were long and still. She was the central object of that pretty picture,

[019-194]and every one present must gaze at her. That was enough: she herself

[019-195]was determined to see nobody in particular, or to turn her eyes any way

[019-196]except toward Lady Brackenshaw, but her thoughts undeniably turned in

[019-197]other ways. It entered a little into her pleasure that Herr Klesmer

[019-198]must be observing her at a moment when music was out of the question,

[019-199]and his superiority very far in the background; for [[pride|vanity]] is as ill

[019-200]at ease under indifference as tenderness is under a love which it

[019-201]cannot return; and the unconquered Klesmer threw a trace of his malign

[019-202]power even across her pleasant consciousness that Mr. Grandcourt was

[019-203]seeing her to the utmost advantage, and was probably giving her an

[019-204]admiration unmixed with criticism. She did not expect to admire _him_,

[019-205]but that was not necessary to her peace of mind.
