---
id: ch011
label: "Section 11"
type: chapter
description: "“That would be a good attitude for me,” said Gwendolen, in a tone of"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[011-001]“That would be a good attitude for me,” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], in a tone of

[011-002]acceptance. But afterward she said with decision, “No. It will not do.

[011-003]There must be three men in proper costume, else it will be ridiculous.”

[011-004]“I have it,” said [[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]], after a little reflection. “Hermione as the

[011-005]statue in Winter’s Tale? I will be Leontes, and Miss Merry, Paulina,

[011-006]one on each side. Our dress won’t signify,” he went on laughingly; “it

[011-007]will be more Shakespearian and romantic if Leontes looks like Napoleon,

[011-008]and Paulina like a modern spinster.”

[011-009]And Hermione was chosen; all agreeing that age was of no consequence,

[011-010]but Gwendolen urged that instead of the mere tableau there should be

[011-011]just enough acting of the scene to introduce the striking up of the

[011-012][[art|music]] as a signal for her to step down and advance; when Leontes,

[011-013]instead of embracing her, was to kneel and kiss the hem of her garment,

[011-014]and so the curtain was to fall. The antechamber with folding doors lent

[011-015]itself admirably to the purpose of a stage, and the whole of the

[011-016]establishment, with the addition of Jarrett the village carpenter, was

[011-017]absorbed in the preparations for an entertainment, which, considering

[011-018]that it was an imitation of acting, was likely to be successful, since

[011-019]we know from ancient fable that an imitation may have more chance of

[011-020]success than the original.

[011-021]Gwendolen was not without a special exultation in the prospect of this

[011-022]occasion, for she knew that [[Herr-Klesmer|Herr Klesmer]] was again at [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]], and she

[011-023]had taken care to include him among the invited.

[011-024]Klesmer came. He was in one of his placid, silent moods, and sat in

[011-025]serene contemplation, replying to all appeals in benignant-sounding

[011-026]syllables more or less articulate—as taking up his cross meekly in a

[011-027]world overgrown with amateurs, or as careful how he moved his lion paws

[011-028]lest he should crush a rampant and vociferous mouse.

[011-029]Everything indeed went off smoothly and according to expectation—all

[011-030]that was improvised and accidental being of a probable sort—until the

[011-031]incident occurred which showed Gwendolen in an unforeseen phase of

[011-032]emotion. How it came about was at first a mystery.

[011-033]The tableau of Hermione was doubly striking from its dissimilarity with

[011-034]what had gone before: it was answering perfectly, and a murmur of

[011-035]applause had been gradually suppressed while Leontes gave his

[011-036]permission that Paulina should exercise her utmost art and make the

[011-037]statue move.

[011-038]Hermione, her arm resting on a pillar, was elevated by about six

[011-039]inches, which she counted on as a means of showing her pretty foot and

[011-040]instep, when at the given signal she should advance and descend.

[011-041]“[[music|Music]], awake her, strike!” said Paulina ([[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], who, by special

[011-042]entreaty, had consented to take the part in a white burnous and hood).

[011-043]Herr Klesmer, who had been good-natured enough to seat himself at the

[011-044]piano, struck a thunderous chord—but in the same instant, and before

[011-045]Hermione had put forth her foot, the movable panel, which was on a line

[011-046]with the piano, flew open on the right opposite the stage and disclosed

[011-047]the picture of the dead face and the fleeing figure, brought out in

[011-048]pale definiteness by the position of the wax-lights. Everyone was

[011-049]startled, but all eyes in the act of turning toward the open panel were

[011-050]recalled by a piercing cry from Gwendolen, who stood without change of

[011-051]attitude, but with a change of expression that was terrifying in its

[011-052]terror. She looked like a statue into which a soul of Fear had entered:

[011-053]her pallid lips were parted; her eyes, usually narrowed under their

[011-054]long lashes, were dilated and fixed. Her mother, less surprised than

[011-055]alarmed, rushed toward her, and Rex, too, could not help going to her

[011-056]side. But the touch of her mother’s arm had the effect of an electric

[011-057]charge; Gwendolen fell on her knees and put her hands before her face.

[011-058]She was still trembling, but mute, and it seemed that she had

[011-059]self-consciousness enough to aim at controlling her signs of terror,

[011-060]for she presently allowed herself to be raised from her kneeling

[011-061]posture and led away, while the company were relieving their minds by

[011-062]explanation.

[011-063]“A magnificent bit of _plastik_ that!” said Klesmer to [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]].

[011-064]And a quick fire of undertoned question and answer went round.

[011-065]“Was it part of the play?”

[011-066]“Oh, no, surely not. Miss Harleth was too much affected. A sensitive

[011-067]creature!”

[011-068]“Dear me! I was not aware that there was a painting behind that panel;

[011-069]were you?”

[011-070]“No; how should I? Some eccentricity in one of the Earl’s family long

[011-071]ago, I suppose.”

[011-072]“How very painful! Pray shut it up.”

[011-073]“Was the door locked? It is very mysterious. It must be the spirits.”

[011-074]“But there is no medium present.”

[011-075]“How do you know that? We must conclude that there is, when such things

[011-076]happen.”

[011-077]“Oh, the door was not locked; it was probably the sudden vibration from

[011-078]the piano that sent it open.”

[011-079]This conclusion came from Mr. Gascoigne, who begged Miss Merry if

[011-080]possible to get the key. But this readiness to explain the mystery was

[011-081]thought by Mrs. Vulcany unbecoming in a clergyman, and she observed in

[011-082]an undertone that Mr. Gascoigne was always a little too worldly for her

[011-083]taste. However, the key was produced, and the rector turned it in the

[011-084]lock with an emphasis rather offensively rationalizing—as who should

[011-085]say, “it will not start open again”—putting the key in his pocket as a

[011-086]security.

[011-087]However, Gwendolen soon reappeared, showing her usual spirits, and

[011-088]evidently determined to ignore as far as she could the striking change

[011-089]she had made in the part of Hermione.

[011-090]But when Klesmer said to her, “We have to thank you for devising a

[011-091]perfect climax: you could not have chosen a finer bit of _plastik_,”

[011-092]there was a flush of pleasure in her face. She liked to accept as a

[011-093]belief what was really no more than delicate feigning. He divined that

[011-094]the betrayal into a passion of fear had been mortifying to her, and

[011-095]wished her to understand that he took it for good acting. Gwendolen

[011-096]cherished the idea that now he was struck with her talent as well as

[011-097]her beauty, and her uneasiness about his opinion was half turned to

[011-098]complacency.

[011-099]But too many were in the secret of what had been included in the

[011-100]rehearsals, and what had not, and no one besides Klesmer took the

[011-101]trouble to soothe Gwendolen’s imagined [[shame|mortification]]. The general

[011-102]sentiment was that the incident should be let drop.

[011-103]There had really been a medium concerned in the starting open of the

[011-104]panel: one who had quitted the room in haste and crept to bed in much

[011-105]alarm of conscience. It was the small Isabel, whose intense curiosity,

[011-106]unsatisfied by the brief glimpse she had had of the strange picture on

[011-107]the day of arrival at [[Offendene]], had kept her on the watch for an

[011-108]opportunity of finding out where Gwendolen had put the key, of stealing

[011-109]it from the discovered drawer when the rest of the family were out, and

[011-110]getting on a stool to unlock the panel. While she was indulging her

[011-111]thirst for knowledge in this way, a noise which she feared was an

[011-112]approaching footstep alarmed her: she closed the door and attempted

[011-113]hurriedly to lock it, but failing and not daring to linger, she

[011-114]withdrew the key and trusted that the panel would stick, as it seemed

[011-115]well inclined to do. In this confidence she had returned the key to its

[011-116]former place, stilling any anxiety by the thought that if the door were

[011-117]discovered to be unlocked nobody would know how the unlocking came

[011-118]about. The inconvenient Isabel, like other offenders, did not foresee

[011-119]her own impulse to confession, a fatality which came upon her the

[011-120]morning after the party, when Gwendolen said at the breakfast-table, “I

[011-121]know the door was locked before the housekeeper gave me the key, for I

[011-122]tried it myself afterward. Some one must have been to my drawer and

[011-123]taken the key.”

[011-124]It seemed to Isabel that Gwendolen’s awful eyes had rested on her more

[011-125]than on the other sisters, and without any time for resolve, she said,

[011-126]with a trembling lip:

[011-127]“Please forgive me, Gwendolen.”

[011-128]The forgiveness was sooner bestowed than it would have been if

[011-129]Gwendolen had not desired to dismiss from her own and every one else’s

[011-130]memory any case in which she had shown her susceptibility to terror.

[011-131]She wondered at herself in these occasional experiences, which seemed

[011-132]like a brief remembered madness, an unexplained exception from her

[011-133]normal life; and in this instance she felt a peculiar vexation that her

[011-134]helpless fear had shown itself, not, as usual, in solitude, but in

[011-135]well-lit company. Her ideal was to be daring in speech and reckless in

[011-136]braving dangers, both moral and physical; and though her practice fell

[011-137]far behind her ideal, this shortcoming seemed to be due to the

[011-138]pettiness of circumstances, the narrow theatre which life offers to a

[011-139]girl of twenty, who cannot conceive herself as anything else than a

[011-140]lady, or as in any position which would lack the tribute of respect.

[011-141]She had no permanent consciousness of other fetters, or of more

[011-142]spiritual restraints, having always disliked whatever was presented to

[011-143]her under the name of religion, in the same way that some people

[011-144]dislike arithmetic and accounts: it had raised no other emotion in her,

[011-145]no alarm, no longing; so that the question whether she believed it had

[011-146]not occurred to her any more than it had occurred to her to inquire

[011-147]into the conditions of colonial property and banking, on which, as she

[011-148]had had many opportunities of knowing, the family fortune was

[011-149]dependent. All these facts about herself she would have been ready to

[011-150]admit, and even, more or less indirectly, to state. What she

[011-151]unwillingly recognized, and would have been glad for others to be

[011-152]unaware of, was that liability of hers to fits of spiritual dread,

[011-153]though this fountain of awe within her had not found its way into

[011-154]connection with the religion taught her or with any human relations.

[011-155]She was ashamed and frightened, as at what might happen again, in

[011-156]remembering her tremor on suddenly feeling herself alone, when, for

[011-157]example, she was walking without companionship and there came some

[011-158]rapid change in the light. Solitude in any wide scene impressed her

[011-159]with an undefined feeling of immeasurable existence aloof from her, in

[011-160]the midst of which she was helplessly incapable of asserting herself.

[011-161]The little astronomy taught her at school used sometimes to set her

[011-162]imagination at work in a way that made her tremble: but always when

[011-163]some one joined her she recovered her indifference to the vastness in

[011-164]which she seemed an exile; she found again her usual world in which her

[011-165]will was of some avail, and the religious nomenclature belonging to

[011-166]this world was no more identified for her with those uneasy impressions

[011-167]of awe than her uncle’s surplices seen out of use at the rectory. With

[011-168]human ears and eyes about her, she had always hitherto recovered her

[011-169]confidence, and felt the possibility of winning empire.

[011-170]To her mamma and others her fits of timidity or terror were

[011-171]sufficiently accounted for by her “sensitiveness” or the “excitability

[011-172]of her nature”; but these explanatory phrases required conciliation

[011-173]with much that seemed to be blank indifference or rare self-mastery.

[011-174]Heat is a great agent and a useful word, but considered as a means of

[011-175]explaining the universe it requires an extensive knowledge of

[011-176]differences; and as a means of explaining character “sensitiveness” is

[011-177]in much the same predicament. But who, loving a creature like

[011-178]Gwendolen, would not be inclined to regard every peculiarity in her as

[011-179]a mark of pre-eminence? That was what Rex did. After the Hermione scene

[011-180]he was more persuaded than ever that she must be instinct with all

[011-181]feeling, and not only readier to respond to a worshipful love, but able

[011-182]to love better than other girls. Rex felt the summer on his young wings

[011-183]and soared happily.
