---
id: ch028
label: "Section 28"
type: chapter
description: "With all Gwendolen’s resolve not to betray any agitation, she could not"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[028-001]With all [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s resolve not to betray any agitation, she could not

[028-002]help it that her tone was unusually high and hard, and her mother felt

[028-003]sure that something unpropitious had happened.

[028-004]Mrs. Arrowpoint thought that the self-confident young lady was much

[028-005]piqued, and that [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]] was probably seeing reason to change

[028-006]his mind.

[028-007]“If you have no objection, mamma, I will order the carriage,” said

[028-008]Gwendolen. “I am tired. And every one will be going soon.”

[028-009][[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] assented; but by the time the carriage was announced as

[028-010]ready—the horses having to be fetched from the stables on the warden’s

[028-011]premises—the roving party reappeared, and with them Mr. Grandcourt.

[028-012]“Ah, there you are!” said Lord Brackenshaw, going up to Gwendolen, who

[028-013]was arranging her mamma’s shawl for the [[ambition|drive]]. “We thought at first you

[028-014]had alighted on Grandcourt and he had taken you home. [[Lush]] said so. But

[028-015]after that we met Grandcourt. However, we didn’t suppose you could be

[028-016]in any danger. The warden said he had told you a near way back.”

[028-017]“You are going?” said Grandcourt, coming up with his usual air, as if

[028-018]he did not conceive that there had been any omission on his part. Lord

[028-019]Brackenshaw gave place to him and moved away.

[028-020]“Yes, we are going,” said Gwendolen, looking busily at her scarf, which

[028-021]she was arranging across her shoulders Scotch fashion.

[028-022]“May I call at [[Offendene]] to-morrow?”

[028-023]“Oh yes, if you like,” said Gwendolen, sweeping him from a distance

[028-024]with her eyelashes. Her voice was light and sharp as the first touch of

[028-025]frost.

[028-026]Mrs. Davilow accepted his arm to lead her to the carriage; but while

[028-027]that was happening, Gwendolen with incredible swiftness had got in

[028-028]advance of them, and had sprung into the carriage.

[028-029]“I got in, mamma, because I wished to be on this side,” she said,

[028-030]apologetically. But she had avoided Grandcourt’s touch: he only lifted

[028-031]his hat and walked away—with the not unsatisfactory impression that

[028-032]she meant to show herself offended by his neglect.

[028-033]The mother and daughter drove for five minutes in silence. Then

[028-034]Gwendolen said, “I intend to join the Langens at [[dover|Dover]], mamma. I shall

[028-035]pack up immediately on getting home, and set off by the early train. I

[028-036]shall be at Dover almost as soon as they are; we can let them know by

[028-037]telegraph.”

[028-038]“Good heavens, child! what can be your reason for saying so?”

[028-039]“My reason for saying it, mamma, is that I mean to do it.”

[028-040]“But why do you mean to do it?”

[028-041]“I wish to go away.”

[028-042]“Is it because you are offended with Mr. Grandcourt’s odd behavior in

[028-043]walking off to-day?”

[028-044]“It is useless to enter into such questions. I am not going in any case

[028-045]to marry Mr. Grandcourt. Don’t interest yourself further about it.”

[028-046]“What can I say to your uncle, Gwendolen? Consider the position you

[028-047]place me in. You led him to believe only last night that you had made

[028-048]up your mind in favor of Mr. Grandcourt.”

[028-049]“I am very sorry to cause you annoyance, mamma, dear, but I can’t help

[028-050]it,” said Gwendolen, with still harder resistance in her tone.

[028-051]“Whatever you or my uncle may think or do, I shall not alter my

[028-052]resolve, and I shall not tell my reason. I don’t care what comes of it.

[028-053]I don’t care if I never marry any one. There is nothing worth caring

[028-054]for. I believe all men are bad, and I hate them.”

[028-055]“But need you set off in this way, Gwendolen?” said Mrs. Davilow,

[028-056]miserable and helpless.

[028-057]“Now mamma, don’t interfere with me. If you have ever had any trouble

[028-058]in your own life, remember it and don’t interfere with me. If I am to

[028-059]be miserable, let it be by my own choice.”

[028-060]The mother was reduced to trembling silence. She began to see that the

[028-061]difficulty would be lessened if Gwendolen went away.

[028-062]And she did go. The packing was all carefully done that evening, and

[028-063]not long after dawn the next day Mrs. Davilow accompanied her daughter

[028-064]to the railway station. The sweet dews of morning, the cows and horses

[028-065]looking over the hedges without any particular reason, the early

[028-066]travelers on foot with their bundles, seemed all very melancholy and

[028-067]purposeless to them both. The dingy torpor of the railway station,

[028-068]before the ticket could be taken, was still worse. Gwendolen had

[028-069]certainly hardened in the last twenty-four hours: her mother’s trouble

[028-070]evidently counted for little in her present state of mind, which did

[028-071]not essentially differ from the mood that makes men take to worse

[028-072]conduct when their belief in persons or things is upset. Gwendolen’s

[028-073]uncontrolled reading, though consisting chiefly in what are called

[028-074]pictures of life, had somehow not prepared her for this encounter with

[028-075]reality. Is that surprising? It is to be believed that attendance at

[028-076]the _opéra bouffe_ in the present day would not leave men’s minds

[028-077]entirely without shock, if the manners observed there with some

[028-078]applause were suddenly to start up in their own families. Perspective,

[028-079]as its inventor remarked, is a beautiful thing. What horrors of damp

[028-080]huts, where human beings languish, may not become picturesque through

[028-081]aerial distance! What hymning of cancerous vices may we not languish

[028-082]over as sublimest art in the safe remoteness of a strange language and

[028-083]artificial phrase! Yet we keep a repugnance to rheumatism and other

[028-084]painful effects when presented in our personal experience.

[028-085]Mrs. Davilow felt Gwendolen’s new phase of indifference keenly, and as

[028-086]she drove back alone, the brightening morning was sadder to her than

[028-087]before.

[028-088]Mr. Grandcourt called that day at Offendene, but nobody was at home.

[028-089]CHAPTER XV.

[028-090]“_Festina lente_—celerity should be contempered with

[028-091]cunctation.”—SIR THOMAS BROWNE.

[028-092]Gwendolen, we have seen, passed her time abroad in the new excitement

[028-093]of gambling, and in imagining herself an empress of luck, having

[028-094]brought from her late experience a vague impression that in this

[028-095]confused world it signified nothing what any one did, so that they

[028-096]amused themselves. We have seen, too, that certain persons,

[028-097]mysteriously symbolized as Grapnell & Co., having also thought of

[028-098]reigning in the realm of luck, and being also bent on amusing

[028-099]themselves, no matter how, had brought about a painful change in her

[028-100]family circumstances; whence she had returned home—carrying with her,

[028-101]against her inclination, a necklace which she had pawned and some one

[028-102]else had redeemed.

[028-103]While she was going back to England, Grandcourt was coming to find her;

[028-104]coming, that is, after his own manner—not in haste by express straight

[028-105]from [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] to [[Leubronn]], where she was understood to be; but so

[028-106]entirely without hurry that he was induced by the presence of some

[028-107]Russian acquaintances to linger at Baden-Baden and make various

[028-108]appointments with them, which, however, his desire to be at Leubronn

[028-109]ultimately caused him to break. Grandcourt’s passions were of the

[028-110]intermittent, flickering kind: never flaming out strongly. But a great

[028-111]deal of life goes on without strong passion: myriads of cravats are

[028-112]carefully tied, dinners attended, even speeches made proposing the

[028-113]health of august personages without the zest arising from a strong

[028-114]desire. And a man may make a good appearance in high social

[028-115]positions—may be supposed to know the classics, to have his reserves

[028-116]on science, a strong though repressed opinion on politics, and all the

[028-117]sentiments of the English gentleman, at a small expense of vital

[028-118]energy. Also, he may be obstinate or persistent at the same low rate,

[028-119]and may even show sudden impulses which have a false air of daemonic

[028-120]strength because they seem inexplicable, though perhaps their secret

[028-121]lies merely in the want of regulated channels for the soul to move

[028-122]in—good and sufficient ducts of habit without which our nature easily

[028-123]turns to mere ooze and mud, and at any pressure yields nothing but a

[028-124]spurt or a puddle.

[028-125]Grandcourt had not been altogether displeased by Gwendolen’s running

[028-126]away from the splendid chance he was holding out to her. The act had

[028-127]some piquancy for him. He liked to think that it was due to resentment

[028-128]of his careless behavior in Cardell Chase, which, when he came to

[028-129]consider it, did appear rather cool. To have brought her so near a

[028-130]tender admission, and then to have walked headlong away from further

[028-131]opportunities of winning the consent which he had made her understand

[028-132]him to be asking for, was enough to provoke a girl of spirit; and to be

[028-133]worth his mastering it was proper that she should have some spirit.

[028-134]Doubtless she meant him to follow her, and it was what he meant too.

[028-135]But for a whole week he took no measures toward starting, and did not

[028-136]even inquire where Miss Harleth was gone. Mr. Lush felt a triumph that

[028-137]was mingled with much distrust; for Grandcourt had said no word to him

[028-138]about her, and looked as neutral as an alligator; there was no telling

[028-139]what might turn up in the slowly-churning chances of his mind. Still,

[028-140]to have put off a decision was to have made room for the waste of

[028-141]Grandcourt’s energy.

[028-142]The guests at Diplow felt more curiosity than their host. How was it

[028-143]that nothing more was heard of Miss Harleth? Was it credible that she

[028-144]had refused Mr. Grandcourt? Lady Flora Hollis, a lively middle-aged

[028-145]woman, well endowed with curiosity, felt a sudden interest in making a

[028-146]round of calls with Mrs. Torrington, including the rectory, Offendene,

[028-147]and [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]], and thus not only got twice over, but also discussed with

[028-148]the Arrowpoints, the information that Miss Harleth was gone to

[028-149]Leubronn, with some old friends, the Baron and Baroness von Langen; for

[028-150]the immediate agitation and disappointment of Mrs. Davilow and the

[028-151]Gascoignes had resolved itself into a wish that Gwendolen’s

[028-152]disappearance should not be interpreted as anything eccentric or

[028-153]needful to be kept secret. The rector’s mind, indeed, entertained the

[028-154]possibility that the marriage was only a little deferred, for Mrs.

[028-155]Davilow had not dared to tell him of the bitter determination with

[028-156]which Gwendolen had spoken. And in spite of his practical ability, some

[028-157]of his experience had petrified into maxims and quotations. Amaryllis

[028-158]fleeing desired that her hiding-place should be known; and that love

[028-159]will find out the way “over the mountain and over the wave” may be said

[028-160]without hyperbole in this age of steam. Gwendolen, he conceived, was an

[028-161]Amaryllis of excellent sense but coquettish daring; the question was

[028-162]whether she had dared too much.

[028-163]Lady Flora, coming back charged with news about Miss Harleth, saw no

[028-164]good reason why she should not try whether she could electrify Mr.

[028-165]Grandcourt by mentioning it to him at the table; and in doing so shot a

[028-166]few hints of a notion having got abroad that he was a disappointed

[028-167]adorer. Grandcourt heard with quietude, but with attention; and the

[028-168]next day he ordered Lush to bring about a decent reason for breaking up

[028-169]the party at Diplow by the end of another week, as he meant to go

[028-170]yachting to the Baltic or somewhere—it being impossible to stay at

[028-171]Diplow as if he were a prisoner on parole, with a set of people whom he

[028-172]had never wanted. Lush needed no clearer announcement that Grandcourt

[028-173]was going to Leubronn; but he might go after the manner of a creeping

[028-174]billiard-ball and stick on the way. What Mr. Lush intended was to make

[028-175]himself indispensable so that he might go too, and he succeeded;

[028-176]Gwendolen’s repulsion for him being a fact that only amused his patron,

[028-177]and made him none the less willing to have Lush always at hand.

[028-178]This was how it happened that Grandcourt arrived at the _[[czarina-hotel|Czarina]]_ on

[028-179]the fifth day after Gwendolen had left Leubronn, and found there his

[028-180]uncle, [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo Mallinger]], with his family, including [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]. It is

[028-181]not necessarily a pleasure either to the reigning power or the heir

[028-182]presumptive when their separate affairs—a touch of gout, say, in the

[028-183]one, and a touch of willfulness in the other—happen to bring them to

[028-184]the same spot. Sir Hugo was an easy-tempered man, tolerant both of

[028-185]differences and defects; but a point of view different from his own

[028-186]concerning the settlement of the family estates fretted him rather more

[028-187]than if it had concerned Church discipline or the ballot, and faults

[028-188]were the less venial for belonging to a person whose existence was

[028-189]inconvenient to him. In no case could Grandcourt have been a nephew

[028-190]after his own heart; but as the presumptive heir to the Mallinger

[028-191]estates he was the sign and embodiment of a chief grievance in the

[028-192]baronet’s life—the want of a son to inherit the lands, in no portion

[028-193]of which had he himself more than a life-interest. For in the

[028-194]ill-advised settlement which his father, Sir Francis, had chosen to

[028-195]make by will, even Diplow with its modicum of land had been left under

[028-196]the same conditions as the ancient and wide inheritance of the two

[028-197]Toppings—Diplow, where Sir Hugo had lived and hunted through many a

[028-198]season in his younger years, and where his wife and daughters ought to

[028-199]have been able to retire after his death.
