---
id: ch027
label: "Section 27"
type: chapter
description: "“Mr. Grandcourt is not equal as a man to his uncle, Sir Hugo"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[027-001]“[[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]] is not equal as a man to his uncle, [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]]

[027-002]Mallinger—too languid. To be sure, Mr. Grandcourt is a much younger

[027-003]man, but I shouldn’t wonder if Sir Hugo were to outlive him,

[027-004]notwithstanding the difference of years. It is ill calculating on

[027-005]successions,” concluded Mrs. Arrowpoint, rather too loudly.

[027-006]“It is indeed,” said [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], able to assent with quiet

[027-007]cheerfulness, for she was so well satisfied with the actual situation

[027-008]of affairs that her habitual melancholy in their general

[027-009]unsatisfactoriness was altogether in abeyance.

[027-010]I am not concerned to tell of the food that was eaten in that green

[027-011]refectory, or even to dwell on the stories of the forest scenery that

[027-012]spread themselves out beyond the level front of the hollow; being just

[027-013]now bound to tell a story of life at a stage when the blissful beauty

[027-014]of earth and sky entered only by narrow and oblique inlets into the

[027-015]consciousness, which was busy with a small social drama almost as

[027-016]little penetrated by a feeling of wider relations as if it had been a

[027-017]puppet-show. It will be understood that the food and champagne were of

[027-018]the best—the talk and laughter too, in the sense of belonging to the

[027-019]best society, where no one makes an invidious display of anything in

[027-020]particular, and the advantages of the world are taken with that

[027-021]high-bred depreciation which follows from being accustomed to them.

[027-022]Some of the gentlemen strolled a little and indulged in a cigar, there

[027-023]being a sufficient interval before four o’clock—the time for

[027-024]beginning to rove again. Among these, strange to say, was Grandcourt;

[027-025]but not [[Lush|Mr. Lush]], who seemed to be taking his pleasure quite generously

[027-026]to-day by making himself particularly serviceable, ordering everything

[027-027]for everybody, and by this activity becoming more than ever a blot on

[027-028]the scene to [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], though he kept himself amiably aloof from her,

[027-029]and never even looked at her obviously. When there was a general move

[027-030]to prepare for starting, it appeared that the bows had all been put

[027-031]under the charge of Lord Brackenshaw’s valet, and Mr. Lush was

[027-032]concerned to save ladies the trouble of fetching theirs from the

[027-033]carriage where they were propped. He did not intend to bring

[027-034]Gwendolen’s, but she, fearful lest he should do so, hurried to fetch it

[027-035]herself. The valet, seeing her approach, met her with it, and in giving

[027-036]it into her hand gave also a letter addressed to her. She asked no

[027-037]question about it, perceived at a glance that the address was in a

[027-038]lady’s handwriting (of the delicate kind which used to be esteemed

[027-039]feminine before the present uncial period), and moving away with her

[027-040]bow in her hand, saw Mr. Lush coming to fetch other bows. To avoid

[027-041]meeting him she turned aside and walked with her back toward the stand

[027-042]of carriages, opening the letter. It contained these words,

[027-043]If Miss Harleth is in doubt whether she should accept Mr. Grandcourt,

[027-044]let her break from her party after they have passed the Whispering

[027-045]Stones and return to that spot. She will then hear something to decide

[027-046]her; but she can only hear it by keeping this letter a strict secret

[027-047]from every one. If she does not act according to this letter, she will

[027-048]repent, as the woman who writes it has repented. The secrecy Miss

[027-049]Harleth will feel herself bound in honor to guard.

[027-050]Gwendolen felt an inward shock, but her immediate thought was, “It is

[027-051]come in time.” It lay in her youthfulness that she was absorbed by the

[027-052]idea of the revelation to be made, and had not even a momentary

[027-053]suspicion of contrivance that could justify her in showing the letter.

[027-054]Her mind gathered itself up at once into the resolution, that she would

[027-055]manage to go unobserved to the Whispering Stones; and thrusting the

[027-056]letter into her pocket she turned back to rejoin the company, with that

[027-057]sense of having something to conceal which to her nature had a bracing

[027-058]quality and helped her to be mistress of herself.

[027-059]It was a surprise to every one that Grandcourt was not, like the other

[027-060]smokers, on the spot in time to set out roving with the rest. “We shall

[027-061]alight on him by-and-by,” said Lord Brackenshaw; “he can’t be gone

[027-062]far.” At any rate, no man could be waited for. This apparent

[027-063]forgetfulness might be taken for the distraction of a lover so absorbed

[027-064]in thinking of the beloved object as to forget an appointment which

[027-065]would bring him into her actual presence. And the good-natured Earl

[027-066]gave Gwendolen a distant jocose hint to that effect, which she took

[027-067]with suitable quietude. But the thought in her mind was “Can he too be

[027-068]starting away from a decision?” It was not exactly a pleasant thought

[027-069]to her; but it was near the truth. “Starting away,” however, was not

[027-070]the right expression for the languor of intention that came over

[027-071]Grandcourt, like a fit of diseased numbness, when an end seemed within

[027-072]easy reach: to desist then, when all expectation was to the contrary,

[027-073]became another gratification of mere will, sublimely independent of

[027-074]definite motive. At that moment he had begun a second large cigar in a

[027-075]vague, hazy obstinacy which, if Lush or any other mortal who might be

[027-076]insulted with impunity had interrupted by overtaking him with a request

[027-077]for his return, would have expressed itself by a slow removal of his

[027-078]cigar, to say in an undertone, “You’ll be kind enough to go to the

[027-079]devil, will you?”

[027-080]But he was not interrupted, and the rovers set off without any visible

[027-081]depression of spirits, leaving behind only a few of the less vigorous

[027-082]ladies, including Mrs. Davilow, who preferred a quiet stroll free from

[027-083][[duty|obligation]] to keep up with others. The enjoyment of the day was soon at

[027-084]its highest pitch, the archery getting more spirited and the changing

[027-085]scenes of the forest from roofed grove to open glade growing lovelier

[027-086]with the lengthening shadows, and the deeply-felt but undefinable

[027-087]gradations of the mellowing afternoon. It was agreed that they were

[027-088]playing an extemporized _As you like it_; and when a pretty compliment

[027-089]had been turned to Gwendolen about her having the part of Rosalind, she

[027-090]felt the more compelled to be surpassing in loveliness. This was not

[027-091]very difficult to her, for the effect of what had happened to-day was

[027-092]an excitement which needed a vent—a sense of adventure rather than

[027-093]alarm, and a straining toward the management of her retreat, so as not

[027-094]to be impeded.

[027-095]The roving had been lasting nearly an hour before the arrival at the

[027-096]Whispering Stones, two tall conical blocks that leaned toward each

[027-097]other like gigantic gray-mantled figures. They were soon surveyed and

[027-098]passed by with the remark that they would be good ghosts on a starlit

[027-099]night. But a soft sunlight was on them now, and Gwendolen felt daring.

[027-100]The stones were near a fine grove of beeches, where the archers found

[027-101]plenty of marks.

[027-102]“How far are we from Green Arbor now?” said Gwendolen, having got in

[027-103]front by the side of the warden.

[027-104]“Oh, not more than half a mile, taking along the avenue we’re going to

[027-105]cross up there: but I shall take round a couple of miles, by the High

[027-106]Cross.”

[027-107]She was falling back among the rest, when suddenly they seemed all to

[027-108]be hurrying obliquely forward under the guidance of Mr. Lush, and

[027-109]lingering a little where she was, she perceived her opportunity of

[027-110]slipping away. Soon she was out of sight, and without running she

[027-111]seemed to herself to fly along the ground and count the moments nothing

[027-112]till she found herself back again at the Whispering Stones. They turned

[027-113]their blank gray sides to her: what was there on the other side? If

[027-114]there were nothing after all? That was her only dread now—to have to

[027-115]turn back again in mystification; and walking round the right-hand

[027-116]stone without pause, she found herself in front of some one whose large

[027-117]dark eyes met hers at a foot’s distance. In spite of expectation, she

[027-118]was startled and shrank bank, but in doing so she could take in the

[027-119]whole figure of this stranger and perceive that she was unmistakably a

[027-120]lady, and one who must have been exceedingly handsome. She perceived,

[027-121]also, that a few yards from her were two children seated on the grass.

[027-122]“Miss Harleth?” said the lady.

[027-123]“Yes.” All Gwendolen’s consciousness was wonder.

[027-124]“Have you accepted Mr. Grandcourt?”

[027-125]“No.”

[027-126]“I have promised to tell you something. And you will promise to keep my

[027-127]secret. However you may decide you will not tell Mr. Grandcourt, or any

[027-128]one else, that you have seen me?”

[027-129]“I promise.”

[027-130]“My name is [[Lydia-Glasher|Lydia Glasher]]. Mr. Grandcourt ought not to marry any one

[027-131]but me. I left my husband and child for him nine years ago. Those two

[027-132]children are his, and we have two others—girls—who are older. My

[027-133]husband is dead now, and Mr. Grandcourt ought to marry me. He ought to

[027-134]make that boy his heir.”

[027-135]She looked at the boy as she spoke, and Gwendolen’s eyes followed hers.

[027-136]The handsome little fellow was puffing out his cheeks in trying to blow

[027-137]a tiny trumpet which remained dumb. His hat hung backward by a string,

[027-138]and his brown curls caught the sun-rays. He was a cherub.

[027-139]The two women’s eyes met again, and Gwendolen said proudly, “I will not

[027-140]interfere with your wishes.” She looked as if she were shivering, and

[027-141]her lips were pale.

[027-142]“You are very attractive, Miss Harleth. But when he first knew me, I

[027-143]too was young. Since then my life has been broken up and embittered. It

[027-144]is not fair that he should be happy and I miserable, and my boy thrust

[027-145]out of sight for another.”

[027-146]These words were uttered with a biting accent, but with a determined

[027-147]abstinence from anything violent in tone or manner. Gwendolen, watching

[027-148]Mrs. Glasher’s face while she spoke, felt a sort of terror: it was as

[027-149]if some ghastly vision had come to her in a dream and said, “I am a

[027-150]woman’s life.”

[027-151]“Have you anything more to say to me?” she asked in a low tone, but

[027-152]still proud and coldly. The revulsion within her was not tending to

[027-153]soften her. Everyone seemed hateful.

[027-154]“Nothing. You know what I wished you to know. You can inquire about me

[027-155]if you like. My husband was Colonel Glasher.”

[027-156]“Then I will go,” said Gwendolen, moving away with a ceremonious

[027-157]inclination, which was returned with equal grace.

[027-158]In a few minutes Gwendolen was in the beech grove again but her party

[027-159]had gone out of sight and apparently had not sent in search of her, for

[027-160]all was solitude till she had reached the avenue pointed out by the

[027-161]warden. She determined to take this way back to Green Arbor, which she

[027-162]reached quickly; rapid movements seeming to her just now a means of

[027-163]suspending the thoughts which might prevent her from behaving with due

[027-164]calm. She had already made up her mind what step she would take.

[027-165]Mrs. Davilow was of course astonished to see Gwendolen returning alone,

[027-166]and was not without some uneasiness which the presence of other ladies

[027-167]hindered her from showing. In answer to her words of surprise Gwendolen

[027-168]said,

[027-169]“Oh, I have been rather silly. I lingered behind to look at the

[027-170]Whispering Stones, and the rest hurried on after something, so I lost

[027-171]sight of them. I thought it best to come home by the short way—the

[027-172]avenue that the warden had told me of. I’m not sorry after all. I had

[027-173]had enough walking.”

[027-174]“Your party did not meet Mr. Grandcourt, I presume,” said Mrs.

[027-175]Arrowpoint, not without intention.

[027-176]“No,” said Gwendolen, with a little flash of defiance, and a light

[027-177]laugh. “And we didn’t see any carvings on the trees, either. Where can

[027-178]he be? I should think he has fallen into the pool or had an apoplectic

[027-179]fit.”
