---
id: ch029
label: "Section 29"
type: chapter
description: "This grievance had naturally gathered emphasis as the years advanced,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[029-001]This grievance had naturally gathered emphasis as the years advanced,

[029-002]and Lady Mallinger, after having had three daughters in quick

[029-003]succession, had remained for eight years till now that she was over

[029-004]forty without producing so much as another girl; while [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], almost

[029-005]twenty years older, was at a time of life when, notwithstanding the

[029-006]fashionable retardation of most things from dinners to marriages, a

[029-007]man’s hopefulness is apt to show signs of wear, until restored by

[029-008]second childhood.

[029-009]In fact, he had begun to despair of a son, and this confirmation of

[029-010][[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]’s interest in the estates certainly tended to make his image

[029-011]and presence the more unwelcome; but, on the other hand, it carried

[029-012]circumstances which disposed Sir Hugo to take care that the relation

[029-013]between them should be kept as friendly as possible. It led him to

[029-014]dwell on a plan which had grown up side by side with his disappointment

[029-015]of an heir; namely, to try and secure [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] as a future residence for

[029-016]Lady Mallinger and her daughters, and keep this pretty bit of the

[029-017]family inheritance for his own offspring in spite of that

[029-018]disappointment. Such knowledge as he had of his nephew’s disposition

[029-019]and affairs encouraged the belief that Grandcourt might consent to a

[029-020]transaction by which he would get a good sum of ready money, as an

[029-021]equivalent for his prospective interest in the domain of Diplow and the

[029-022]moderate amount of land attached to it. If, after all, the unhoped-for

[029-023]son should be born, the money would have been thrown away, and

[029-024]Grandcourt would have been paid for giving up interests that had turned

[029-025]out good for nothing; but Sir Hugo set down this risk as _nil_, and of

[029-026]late years he had husbanded his fortune so well by the working of mines

[029-027]and the sale of leases that he was prepared for an outlay.

[029-028]Here was an object that made him careful to avoid any quarrel with

[029-029]Grandcourt. Some years before, when he was making improvements at the

[029-030]Abbey, and needed Grandcourt’s concurrence in his felling an

[029-031]obstructive mass of timber on the demesne, he had congratulated himself

[029-032]on finding that there was no active spite against him in his nephew’s

[029-033]peculiar mind; and nothing had since occurred to make them hate each

[029-034]other more than was compatible with perfect politeness, or with any

[029-035]accommodation that could be strictly mutual.

[029-036]Grandcourt, on his side, thought his uncle a superfluity and a bore,

[029-037]and felt that the list of things in general would be improved whenever

[029-038]Sir Hugo came to be expunged. But he had been made aware through [[Lush]],

[029-039]always a useful medium, of the baronet’s inclinations concerning

[029-040]Diplow, and he was gratified to have the alternative of the money in

[029-041]his mind: even if he had not thought it in the least likely that he

[029-042]would choose to accept it, his sense of power would have been flattered

[029-043]by his being able to refuse what Sir Hugo desired. The hinted

[029-044]transaction had told for something among the motives which had made him

[029-045]ask for a year’s tenancy of Diplow, which it had rather annoyed Sir

[029-046]Hugo to grant, because the excellent hunting in the neighborhood might

[029-047]decide Grandcourt not to part with his chance of future possession;—a

[029-048]man who has two places, in one of which the hunting is less good,

[029-049]naturally desiring a third where it is better. Also, Lush had thrown

[029-050]out to Sir Hugo the probability that Grandcourt would woo and win Miss

[029-051]Arrowpoint, and in that case ready money might be less of a temptation

[029-052]to him. Hence, on this unexpected meeting at [[Leubronn]], the baronet felt

[029-053]much curiosity to know how things had been going on at Diplow, was bent

[029-054]on being as civil as possible to his nephew, and looked forward to some

[029-055]private chat with Lush.

[029-056]Between [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] and Grandcourt there was a more faintly-marked but

[029-057]peculiar relation, depending on circumstances which have yet to be made

[029-058]known. But on no side was there any sign of suppressed chagrin on the

[029-059]first meeting at the _table d’hôte_, an hour after Grandcourt’s

[029-060]arrival; and when the quartette of gentlemen afterward met on the

[029-061]terrace, without Lady Mallinger, they moved off together to saunter

[029-062]through the rooms, Sir Hugo saying as they entered the large _saal_,

[029-063]“Did you play much at Baden, Grandcourt?”

[029-064]“No; I looked on and betted a little with some Russians there.”

[029-065]“Had you luck?”

[029-066]“What did I win, Lush?”

[029-067]“You brought away about two hundred,” said Lush.

[029-068]“You are not here for the sake of the play, then?” said Sir Hugo.

[029-069]“No; I don’t care about play now. It’s a confounded strain,” said

[029-070]Grandcourt, whose diamond ring and demeanor, as he moved along playing

[029-071]slightly with his whisker, were being a good deal stared at by rouged

[029-072]foreigners interested in a new milord.

[029-073]“The fact is, somebody should invent a mill to do amusements for you,

[029-074]my dear fellow,” said Sir Hugo, “as the Tartars get their praying done.

[029-075]But I agree with you; I never cared for play. It’s monotonous—knits

[029-076]the brain up into meshes. And it knocks me up to watch it now. I

[029-077]suppose one gets poisoned with the bad air. I never stay here more than

[029-078]ten minutes. But where’s your gambling beauty, Deronda? Have you seen

[029-079]her lately?”

[029-080]“She’s gone,” said Deronda, curtly.

[029-081]“An uncommonly fine girl, a perfect Diana,” said Sir Hugo, turning to

[029-082]Grandcourt again. “Really worth a little straining to look at her. I

[029-083]saw her winning, and she took it as coolly as if she had known it all

[029-084]beforehand. The same day Deronda happened to see her losing like

[029-085]wildfire, and she bore it with immense pluck. I suppose she was cleaned

[029-086]out, or was wise enough to stop in time. How do you know she’s gone?”

[029-087]“Oh, by the Visitor-list, ...” said Deronda, with a scarcely perceptible

[029-088]shrug. “Vandernoodt told me her name was Harleth, and she was with the

[029-089]Baron and Baroness von Langen. I saw by the list that [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Miss Harleth]] was

[029-090]no longer there.”

[029-091]This held no further information for Lush than that Gwendolen had been

[029-092]gambling. He had already looked at the list, and ascertained that

[029-093]Gwendolen had gone, but he had no intention of thrusting this knowledge

[029-094]on Grandcourt before he asked for it; and he had not asked, finding it

[029-095]enough to believe that the object of search would turn up somewhere or

[029-096]other.

[029-097]But now Grandcourt had heard what was rather piquant, and not a word

[029-098]about Miss Harleth had been missed by him. After a moment’s pause he

[029-099]said to Deronda,

[029-100]“Do you know those people—the Langens?”

[029-101]“I have talked with them a little since Miss Harleth went away. I knew

[029-102]nothing of them before.”

[029-103]“Where is she gone—do you know?”

[029-104]“She is gone home,” said Deronda, coldly, as if he wished to say no

[029-105]more. But then, from a fresh impulse, he turned to look markedly at

[029-106]Grandcourt, and added, “But it is possible you know her. Her home is

[029-107]not far from Diplow: [[Offendene]], near Winchester.”

[029-108]Deronda, turning to look straight at Grandcourt, who was on his left

[029-109]hand, might have been a subject for those old painters who liked

[029-110]contrasts of temperament. There was a calm intensity of life and

[029-111]richness of tint in his face that on a sudden gaze from him was rather

[029-112]startling, and often made him seem to have spoken, so that servants and

[029-113]officials asked him automatically, “What did you say, sir?” when he had

[029-114]been quite silent. Grandcourt himself felt an irritation, which he did

[029-115]not show except by a slight movement of the eyelids, at Deronda’s

[029-116]turning round on him when he was not asked to do more than speak. But

[029-117]he answered, with his usual drawl, “Yes, I know her,” and paused with

[029-118]his shoulder toward Deronda, to look at the gambling.

[029-119]“What of her, eh?” asked Sir Hugo of Lush, as the three moved on a

[029-120]little way. “She must be a new-comer at Offendene. Old Blenny lived

[029-121]there after the dowager died.”

[029-122]“A little too much of her,” said Lush, in a low, significant tone; not

[029-123]sorry to let Sir Hugo know the state of affairs.

[029-124]“Why? how?” said the baronet. They all moved out of the _salon_ into an

[029-125]airy promenade.

[029-126]“He has been on the brink of marrying her,” Lush went on. “But I hope

[029-127]it’s off now. She’s a niece of the clergyman—Gascoigne—at [[pennicote-rectory|Pennicote]].

[029-128]Her mother is a widow with a brood of daughters. This girl will have

[029-129]nothing, and is as dangerous as gunpowder. It would be a foolish

[029-130]marriage. But she has taken a freak against him, for she ran off here

[029-131]without notice, when he had agreed to call the next day. The fact is,

[029-132]he’s here after her; but he was in no great hurry, and between his

[029-133]caprice and hers they are likely enough not to get together again. But

[029-134]of course he has lost his chance with the heiress.”

[029-135]Grandcourt joining them said, “What a beastly den this is!—a worse

[029-136]hole than Baden. I shall go back to the hotel.”

[029-137]When Sir Hugo and Deronda were alone, the baronet began,

[029-138]“Rather a pretty story. That girl has something in her. She must be

[029-139]worth running after—has _de l’imprévu_. I think her appearance on the

[029-140]scene has bettered my chance of getting Diplow, whether the marriage

[029-141]comes off or not.”

[029-142]“I should hope a marriage like that would not come off,” said Deronda,

[029-143]in a tone of disgust.

[029-144]“What! are you a little touched with the sublime lash?” said Sir Hugo,

[029-145]putting up his glasses to help his short sight in looking at his

[029-146]companion. “Are you inclined to run after her?”

[029-147]“On the contrary,” said Deronda, “I should rather be inclined to run

[029-148]away from her.”

[029-149]“Why, you would easily cut out Grandcourt. A girl with her spirit would

[029-150]think you the finer match of the two,” said Sir Hugo, who often tried

[029-151]Deronda’s patience by finding a joke in impossible advice. (A

[029-152]difference of taste in jokes is a great strain on the affections.)

[029-153]“I suppose pedigree and land belong to a fine match,” said Deronda,

[029-154]coldly.

[029-155]“The best horse will win in spite of pedigree, my boy. You remember

[029-156]Napoleon’s _mot—Je suis un ancêtre_” said Sir Hugo, who habitually

[029-157]undervalued birth, as men after dining well often agree that the good

[029-158]of life is distributed with wonderful equality.

[029-159]“I am not sure that I want to be an ancestor,” said Deronda. “It

[029-160]doesn’t seem to me the rarest sort of origination.”

[029-161]“You won’t run after the pretty gambler, then?” said Sir Hugo, putting

[029-162]down his glasses.

[029-163]“Decidedly not.”

[029-164]This answer was perfectly truthful; nevertheless it had passed through

[029-165]Deronda’s mind that under other circumstances he should have given way

[029-166]to the interest this girl had raised in him, and tried to know more of

[029-167]her. But his history had given him a stronger bias in another

[029-168]direction. He felt himself in no sense free.

[029-169]CHAPTER XVI.

[029-170]Men, like planets, have both a visible and an invisible history. The

[029-171]astronomer threads the darkness with strict deduction, accounting so

[029-172]for every visible arc in the wanderer’s orbit; and the narrator of

[029-173]human actions, if he did his work with the same completeness, would

[029-174]have to thread the hidden pathways of feeling and thought which lead

[029-175]up to every moment of action, and to those moments of intense

[029-176]suffering which take the quality of action—like the cry of

[029-177]Prometheus, whose chained anguish seems a greater energy than the sea

[029-178]and sky he invokes and the deity he defies.

[029-179]Deronda’s circumstances, indeed, had been exceptional. One moment had

[029-180]been burned into his life as its chief epoch—a moment full of July

[029-181]sunshine and large pink roses shedding their last petals on a grassy

[029-182]court enclosed on three sides by a gothic cloister. Imagine him in such

[029-183]a scene: a boy of thirteen, stretched prone on the grass where it was

[029-184]in shadow, his curly head propped on his arms over a book, while his

[029-185]tutor, also reading, sat on a camp-stool under shelter. Deronda’s book

[029-186]was Sismondi’s _History of the Italian Republics_; the lad had a

[029-187]passion for history, eager to know how time had been filled up since

[029-188]the flood, and how things were carried on in the dull periods. Suddenly

[029-189]he let down his left arm and looked at his tutor, saying in purest

[029-190]boyish tones,
