---
id: ch025
label: "Section 25"
type: chapter
description: "How was it that he caused her unusual constraint now?—that she was"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[025-001]How was it that he caused her unusual constraint now?—that she was

[025-002]less daring and playful in her talk with him than with any other

[025-003]admirer she had known? That absence of demonstrativeness which she was

[025-004]glad of, acted as a charm in more senses than one, and was slightly

[025-005]benumbing. [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] after all was formidable—a handsome lizard of a

[025-006]hitherto unknown species, not of the lively, darting kind. But

[025-007][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] knew hardly anything about lizards, and ignorance gives one a

[025-008]large range of probabilities. This splendid specimen was probably

[025-009]gentle, suitable as a boudoir pet: what may not a lizard be, if you

[025-010]know nothing to the contrary? Her acquaintance with Grandcourt was such

[025-011]that no accomplishment suddenly revealed in him would have surprised

[025-012]her. And he was so little suggestive of drama, that it hardly occurred

[025-013]to her to think with any detail how his life of thirty-six years had

[025-014]been passed: in general, she imagined him always cold and dignified,

[025-015]not likely ever to have committed himself. He had hunted the tiger—had

[025-016]he ever been in love or made love? The one experience and the other

[025-017]seemed alike remote in Gwendolen’s fancy from the Mr. Grandcourt who

[025-018]had come to [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] in order apparently to make a chief epoch in her

[025-019]destiny—perhaps by introducing her to that state of marriage which she

[025-020]had resolved to make a state of greater freedom than her girlhood. And

[025-021]on the whole she wished to marry him; he suited her purpose; her

[025-022]prevailing, deliberate intention was, to accept him.

[025-023]But was she going to fulfill her deliberate intention? She began to be

[025-024]afraid of herself, and to find out a certain difficulty in doing as she

[025-025]liked. Already her assertion of [[freedom|independence]] in evading his advances

[025-026]had been carried farther than was necessary, and she was thinking with

[025-027]some anxiety what she might do on the next occasion.

[025-028]Seated according to her habit with her back to the horses on their

[025-029][[ambition|drive]] homeward, she was completely under the observation of her mamma,

[025-030]who took the excitement and changefulness in the expression of her

[025-031]eyes, her unwonted absence of mind and total silence, as unmistakable

[025-032]signs that something unprecedented had occurred between her and

[025-033]Grandcourt. [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]]’s uneasiness determined her to risk some

[025-034]speech on the subject: the Gascoignes were to dine at [[Offendene]], and in

[025-035]what had occurred this morning there might be some reason for

[025-036]consulting the rector; not that she expected him anymore than herself

[025-037]to influence Gwendolen, but that her anxious mind wanted to be

[025-038]disburdened.

[025-039]“Something has happened, dear?” she began, in a tender tone of question.

[025-040]Gwendolen looked round, and seeming to be roused to the consciousness

[025-041]of her physical self, took off her gloves and then her hat, that the

[025-042]soft breeze might blow on her head. They were in a retired bit of the

[025-043]road, where the long afternoon shadows from the bordering trees fell

[025-044]across it and no observers were within sight. Her eyes continued to

[025-045]meet her mother’s, but she did not speak.

[025-046]“Mr. Grandcourt has been saying something?—Tell me, dear.” The last

[025-047]words were uttered beseechingly.

[025-048]“What am I to tell you, mamma?” was the perverse answer.

[025-049]“I am sure something has agitated you. You ought to confide in me,

[025-050]Gwen. You ought not to leave me in doubt and anxiety.” Mrs. Davilow’s

[025-051]eyes filled with tears.

[025-052]“Mamma, dear, please don’t be miserable,” said Gwendolen, with pettish

[025-053]remonstrance. “It only makes me more so. I am in doubt myself.”

[025-054]“[[About]] Mr. Grandcourt’s intentions?” said Mrs. Davilow, gathering

[025-055]determination from her alarms.

[025-056]“No; not at all,” said Gwendolen, with some curtness, and a pretty

[025-057]little toss of the head as she put on her hat again.

[025-058]“About whether you will accept him, then?”

[025-059]“Precisely.”

[025-060]“Have you given him a doubtful answer?”

[025-061]“I have given him no answer at all.”

[025-062]“He _has_ spoken so that you could not misunderstand him?”

[025-063]“As far as I would let him speak.”

[025-064]“You expect him to persevere?” Mrs. Davilow put this question rather

[025-065]anxiously, and receiving no answer, asked another: “You don’t consider

[025-066]that you have discouraged him?”

[025-067]“I dare say not.”

[025-068]“I thought you liked him, dear,” said Mrs. Davilow, timidly.

[025-069]“So I do, mamma, as liking goes. There is less to dislike about him

[025-070]than about most men. He is quiet and _distingué_.” Gwendolen so far

[025-071]spoke with a pouting sort of gravity; but suddenly she recovered some

[025-072]of her mischievousness, and her face broke into a smile as she

[025-073]added—“Indeed he has all the qualities that would make a husband

[025-074]tolerable—battlement, veranda, stable, etc., no grins and no glass in

[025-075]his eye.”

[025-076]“Do be serious with me for a moment, dear. Am I to understand that you

[025-077]mean to accept him?”

[025-078]“Oh, pray, mamma, leave me to myself,” said Gwendolen, with a pettish

[025-079]distress in her voice.

[025-080]And Mrs. Davilow said no more.

[025-081]When they got home Gwendolen declared that she would not dine. She was

[025-082]tired, and would come down in the evening after she had taken some

[025-083]rest. The probability that her uncle would hear what had passed did not

[025-084]trouble her. She was convinced that whatever he might say would be on

[025-085]the side of her accepting Grandcourt, and she wished to accept him if

[025-086]she could. At this moment she would willingly have had weights hung on

[025-087]her own caprice.

[025-088][[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]] did hear—not Gwendolen’s answers repeated verbatim, but

[025-089]a softened generalized account of them. The mother conveyed as vaguely

[025-090]as the keen rector’s questions would let her the impression that

[025-091]Gwendolen was in some uncertainty about her own mind, but inclined on

[025-092]the whole to acceptance. The result was that the uncle felt himself

[025-093]called on to interfere; he did not conceive that he should do his duty

[025-094]in witholding direction from his niece in a momentous crisis of this

[025-095]kind. Mrs. Davilow ventured a hesitating opinion that perhaps it would

[025-096]be safer to say nothing—Gwendolen was so sensitive (she did not like

[025-097]to say willful). But the rector’s was a firm mind, grasping its first

[025-098]judgments tenaciously and acting on them promptly, whence

[025-099]counter-judgments were no more for him than shadows fleeting across the

[025-100]solid ground to which he adjusted himself.

[025-101]This match with Grandcourt presented itself to him as a sort of public

[025-102]affair; perhaps there were ways in which it might even strengthen the

[025-103]establishment. To the rector, whose father (nobody would have suspected

[025-104]it, and nobody was told) had risen to be a provincial corn-dealer,

[025-105]aristocratic heirship resembled regal heirship in excepting its

[025-106]possessor from the ordinary standard of moral judgments, Grandcourt,

[025-107]the almost certain baronet, the probable peer, was to be ranged with

[025-108]public personages, and was a match to be accepted on broad general

[025-109]grounds national and ecclesiastical. Such public personages, it is

[025-110]true, are often in the nature of giants which an ancient community may

[025-111]have felt pride and safety in possessing, though, regarded privately,

[025-112]these born eminences must often have been inconvenient and even

[025-113]noisome. But of the future husband personally Mr. Gascoigne was

[025-114]disposed to think the best. Gossip is a sort of smoke that comes from

[025-115]the dirty tobacco-pipes of those who diffuse it: it proves nothing

[025-116]but the bad taste of the smoker. But if Grandcourt had really made any

[025-117]deeper or more unfortunate experiments in folly than were common in

[025-118]young men of high prospects, he was of an age to have finished them.

[025-119]All accounts can be suitably wound up when a man has not ruined

[025-120]himself, and the expense may be taken as an insurance against future

[025-121]error. This was the view of practical wisdom; with reference to higher

[025-122]views, repentance had a supreme moral and religious value. There was

[025-123]every reason to believe that a woman of well-regulated mind would be

[025-124]happy with Grandcourt.

[025-125]It was no surprise to Gwendolen on coming down to tea to be told that

[025-126]her uncle wished to see her in the dining-room. He threw aside the

[025-127]paper as she entered and greeted her with his usual kindness. As his

[025-128]wife had remarked, he always “made much” of Gwendolen, and her

[025-129]importance had risen of late. “My dear,” he said, in a fatherly way,

[025-130]moving a chair for her as he held her hand, “I want to speak to you on

[025-131]a subject which is more momentous than any other with regard to your

[025-132]welfare. You will guess what I mean. But I shall speak to you with

[025-133]perfect directness: in such matters I consider myself bound to act as

[025-134]your father. You have no objection, I hope?”

[025-135]“Oh dear, no, uncle. You have always been very kind to me,” said

[025-136]Gwendolen, frankly. This evening she was willing, if it were possible,

[025-137]to be a little fortified against her troublesome self, and her

[025-138]resistant temper was in abeyance. The rector’s mode of speech always

[025-139]conveyed a thrill of authority, as of a word of command: it seemed to

[025-140]take for granted that there could be no wavering in the audience, and

[025-141]that every one was going to be rationally obedient.

[025-142]“It is naturally a satisfaction to me that the prospect of a marriage

[025-143]for you—advantageous in the highest degree—has presented itself so

[025-144]early. I do not know exactly what has passed between you and Mr.

[025-145]Grandcourt, but I presume there can be little doubt, from the way in

[025-146]which he has distinguished you, that he desires to make you his wife.”

[025-147]Gwendolen did not speak immediately, and her uncle said with more

[025-148]emphasis,

[025-149]“Have you any doubt of that yourself, my dear?”

[025-150]“I suppose that is what he has been thinking of. But he may have

[025-151]changed his mind to-morrow,” said Gwendolen.

[025-152]“Why to-morrow? Has he made advances which you have discouraged?”

[025-153]“I think he meant—he began to make advances—but I did not encourage

[025-154]them. I turned the conversation.”

[025-155]“Will you confide in me so far as to tell me your reasons?”

[025-156]“I am not sure that I had any reasons, uncle.” Gwendolen laughed rather

[025-157]artificially.

[025-158]“You are quite capable of reflecting, Gwendolen. You are aware that

[025-159]this is not a trivial occasion, and it concerns your establishment for

[025-160]life under circumstances which may not occur again. You have a duty

[025-161]here both to yourself and your family. I wish to understand whether you

[025-162]have any ground for hesitating as to your acceptance of Mr. Grandcourt.”

[025-163]“I suppose I hesitate without grounds.” Gwendolen spoke rather

[025-164]poutingly, and her uncle grew suspicious.

[025-165]“Is he disagreeable to you personally?”

[025-166]“No.”

[025-167]“Have you heard anything of him which has affected you disagreeably?”

[025-168]The rector thought it impossible that Gwendolen could have heard the

[025-169]gossip he had heard, but in any case he must endeavor to put all things

[025-170]in the right light for her.

[025-171]“I have heard nothing about him except that he is a great match,” said

[025-172]Gwendolen, with some sauciness; “and that affects me very agreeably.”

[025-173]“Then, my dear Gwendolen, I have nothing further to say than this: you

[025-174]hold your fortune in your own hands—a fortune such as rarely happens

[025-175]to a girl in your circumstances—a fortune in fact which almost takes

[025-176]the question out of the range of mere personal feeling, and makes your

[025-177]acceptance of it a duty. If Providence offers you power and

[025-178]position—especially when unclogged by any conditions that are

[025-179]repugnant to you—your course is one of [[duty|responsibility]], into which

[025-180]caprice must not enter. A man does not like to have his attachment

[025-181]trifled with: he may not be at once repelled—these things are matters

[025-182]of individual disposition. But the trifling may be carried too far. And

[025-183]I must point out to you that in case Mr. Grandcourt were repelled

[025-184]without your having refused him—without your having intended

[025-185]ultimately to refuse him, your situation would be a humiliating and

[025-186]painful one. I, for my part, should regard you with severe

[025-187]disapprobation, as the victim of nothing else than your own coquetry

[025-188]and folly.”

[025-189]Gwendolen became pallid as she listened to this admonitory speech. The

[025-190]ideas it raised had the force of sensations. Her resistant courage

[025-191]would not help her here, because her uncle was not urging her against

[025-192]her own resolve; he was pressing upon her the motives of dread which

[025-193]she already felt; he was making her more conscious of the risks that

[025-194]lay within herself. She was silent, and the rector observed that he had

[025-195]produced some strong effect.
