---
id: ch024
label: "Section 24"
type: chapter
description: "Gwendolen enjoyed the riding, but her pleasure did not break forth in"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[024-001][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] enjoyed the riding, but her pleasure did not break forth in

[024-002]girlish unpremeditated chat and laughter as it did on that morning with

[024-003][[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]]. She spoke a little, and even laughed, but with a lightness as of a

[024-004]far-off echo: for her too there was some peculiar quality in the

[024-005]air—not, she was sure, any subjugation of her will by [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]],

[024-006]and the splendid prospects he meant to offer her; for Gwendolen desired

[024-007]every one, that dignified gentleman himself included, to understand

[024-008]that she was going to do just as she liked, and that they had better

[024-009]not calculate on her pleasing them. If she chose to take this husband,

[024-010]she would have him know that she was not going to renounce her freedom,

[024-011]or according to her favorite formula, “not going to do as other women

[024-012]did.”

[024-013]Grandcourt’s speeches this morning were, as usual, all of that brief

[024-014]sort which never fails to make a conversational figure when the speaker

[024-015]is held important in his circle. Stopping so soon, they give signs of a

[024-016]suppressed and formidable ability so say more, and have also the

[024-017]meritorious quality of allowing lengthiness to others.

[024-018]“How do you like Criterion’s paces?” he said, after they had entered

[024-019]the park and were slacking from a canter to a walk.

[024-020]“He is delightful to ride. I should like to have a leap with him, if it

[024-021]would not frighten mamma. There was a good wide channel we passed five

[024-022]minutes ago. I should like to have a gallop back and take it.”

[024-023]“Pray do. We can take it together.”

[024-024]“No, thanks. Mamma is so timid—if she saw me it might make her ill.”

[024-025]“Let me go and explain. Criterion would take it without fail.”

[024-026]“No—indeed—you are very kind—but it would alarm her too much. I dare

[024-027]take any leap when she is not by; but I do it and don’t tell her about

[024-028]it.”

[024-029]“We can let the carriage pass and then set off.”

[024-030]“No, no, pray don’t think of it any more: I spoke quite randomly,” said

[024-031]Gwendolen; she began to feel a new objection to carrying out her own

[024-032]proposition.

[024-033]“But [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] knows I shall take care of you.”

[024-034]“Yes, but she would think of you as having to take care of my broken

[024-035]neck.”

[024-036]There was a considerable pause before Grandcourt said, looking toward

[024-037]her, “I should like to have the right always to take care of you.”

[024-038]Gwendolen did not turn her eyes on him; it seemed to her a long while

[024-039]that she was first blushing, and then turning pale, but to Grandcourt’s

[024-040]rate of judgment she answered soon enough, with the lightest flute-tone

[024-041]and a careless movement of the head, “Oh, I am not sure that I want to

[024-042]be taken care of: if I chose to risk breaking my neck, I should like to

[024-043]be at [[freedom|liberty]] to do it.”

[024-044]She checked her horse as she spoke, and turned in her saddle, looking

[024-045]toward the advancing carriage. Her eyes swept across Grandcourt as she

[024-046]made this movement, but there was no language in them to correct the

[024-047]carelessness of her reply. At that very moment she was aware that she

[024-048]was risking something—not her neck, but the possibility of finally

[024-049]checking Grandcourt’s advances, and she did not feel contented with the

[024-050]possibility.

[024-051]“Damn her!” thought Grandcourt, as he too checked his horse. He was not

[024-052]a wordy thinker, and this explosive phrase stood for mixed impressions

[024-053]which eloquent interpreters might have expanded into some sentences

[024-054]full of an irritated sense that he was being mystified, and a

[024-055]determination that this girl should not make a fool of him. Did she

[024-056]want him to throw himself at her feet and declare that he was dying for

[024-057]her? It was not by that gate that she could enter on the privileges he

[024-058]could give her. Or did she expect him to write his proposals? Equally a

[024-059]delusion. He would not make his offer in any way that could place him

[024-060]definitely in the position of being rejected. But as to her accepting

[024-061]him, she had done it already in accepting his marked attentions: and

[024-062]anything which happened to break them off would be understood to her

[024-063]disadvantage. She was merely coquetting, then?

[024-064]However, the carriage came up, and no further _tête-à-tête_ could well

[024-065]occur before their arrival at the house, where there was abundant

[024-066]company, to whom Gwendolen, clad in riding-dress, with her hat laid

[024-067]aside, clad also in the repute of being chosen by Mr. Grandcourt, was

[024-068]naturally a centre of observation; and since the objectionable [[Lush|Mr. Lush]]

[024-069]was not there to look at her, this stimulus of admiring attention

[024-070]heightened her spirits, and dispersed, for the time, the uneasy

[024-071]consciousness of divided impulses which threatened her with repentance

[024-072]of her own acts. Whether Grandcourt had been offended or not there was

[024-073]no judging: his manners were unchanged, but Gwendolen’s acuteness had

[024-074]not gone deeper than to discern that his manners were no clue for her,

[024-075]and because these were unchanged she was not the less afraid of him.

[024-076]She had not been at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] before except to dine; and since certain

[024-077]points of view from the windows and the garden were worth showing, Lady

[024-078]Flora Hollis proposed after luncheon, when some of the guests had

[024-079]dispersed, and the sun was sloping toward four o’clock, that the

[024-080]remaining party should make a little exploration. Here came frequent

[024-081]opportunities when Grandcourt might have retained Gwendolen apart, and

[024-082]have spoken to her unheard. But no! He indeed spoke to no one else, but

[024-083]what he said was nothing more eager or intimate than it had been in

[024-084]their first interview. He looked at her not less than usual; and some

[024-085]of her defiant spirit having come back, she looked full at him in

[024-086]return, not caring—rather preferring—that his eyes had no expression

[024-087]in them.

[024-088]But at last it seemed as if he entertained some contrivance. After they

[024-089]had nearly made the tour of the grounds, the whole party stopped by the

[024-090]pool to be amused with Fetch’s accomplishment of bringing a water lily

[024-091]to the bank like Cowper’s spaniel Beau, and having been disappointed in

[024-092]his first attempt insisted on his trying again.

[024-093]Here Grandcourt, who stood with Gwendolen outside the group, turned

[024-094]deliberately, and fixing his eyes on a knoll planted with American

[024-095]shrubs, and having a winding path up it, said languidly,

[024-096]“This is a bore. Shall we go up there?”

[024-097]“Oh, certainly—since we are exploring,” said Gwendolen. She was rather

[024-098]pleased, and yet afraid.

[024-099]The path was too narrow for him to offer his arm, and they walked up in

[024-100]silence. When they were on the bit of platform at the summit,

[024-101]Grandcourt said,

[024-102]“There is nothing to be seen here: the thing was not worth climbing.”

[024-103]How was it that Gwendolen did not laugh? She was perfectly silent,

[024-104]holding up the folds of her robe like a statue, and giving a harder

[024-105]grasp to the handle of her whip, which she had snatched up

[024-106]automatically with her hat when they had first set off.

[024-107]“What sort of a place do you prefer?” said Grandcourt.

[024-108]“Different places are agreeable in their way. On the whole, I think, I

[024-109]prefer places that are open and cheerful. I am not fond of anything

[024-110]sombre.”

[024-111]“Your place of [[Offendene]] is too sombre....”.

[024-112]“It is, rather.”

[024-113]“You will not remain there long, I hope.”

[024-114]“Oh, yes, I think so. Mamma likes to be near her sister.”

[024-115]Silence for a short space.

[024-116]“It is not to be supposed that _you_ will always live there, though

[024-117]Mrs. Davilow may.”

[024-118]“I don’t know. We women can’t go in search of adventures—to find out

[024-119]the North-West Passage or the source of the Nile, or to hunt tigers in

[024-120]the East. We must stay where we grow, or where the gardeners like to

[024-121]transplant us. We are brought up like the flowers, to look as pretty as

[024-122]we can, and be dull without complaining. That is my notion about the

[024-123]plants; they are often bored, and that is the reason why some of them

[024-124]have got poisonous. What do you think?” Gwendolen had run on rather

[024-125]nervously, lightly whipping the rhododendron bush in front of her.

[024-126]“I quite agree. Most things are bores,” said Grandcourt, his mind

[024-127]having been pushed into an easy current, away from its intended track.

[024-128]But, after a moment’s pause, he continued in his broken, refined drawl,

[024-129]“But a woman can be married.”

[024-130]“Some women can.”

[024-131]“You, certainly, unless you are obstinately cruel.”

[024-132]“I am not sure that I am not both cruel and obstinate.” Here Gwendolen

[024-133]suddenly turned her head and looked full at Grandcourt, whose eyes she

[024-134]had felt to be upon her throughout their conversation. She was

[024-135]wondering what the effect of looking at him would be on herself rather

[024-136]than on him.

[024-137]He stood perfectly still, half a yard or more away from her; and it

[024-138]flashed through her mind what a sort of lotus-eater’s stupor had begun

[024-139]in him and was taking possession of her. Then he said,

[024-140]“Are you as uncertain about yourself as you make others about you?”

[024-141]“I am quite uncertain about myself; I don’t know how uncertain others

[024-142]may be.”

[024-143]“And you wish them to understand that you don’t care?” said Grandcourt,

[024-144]with a touch of new hardness in his tone.

[024-145]“I did not say that,” Gwendolen replied, hesitatingly, and turning her

[024-146]eyes away whipped the rhododendron bush again. She wished she were on

[024-147]horseback that she might set off on a canter. It was impossible to set

[024-148]off running down the knoll.

[024-149]“You do care, then,” said Grandcourt, not more quickly, but with a

[024-150]softened drawl.

[024-151]“Ha! my whip!” said Gwendolen, in a little scream of distress. She had

[024-152]let it go—what could be more natural in a slight agitation?—and—but

[024-153]this seemed less natural in a gold-handled whip which had been left

[024-154]altogether to itself—it had gone with some force over the immediate

[024-155]shrubs, and had lodged itself in the branches of an azalea half-way

[024-156]down the knoll. She could run down now, laughing prettily, and

[024-157]Grandcourt was obliged to follow; but she was beforehand with him in

[024-158]rescuing the whip, and continued on her way to the level ground, when

[024-159]she paused and looked at Grandcourt with an exasperating brightness in

[024-160]her glance and a heightened color, as if she had carried a triumph, and

[024-161]these indications were still noticeable to Mrs. Davilow when Gwendolen

[024-162]and Grandcourt joined the rest of the party.

[024-163]“It is all coquetting,” thought Grandcourt; “the next time I beckon she

[024-164]will come down.”

[024-165]It seemed to him likely that this final beckoning might happen the very

[024-166]next day, when there was to be a picnic archery meeting in Cardell

[024-167]Chase, according to the plan projected on the evening of the ball.

[024-168]Even in Gwendolen’s mind that result was one of two likelihoods that

[024-169]presented themselves alternately, one of two decisions toward which she

[024-170]was being precipitated, as if they were two sides of a boundary-line,

[024-171]and she did not know on which she should fall. This subjection to a

[024-172]possible self, a self not to be absolutely predicted about, caused her

[024-173]some astonishment and terror; her favorite key of life—doing as she

[024-174]liked—seemed to fail her, and she could not foresee what at a given

[024-175]moment she might like to do. The prospect of marrying Grandcourt really

[024-176]seemed more attractive to her than she had believed beforehand that any

[024-177]marriage could be: the dignities, the luxuries, the power of doing a

[024-178]great deal of what she liked to do, which had now come close to her,

[024-179]and within her choice to secure or to lose, took hold of her nature as

[024-180]if it had been the strong odor of what she had only imagined and longed

[024-181]for before. And Grandcourt himself? He seemed as little of a flaw in

[024-182]his fortunes as a lover and husband could possibly be. Gwendolen wished

[024-183]to mount the chariot and [[ambition|drive]] the plunging horses herself, with a

[024-184]spouse by her side who would fold his arms and give her his countenance

[024-185]without looking ridiculous. Certainly, with all her perspicacity, and

[024-186]all the reading which seemed to her mamma dangerously instructive, her

[024-187]judgment was consciously a little at fault before Grandcourt. He was

[024-188]adorably quiet and free from absurdities—he would be a husband to suit

[024-189]with the best appearance a woman could make. But what else was he? He

[024-190]had been everywhere, and seen everything. _That_ was desirable, and

[024-191]especially gratifying as a preamble to his supreme preference for

[024-192]Gwendolen Harleth. He did not appear to enjoy anything much. That was

[024-193]not necessary: and the less he had of particular tastes, or desires,

[024-194]the more freedom his wife was likely to have in following hers.

[024-195]Gwendolen conceived that after marriage she would most probably be able

[024-196]to manage him thoroughly.
