---
id: ch037
label: "Section 37"
type: chapter
description: "The desire to know his own mother, or to know about her, was constantly"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[037-001]The desire to know his own mother, or to know about her, was constantly

[037-002]haunted with dread; and in imagining what might befall [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] it quickly

[037-003]occurred to him that finding the mother and brother from whom she had

[037-004]been parted when she was a little one might turn out to be a calamity.

[037-005]When she was in the boat she said that her mother and brother were

[037-006]good; but the goodness might have been chiefly in her own ignorant

[037-007]innocence and yearning memory, and the ten or twelve years since the

[037-008]parting had been time enough for much worsening. Spite of his strong

[037-009]tendency to side with the objects of prejudice, and in general with

[037-010]those who got the worst of it, his interest had never been practically

[037-011]drawn toward existing Jews, and the facts he knew about them, whether

[037-012]they walked conspicuous in fine apparel or lurked in by-streets, were

[037-013]chiefly of a sort most repugnant to him. Of learned and accomplished

[037-014]Jews he took it for granted that they had dropped their religion, and

[037-015]wished to be merged in the people of their native lands. Scorn flung at

[037-016]a Jew as such would have roused all his sympathy in griefs of

[037-017]inheritance; but the indiscriminate scorn of a race will often strike a

[037-018]specimen who has well earned it on his own account, and might fairly be

[037-019]gibbeted as a rascally son of Adam. It appears that the Caribs, who

[037-020]know little of theology, regard thieving as a practice peculiarly

[037-021]connected with Christian tenets, and probably they could allege

[037-022]experimental grounds for this opinion. [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] could not escape (who

[037-023]can?) knowing ugly stories of Jewish characteristics and occupations;

[037-024]and though one of his favorite protests was against the severance of

[037-025]past and present history, he was like others who shared his protest, in

[037-026]never having cared to reach any more special conclusions about actual

[037-027]Jews than that they retained the virtues and vices of a long-oppressed

[037-028]race. But now that Mirah’s longing roused his mind to a closer survey

[037-029]of details, very disagreeable images urged themselves of what it might

[037-030]be to find out this middle-aged Jewess and her son. To be sure, there

[037-031]was the exquisite refinement and charm of the creature herself to make

[037-032]a presumption in favor of her immediate kindred, but—he must wait to

[037-033]know more: perhaps through Mrs. Meyrick he might gather some guiding

[037-034]hints from Mirah’s own lips. Her voice, her accent, her looks—all the

[037-035]sweet purity that clothed her as with a consecrating garment made him

[037-036]shrink the more from giving her, either ideally or practically, an

[037-037]association with what was hateful or contaminating. But these fine

[037-038]words with which we fumigate and becloud unpleasant facts are not the

[037-039]language in which we think. Deronda’s thinking went on in rapid images

[037-040]of what might be: he saw himself guided by some official scout into a

[037-041]dingy street; he entered through a dim doorway, and saw a hawk-eyed

[037-042]woman, rough-headed, and unwashed, cheapening a hungry girl’s last bit

[037-043]of finery; or in some quarter only the more hideous for being smarter,

[037-044]he found himself under the breath of a young Jew talkative and

[037-045]familiar, willing to show his acquaintance with gentlemen’s tastes, and

[037-046]not fastidious in any transactions with which they would favor him—and

[037-047]so on through the brief chapter of his experience in this kind. Excuse

[037-048]him: his mind was not apt to run spontaneously into insulting ideas, or

[037-049]to practice a form of wit which identifies Moses with the advertisement

[037-050]sheet; but he was just now governed by dread, and if Mirah’s parents

[037-051]had been Christian, the chief difference would have been that his

[037-052]forebodings would have been fed with wider knowledge. It was the habit

[037-053]of his mind to connect dread with unknown parentage, and in this case

[037-054]as well as his own there was enough to make the connection reasonable.

[037-055]But what was to be done with Mirah? She needed shelter and protection

[037-056]in the fullest sense, and all his chivalrous sentiment roused itself to

[037-057]insist that the sooner and the more fully he could engage for her the

[037-058]interest of others besides himself, the better he should fulfill her

[037-059]claims on him. He had no right to provide for her entirely, though he

[037-060]might be able to do so; the very depth of the impression she had

[037-061]produced made him desire that she should understand herself to be

[037-062]entirely independent of him; and vague visions of the future which he

[037-063]tried to dispel as fantastic left their influence in an anxiety

[037-064]stronger than any motive he could give for it, that those who saw his

[037-065]actions closely should be acquainted from the first with the history of

[037-066]his relation to Mirah. He had learned to hate secrecy about the grand

[037-067]ties and obligations of his life—to hate it the more because a strong

[037-068]spell of interwoven sensibilities hindered him from breaking such

[037-069]secrecy. Deronda had made a vow to himself that—since the truths which

[037-070][[shame|disgrace]] mortals are not all of their own making—the truth should

[037-071]never be made a disgrace to another by his act. He was not without

[037-072]terror lest he should break this vow, and fall into the apologetic

[037-073]philosophy which explains the world into containing nothing better than

[037-074]one’s own conduct.

[037-075]At one moment he resolved to tell the whole of his adventure to Sir

[037-076]Hugo and Lady Mallinger the next morning at breakfast, but the

[037-077]possibility that something quite new might reveal itself on his next

[037-078]visit to Mrs. Meyrick’s checked this impulse, and he finally went to

[037-079]sleep on the conclusion that he would wait until that visit had been

[037-080]made.

[037-081]CHAPTER XX.

[037-082]“It will hardly be denied that even in this frail and corrupted world,

[037-083]we sometimes meet persons who, in their very mien and aspect, as well

[037-084]as in the whole habit of life, manifest such a signature and stamp of

[037-085]virtue, as to make our judgment of them a matter of intuition rather

[037-086]than the result of continued examination.”—ALEXANDER KNOX: quoted in

[037-087]Southey’s Life of Wesley.

[037-088]Mirah said that she had slept well that night; and when she came down

[037-089]in Mab’s black dress, her dark hair curling in fresh fibrils as it

[037-090]gradually dried from its plenteous bath, she looked like one who was

[037-091]beginning to take comfort after the long sorrow and watching which had

[037-092]paled her cheek and made blue semicircles under her eyes. It was Mab

[037-093]who carried her breakfast and ushered her down—with some pride in the

[037-094]effect produced by a pair of tiny felt slippers which she had rushed

[037-095]out to buy because there were no shoes in the house small enough for

[037-096]Mirah, whose borrowed dress ceased about her ankles and displayed the

[037-097]cheap clothing that, moulding itself on her feet, seemed an adornment

[037-098]as choice as the sheaths of buds. The farthing buckles were bijoux.

[037-099]“Oh, if you please, mamma?” cried Mab, clasping her hands and stooping

[037-100]toward Mirah’s feet, as she entered the parlor; “look at the slippers,

[037-101]how beautiful they fit! I declare she is like the Queen Budoor—‘two

[037-102]delicate feet, the work of the protecting and all-recompensing Creator,

[037-103]support her; and I wonder how they can sustain what is above them.’”

[037-104]Mirah looked down at her own feet in a childlike way and then smiled at

[037-105]Mrs. Meyrick, who was saying inwardly, “One could hardly imagine this

[037-106]creature having an evil thought. But wise people would tell me to be

[037-107]cautious.” She returned Mirah’s smile and said, “I fear the feet have

[037-108]had to sustain their burden a little too often lately. But to-day she

[037-109]will rest and be my companion.”

[037-110]“And she will tell you so many things and I shall not hear them,”

[037-111]grumbled Mab, who felt herself in the first volume of a delightful

[037-112]romance and obliged to miss some chapters because she had to go to

[037-113]pupils.

[037-114]Kate was already gone to make sketches along the river, and Amy was

[037-115]away on business errands. It was what the mother wished, to be alone

[037-116]with this stranger, whose story must be a sorrowful one, yet was

[037-117]needful to be told.

[037-118]The small front parlor was as good as a temple that morning. The

[037-119]sunlight was on the river and soft air came in through the open window;

[037-120]the walls showed a glorious silent cloud of witnesses—the Virgin

[037-121]soaring amid her cherubic escort; grand Melancholia with her solemn

[037-122]universe; the Prophets and Sibyls; the School of Athens; the Last

[037-123]Supper; mystic groups where far-off ages made one moment; grave Holbein

[037-124]and Rembrandt heads; the Tragic Muse; last-century children at their

[037-125]musings or their play; Italian poets—all were there through the medium

[037-126]of a little black and white. The neat mother who had weathered her

[037-127]troubles, and come out of them with a face still cheerful, was sorting

[037-128]colored wools for her embroidery. Hafiz purred on the window-ledge, the

[037-129]clock on the mantle-piece ticked without hurry, and the occasional

[037-130]sound of wheels seemed to lie outside the more massive central quiet.

[037-131]Mrs. Meyrick thought that this quiet might be the best invitation to

[037-132]speech on the part of her companion, and chose not to disturb it by

[037-133]remark. Mirah sat opposite in her former attitude, her hands clasped on

[037-134]her lap, her ankles crossed, her eyes at first traveling slowly over

[037-135]the objects around her, but finally resting with a sort of placid

[037-136]reverence on Mrs. Meyrick. At length she began to speak softly.

[037-137]“I remember my mother’s face better than anything; yet I was not seven

[037-138]when I was taken away, and I am nineteen now.”

[037-139]“I can understand that,” said Mrs. Meyrick. “There are some earliest

[037-140]things that last the longest.”

[037-141]“Oh, yes, it was the earliest. I think my life began with waking up and

[037-142]loving my mother’s face: it was so near to me, and her arms were round

[037-143]me, and she sang to me. One hymn she sang so often, so often: and then

[037-144]she taught me to sing it with her: it was the first I ever sang. They

[037-145]were always Hebrew hymns she sang; and because I never knew the meaning

[037-146]of the words they seemed full of nothing but our love and happiness.

[037-147]When I lay in my little bed and it was all white above me, she used to

[037-148]bend over me, between me and the white, and sing in a sweet, low voice.

[037-149]I can dream myself back into that time when I am awake, and it often

[037-150]comes back to me in my sleep—my hand is very little, I put it up to

[037-151]her face and she kisses it. Sometimes in my dreams I begin to tremble

[037-152]and think that we are both dead; but then I wake up and my hand lies

[037-153]like this, and for a moment I hardly know myself. But if I could see my

[037-154]mother again I should know her.”

[037-155]“You must expect some change after twelve years,” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[037-156]gently. “See my grey hair: ten years ago it was bright brown. The days

[037-157]and months pace over us like restless little birds, and leave the marks

[037-158]of their feet backward and forward; especially when they are like birds

[037-159]with heavy hearts—then they tread heavily.”

[037-160]“Ah, I am sure her heart has been heavy for want of me. But to feel her

[037-161]joy if we could meet again, and I could make her know I love her and

[037-162]give her deep comfort after all her mourning! If that could be, I

[037-163]should mind nothing; I should be glad that I have lived through my

[037-164]trouble. I did despair. The world seemed miserable and wicked; none

[037-165]helped me so that I could bear their looks and words; I felt that my

[037-166]mother was dead, and death was the only way to her. But then in the

[037-167]last moment—yesterday, when I longed for the water to close over

[037-168]me—and I thought that death was the best image of mercy—then goodness

[037-169]came to me living, and I felt trust in the living. And—it is

[037-170]strange—but I began to hope that she was living too. And now I with

[037-171]you—here—this morning, peace and hope have come into me like a flood.

[037-172]I want nothing; I can wait; because I hope and believe and am

[037-173]grateful—oh, so grateful! You have not thought evil of me—you have

[037-174]not despised me.”
