---
id: ch032
label: "Section 32"
type: chapter
description: "“I suppose money will make some difference, sir,” said Daniel blushing."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[032-001]“I suppose money will make some difference, sir,” said Daniel blushing.

[032-002]“I shall have to keep myself by-and-by.”

[032-003]“Not exactly. I recommend you not to be extravagant—yes, yes, I

[032-004]know—you are not inclined to that—but you need not take up anything

[032-005]against the grain. You will have a bachelor’s income—enough for you to

[032-006]look about with. Perhaps I had better tell you that you may consider

[032-007]yourself secure of seven hundred a year. You might make yourself a

[032-008]barrister—be a writer—take up politics. I confess that is what would

[032-009]please me best. I should like to have you at my elbow and pulling with

[032-010]me.”

[032-011][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] looked embarrassed. He felt that he ought to make some sign of

[032-012]gratitude, but other feelings clogged his tongue. A moment was passing

[032-013]by in which a question about his birth was throbbing within him, and

[032-014]yet it seemed more impossible than ever that the question should find

[032-015]vent—more impossible than ever that he could hear certain things from

[032-016][[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]]’s lips. The liberal way in which he was dealt with was the

[032-017]more striking because the baronet had of late cared particularly for

[032-018]money, and for making the utmost of his life-interest in the estate by

[032-019]way of providing for his daughters; and as all this flashed through

[032-020]Daniel’s mind it was momentarily within his imagination that the

[032-021]provision for him might come in some way from his mother. But such

[032-022]vaporous conjecture passed away as quickly as it came.

[032-023]Sir Hugo appeared not to notice anything peculiar in Daniel’s manner,

[032-024]and presently went on with his usual chatty liveliness.

[032-025]“I am glad you have done some good reading outside your classics, and

[032-026]have got a grip of French and German. The truth is, unless a man can

[032-027]get the prestige and income of a Don and write donnish books, it’s

[032-028]hardly worth while for him to make a Greek and Latin machine of himself

[032-029]and be able to spin you out pages of the Greek dramatists at any verse

[032-030]you’ll give him as a cue. That’s all very fine, but in practical life

[032-031]nobody does give you the cue for pages of Greek. In fact, it’s a nicety

[032-032]of conversation which I would have you attend to—much quotation of any

[032-033]sort, even in English is bad. It tends to choke ordinary remark. One

[032-034]couldn’t carry on life comfortably without a little blindness to the

[032-035]fact that everything had been said better than we can put it ourselves.

[032-036]But talking of Dons, I have seen Dons make a capital figure in society;

[032-037]and occasionally he can shoot you down a cart-load of learning in the

[032-038]right place, which will tell in politics. Such men are wanted; and if

[032-039]you have any turn for being a Don, I say nothing against it.”

[032-040]“I think there’s not much chance of that. Quicksett and Puller are both

[032-041]stronger than I am. I hope you will not be much disappointed if I don’t

[032-042]come out with high honors.”

[032-043]“No, no. I should like you to do yourself credit, but for God’s sake

[032-044]don’t come out as a superior expensive kind of idiot, like young

[032-045]Brecon, who got a Double First, and has been learning to knit braces

[032-046]ever since. What I wish you to get is a passport in life. I don’t go

[032-047]against our university system: we want a little disinterested culture

[032-048]to make head against cotton and capital, especially in the House. My

[032-049]Greek has all evaporated; if I had to construe a verse on a sudden, I

[032-050]should get an apoplectic fit. But it formed my taste. I dare say my

[032-051]English is the better for it.”

[032-052]On this point Daniel kept a respectful silence. The enthusiastic belief

[032-053]in Sir Hugo’s writings as a standard, and in the Whigs as the chosen

[032-054]race among politicians, had gradually vanished along with the seraphic

[032-055]boy’s face. He had not been the hardest of workers at Eton. Though some

[032-056]kinds of study and reading came as easily as boating to him, he was not

[032-057]of the material that usually makes the first-rate Eton scholar. There

[032-058]had sprung up in him a meditative yearning after wide knowledge which

[032-059]is likely always to abate ardor in the fight for prize acquirement in

[032-060]narrow tracks. Happily he was modest, and took any second-rateness in

[032-061]himself simply as a fact, not as a marvel necessarily to be accounted

[032-062]for by a superiority. Still, Mr. Fraser’s high opinion of the lad had

[032-063]not been altogether belied by the youth: Daniel had the stamp of rarity

[032-064]in a subdued fervor of sympathy, an activity of imagination on behalf

[032-065]of others which did not show itself effusively, but was continually

[032-066]seen in acts of considerateness that struck his companions as moral

[032-067]eccentricity. “Deronda would have been first-rate if he had had more

[032-068]ambition,” was a frequent remark about him. But how could a fellow push

[032-069]his way properly when he objected to swop for his own advantage,

[032-070]knocked under by choice when he was within an inch of victory, and,

[032-071]unlike the great Clive, would rather be the calf than the butcher? It

[032-072]was a mistake, however, to suppose that Deronda had not his share of

[032-073]ambition. We know he had suffered keenly from the belief that there was

[032-074]a tinge of [[shame|dishonor]] in his lot; but there are some cases, and his was

[032-075]one of them, in which the sense of injury breeds—not the will to

[032-076]inflict injuries and climb over them as a ladder, but, a hatred of all

[032-077]injury. He had his flashes of fierceness and could hit out upon

[032-078]occasion, but the occasions were not always what might have been

[032-079]expected. For in what related to himself his resentful impulses had

[032-080]been early checked by a mastering affectionateness. Love has a habit of

[032-081]saying “Never mind” to angry self, who, sitting down for the nonce in

[032-082]the lower place, by-and-by gets used to it. So it was that as Deronda

[032-083]approached manhood his feeling for Sir Hugo, while it was getting more

[032-084]and more mixed with criticism, was gaining in that sort of allowance

[032-085]which reconciles criticism with tenderness. The dear old beautiful home

[032-086]and everything within it, Lady Mallinger and her little ones included,

[032-087]were consecrated for the youth as they had been for the boy—only with

[032-088]a certain difference of light on the objects. The altarpiece was no

[032-089]longer miraculously perfect, painted under infallible guidance, but the

[032-090]human hand discerned in the work was appealing to a reverent tenderness

[032-091]safer from the gusts of discovery. Certainly Deronda’s ambition, even

[032-092]in his spring-time, lay exceptionally aloof from conspicuous, vulgar

[032-093]triumph, and from other ugly forms of boyish energy; perhaps because he

[032-094]was early impassioned by ideas, and burned his fire on those heights.

[032-095]One may spend a good deal of energy in disliking and resisting what

[032-096]others pursue, and a boy who is fond of somebody else’s pencil-case may

[032-097]not be more energetic than another who is fond of giving his own

[032-098]pencil-case away. Still it was not Deronda’s disposition to escape from

[032-099]ugly scenes; he was more inclined to sit through them and take care of

[032-100]the fellow least able to take care of himself. It had helped to make

[032-101]him popular that he was sometimes a little compromised by this apparent

[032-102]comradeship. For a meditative interest in learning how human miseries

[032-103]are wrought—as precocious in him as another sort of genius in the poet

[032-104]who writes a Queen Mab at nineteen—was so infused with kindliness that

[032-105]it easily passed for comradeship. Enough. In many of our neighbors’

[032-106]lives there is much not only of error and lapse, but of a certain

[032-107]exquisite goodness which can never be written or even spoken—only

[032-108]divined by each of us, according to the inward instruction of our own

[032-109]privacy.

[032-110]The impression he made at Cambridge corresponded to his position at

[032-111]Eton. Every one interested in him agreed that he might have taken a

[032-112]high place if his motives had been of a more pushing sort, and if he

[032-113]had not, instead of regarding studies as instruments of success,

[032-114]hampered himself with the notion that they were to feed motive and

[032-115]opinion—a notion which set him criticising methods and arguing against

[032-116]his freight and harness when he should have been using all his might to

[032-117]pull. In the beginning his work at the university had a new zest for

[032-118]him: indifferent to the continuation of Eton classical drill, he

[032-119]applied himself vigorously to mathematics, for which he had shown an

[032-120]early aptitude under Mr. Fraser, and he had the delight of feeling his

[032-121]strength in a comparatively fresh exercise of thought. That delight,

[032-122]and the favorable opinion of his tutor, determined him to try for a

[032-123]mathematical scholarship in the Easter of his second year: he wished to

[032-124]gratify Sir Hugo by some achievement, and the study of the higher

[032-125]mathematics, having the growing fascination inherent in all thinking

[032-126]which demands intensity, was making him a more exclusive worker than he

[032-127]had been before.

[032-128]But here came the old check which had been growing with his growth. He

[032-129]found the inward bent toward comprehension and thoroughness diverging

[032-130]more and more from the track marked out by the standards of

[032-131]examination: he felt a heightening discontent with the wearing futility

[032-132]and enfeebling strain of a demand for excessive retention and dexterity

[032-133]without any insight into the principles which form the vital

[032-134]connections of knowledge. (Deronda’s undergraduateship occurred fifteen

[032-135]years ago, when the perfection of our university methods was not yet

[032-136]indisputable.) In hours when his dissatisfaction was strong upon him he

[032-137]reproached himself for having been attracted by the conventional

[032-138]advantage of belonging to an English university, and was tempted toward

[032-139]the project of asking Sir Hugo to let him quit Cambridge and pursue a

[032-140]more independent line of study abroad. The germs of this inclination

[032-141]had been already stirring in his boyish love of universal history,

[032-142]which made him want to be at home in foreign countries, and follow in

[032-143]imagination the traveling students of the middle ages. He longed now to

[032-144]have the sort of apprenticeship to life which would not shape him too

[032-145]definitely, and rob him of the choice that might come from a free

[032-146]growth. One sees that Deronda’s demerits were likely to be on the side

[032-147]of reflective hesitation, and this tendency was encouraged by his

[032-148]position; there was no need for him to get an immediate income, or to

[032-149]fit himself in haste for a profession; and his sensibility to the

[032-150]half-known facts of his parentage made him an excuse for lingering

[032-151]longer than others in a state of social neutrality. Other men, he

[032-152]inwardly said, had a more definite place and duties. But the project

[032-153]which flattered his inclination might not have gone beyond the stage of

[032-154]ineffective brooding, if certain circumstances had not quickened it

[032-155]into action.

[032-156]The circumstances arose out of an enthusiastic friendship which

[032-157]extended into his after-life. Of the same year with himself, and

[032-158]occupying small rooms close to his, was a youth who had come as an

[032-159]exhibitioner from Christ’s Hospital, and had eccentricities enough for

[032-160]a Charles Lamb. Only to look at his pinched features and blonde hair

[032-161]hanging over his collar reminded one of pale quaint heads by early

[032-162]German painters; and when this faint coloring was lit up by a joke,

[032-163]there came sudden creases about the mouth and eyes which might have

[032-164]been moulded by the soul of an aged humorist. His father, an engraver

[032-165]of some distinction, had been dead eleven years, and his mother had

[032-166]three girls to educate and maintain on a meagre annuity. [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]]

[032-167]Meyrick—he had been daringly christened after Holbein—felt himself

[032-168]the pillar, or rather the knotted and twisted trunk, round which these

[032-169]feeble climbing plants must cling. There was no want of ability or of

[032-170]honest well-meaning affection to make the prop trustworthy: the ease

[032-171]and quickness with which he studied might serve him to win prizes at

[032-172]Cambridge, as he had done among the Blue Coats, in spite of

[032-173]irregularities. The only danger was, that the incalculable tendencies

[032-174]in him might be fatally timed, and that his good intentions might be

[032-175]frustrated by some act which was not due to habit but to capricious,

[032-176]scattered impulses. He could not be said to have any one bad habit; yet

[032-177]at longer or shorter intervals he had fits of impish recklessness, and

[032-178]did things that would have made the worst habits.
