---
id: ch038
label: "Section 38"
type: chapter
description: "Mirah spoke with low-toned fervor, and sat as still as a picture all"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[038-001][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] spoke with low-toned fervor, and sat as still as a picture all

[038-002]the while.

[038-003]“Many others would have felt as we do, my dear,” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[038-004]feeling a mist come over her eyes as she looked at her work.

[038-005]“But I did not meet them—they did not come to me.”

[038-006]“How was it that you were taken from your mother?”

[038-007]“Ah, I am a long while coming to that. It is dreadful to speak of, yet

[038-008]I must tell you—I must tell you everything. My father—it was he that

[038-009]took me away. I thought we were only going on a little journey; and I

[038-010]was pleased. There was a box with all my little things in. But we went

[038-011]on board a ship, and got farther and farther away from the land. Then I

[038-012]was ill; and I thought it would never end—it was the first misery, and

[038-013]it seemed endless. But at last we landed. I knew nothing then, and

[038-014]believed what my father said. He comforted me, and told me I should go

[038-015]back to my mother. But it was America we had reached, and it was long

[038-016]years before we came back to Europe. At first I often asked my father

[038-017]when we were going back; and I tried to learn writing fast, because I

[038-018]wanted to write to my mother; but one day when he found me trying to

[038-019]write a letter, he took me on his knee and told me that my mother and

[038-020]brother were dead; that was why we did not go back. I remember my

[038-021]brother a little; he carried me once; but he was not always at home. I

[038-022]believed my father when he said that they were dead. I saw them under

[038-023]the earth when he said they were there, with their eyes forever closed.

[038-024]I never thought of its not being true; and I used to cry every night in

[038-025]my bed for a long while. Then when she came so often to me, in my

[038-026]sleep, I thought she must be living about me though I could not always

[038-027]see her, and that comforted me. I was never afraid in the dark, because

[038-028]of that; and very often in the day I used to shut my eyes and bury my

[038-029]face and try to see her and to hear her [[music|singing]]. I came to do that at

[038-030]last without shutting my eyes.”

[038-031]Mirah paused with a sweet content in her face, as if she were having

[038-032]her happy vision, while she looked out toward the river.

[038-033]“Still your father was not unkind to you, I hope,” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[038-034]after a minute, anxious to recall her.

[038-035]“No; he petted me, and took pains to teach me. He was an actor; and I

[038-036]found out, after, that the ‘Coburg’ I used to hear of his going to at

[038-037]home was a theatre. But he had more to do with the theatre than acting.

[038-038]He had not always been an actor; he had been a teacher, and knew many

[038-039]languages. His acting was not very good; I think, but he managed the

[038-040]stage, and wrote and translated plays. An Italian lady, a singer, lived

[038-041]with us a long time. They both taught me, and I had a master besides,

[038-042]who made me learn by heart and recite. I worked quite hard, though I

[038-043]was so little; and I was not nine when I first went on the stage. I

[038-044]could easily learn things, and I was not afraid. But then and ever

[038-045]since I hated our way of life. My father had money, and we had finery

[038-046]about us in a disorderly way; always there were men and women coming

[038-047]and going; there was loud laughing and disputing, strutting, snapping

[038-048]of fingers, jeering, faces I did not like to look at—though many

[038-049]petted and caressed me. But then I remembered my mother. Even at first

[038-050]when I understood nothing, I shrank away from all those things outside

[038-051]me into companionship with thoughts that were not like them; and I

[038-052]gathered thoughts very fast, because I read many things—plays and

[038-053]poetry, [[shakespeare-in-deronda|Shakespeare]] and Schiller, and learned evil and good. My father

[038-054]began to believe that I might be a great singer: my voice was

[038-055]considered wonderful for a child; and he had the best teaching for me.

[038-056]But it was painful that he boasted of me, and set me to sing for show

[038-057]at any minute, as if I had been a musical box. Once when I was nine

[038-058]years old, I played the part of a little girl who had been forsaken and

[038-059]did not know it, and sat singing to herself while she played with

[038-060]flowers. I did it without any trouble; but the clapping and all the

[038-061]sounds of the theatre were hateful to me; and I never liked the praise

[038-062]I had, because it all seemed very hard and unloving: I missed the love

[038-063]and trust I had been born into. I made a life in my own thoughts quite

[038-064]different from everything about me: I chose what seemed to me beautiful

[038-065]out of the plays and everything, and made my world out of it; and it

[038-066]was like a sharp knife always grazing me that we had two sorts of life

[038-067]which jarred so with each other—women looking good and gentle on the

[038-068]stage, and saying good things as if they felt them, and directly after

[038-069]I saw them with coarse, ugly manners. My father sometimes noticed my

[038-070]shrinking ways; and Signora said one day, when I had been rehearsing,

[038-071]‘She will never be an artist: she has no notion of being anybody but

[038-072]herself. That does very well now, but by-and-by you will see—she will

[038-073]have no more face and action than a singing-bird.’ My father was angry,

[038-074]and they quarreled. I sat alone and cried, because what she had said

[038-075]was like a long unhappy future unrolled before me. I did not want to be

[038-076]an artist; but this was what my father expected of me. After a while

[038-077]Signora left us, and a governess used to come and give me lessons in

[038-078]different things, because my father began to be afraid of my singing

[038-079]too much; but I still acted from time to time. Rebellious feelings grew

[038-080]stronger in me, and I wished to get away from this life; but I could

[038-081]not tell where to go, and I dreaded the world. Besides, I felt it would

[038-082]be wrong to leave my father: I dreaded doing wrong, for I thought I

[038-083]might get wicked and hateful to myself, in the same way that many

[038-084]others seemed hateful to me. For so long, so long I had never felt my

[038-085]outside world happy; and if I got wicked I should lose my world of

[038-086]happy thoughts where my mother lived with me. That was my childish

[038-087]notion all through those years. Oh how long they were!”

[038-088]Mirah fell to musing again.

[038-089]“Had you no teaching about what was your duty?” said Mrs. Meyrick. She

[038-090]did not like to say “religion”—finding herself on inspection rather

[038-091]dim as to what the Hebrew religion might have turned into at this date.

[038-092]“No—only that I ought to do what my father wished. He did not follow

[038-093]our religion at New York, and I think he wanted me not to know much

[038-094]about it. But because my mother used to take me to the [[the-synagogue|synagogue]], and I

[038-095]remembered sitting on her knee and looking through the railing and

[038-096]hearing the chanting and singing, I longed to go. One day when I was

[038-097]quite small I slipped out and tried to find the synagogue, but I lost

[038-098]myself a long while till a peddler questioned me and took me home. My

[038-099]father, missing me, had been much in fear, and was very angry. I too

[038-100]had been so frightened at losing myself that it was long before I

[038-101]thought of venturing out again. But after Signora left us we went to

[038-102]rooms where our landlady was a Jewess and observed her religion. I

[038-103]asked her to take me with her to the synagogue; and I read in her

[038-104]prayer-books and Bible, and when I had money enough I asked her to buy

[038-105]me books of my own, for these books seemed a closer companionship with

[038-106]my mother: I knew that she must have looked at the very words and said

[038-107]them. In that way I have come to know a little of our religion, and the

[038-108]history of our people, besides piecing together what I read in plays

[038-109]and other books about Jews and Jewesses; because I was sure my mother

[038-110]obeyed her religion. I had left off asking my father about her. It is

[038-111]very dreadful to say it, but I began to disbelieve him. I had found

[038-112]that he did not always tell the truth, and made promises without

[038-113]meaning to keep them; and that raised my suspicion that my mother and

[038-114]brother were still alive though he had told me they were dead. For in

[038-115]going over the past again as I got older and knew more, I felt sure

[038-116]that my mother had been deceived, and had expected to see us back again

[038-117]after a very little while; and my father taking me on his knee and

[038-118]telling me that my mother and brother were both dead seemed to me now

[038-119]but a bit of acting, to set my mind at rest. The cruelty of that

[038-120]falsehood sank into me, and I hated all untruth because of it. I wrote

[038-121]to my mother secretly: I knew the street, Colman Street, where we

[038-122]lived, and that it was not Blackfriars Bridge and the Coburg, and that

[038-123]our name was Cohen then, though my father called us [[Lapidoth]], because,

[038-124]he said, it was a name of his forefathers in Poland. I sent my letter

[038-125]secretly; but no answer came, and I thought there was no hope for me.

[038-126]Our life in America did not last much longer. My father suddenly told

[038-127]me we were to pack up and go to Hamburg, and I was rather glad. I hoped

[038-128]we might get among a different sort of people, and I knew German quite

[038-129]well—some German plays almost all by heart. My father spoke it better

[038-130]than he spoke English. I was thirteen then, and I seemed to myself

[038-131]quite old—I knew so much, and yet so little. I think other children

[038-132]cannot feel as I did. I had often wished that I had been drowned when I

[038-133]was going away from my mother. But I set myself to obey and suffer:

[038-134]what else could I do? One day when we were on our voyage, a new thought

[038-135]came into my mind. I was not very ill that time, and I kept on deck a

[038-136]good deal. My father acted and sang and joked to amuse people on board,

[038-137]and I used often to hear remarks about him. One day, when I was looking

[038-138]at the sea and nobody took notice of me, I overheard a gentleman say,

[038-139]‘Oh, he is one of those clever Jews—a rascal, I shouldn’t wonder.

[038-140]There’s no race like them for cunning in the men and beauty in the

[038-141]women. I wonder what market he means that daughter for.’ When I heard

[038-142]this it darted into my mind that the unhappiness in my life came from

[038-143]my being a Jewess, and that always to the end the world would think

[038-144]slightly of me and that I must bear it, for I should be judged by that

[038-145]name; and it comforted me to believe that my suffering was part of the

[038-146]affliction of my people, my part in the long song of mourning that has

[038-147]been going on through ages and ages. For if many of our race were

[038-148]wicked and made merry in their wickedness—what was that but part of

[038-149]the affliction borne by the just among them, who were despised for the

[038-150]sins of their brethren?—But you have not rejected me.”
