---
id: ch039
label: "Section 39"
type: chapter
description: "Mirah had changed her tone in this last sentence, having suddenly"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[039-001][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] had changed her tone in this last sentence, having suddenly

[039-002]reflected that at this moment she had reason not for complaint but for

[039-003]gratitude.

[039-004]“And we will try to save you from being judged unjustly by others, my

[039-005]poor child,” said Mrs. Meyrick, who had now given up all attempt at

[039-006]going on with her work, and sat listening with folded hands and a face

[039-007]hardly less eager than Mab’s would have been. “Go on, go on: tell me

[039-008]all.”

[039-009]“After that we lived in different towns—Hamburg and Vienna, the

[039-010]longest. I began to study [[music|singing]] again: and my father always got money

[039-011]about the theatres. I think he brought a good deal of money from

[039-012]America, I never knew why we left. For some time he was in great

[039-013]spirits about my singing, and he made me rehearse parts and act

[039-014]continually. He looked forward to my coming out in the [[opera-as-art|opera]]. But

[039-015]by-and-by it seemed that my voice would never be strong enough—it did

[039-016]not fulfill its promise. My master at Vienna said, ‘Don’t strain it

[039-017]further: it will never do for the public:—it is gold, but a thread of

[039-018]gold dust.’ My father was bitterly disappointed: we were not so well

[039-019]off at that time. I think I have not quite told you what I felt about

[039-020]my father. I knew he was fond of me and meant to indulge me, and that

[039-021]made me afraid of hurting him; but he always mistook what would please

[039-022]me and give me happiness. It was his nature to take everything lightly;

[039-023]and I soon left off asking him any questions about things that I cared

[039-024]for much, because he always turned them off with a joke. He would even

[039-025]ridicule our own people; and once when he had been imitating their

[039-026]movements and their tones in praying, only to make others laugh, I

[039-027]could not restrain myself—for I always had an anger in my heart about

[039-028]my mother—and when we were alone, I said, ‘Father, you ought not to

[039-029]mimic our own people before Christians who mock them: would it not be

[039-030]bad if I mimicked you, that they might mock you?’ But he only shrugged

[039-031]his shoulders and laughed and pinched my chin, and said, ‘You couldn’t

[039-032]do it, my dear.’ It was this way of turning off everything, that made a

[039-033]great wall between me and my father, and whatever I felt most I took

[039-034]the most care to hide from him. For there were some things—when they

[039-035]were laughed at I could not bear it: the world seemed like a hell to

[039-036]me. Is this world and all the life upon it only like a farce or a

[039-037]vaudeville, where you find no great meanings? Why then are there

[039-038]tragedies and grand operas, where men do difficult things and choose to

[039-039]suffer? I think it is silly to speak of all things as a joke. And I saw

[039-040]that his wishing me to sing the greatest [[art|music]], and parts in grand

[039-041]operas, was only wishing for what would fetch the greatest price. That

[039-042]hemmed in my gratitude for his affectionateness, and the tenderest

[039-043]feeling I had toward him was pity. Yes, I did sometimes pity him. He

[039-044]had aged and changed. Now he was no longer so lively. I thought he

[039-045]seemed worse—less good to others than to me. Every now and then in the

[039-046]latter years his gaiety went away suddenly, and he would sit at home

[039-047]silent and gloomy; or he would come in and fling himself down and sob,

[039-048]just as I have done myself when I have been in trouble. If I put my

[039-049]hand on his knee and say, ‘What is the matter, father?’ he would make

[039-050]no answer, but would draw my arm round his neck and put his arm round

[039-051]me and go on crying. There never came any confidence between us; but

[039-052]oh, I was sorry for him. At those moments I knew he must feel his life

[039-053]bitter, and I pressed my cheek against his head and prayed. Those

[039-054]moments were what most bound me to him; and I used to think how much my

[039-055]mother once loved him, else she would not have married him.

[039-056]“But soon there came the dreadful time. We had been at Pesth and we

[039-057]came back to Vienna. In spite of what my master Leo had said, my father

[039-058]got me an engagement, not at the opera, but to take singing parts at a

[039-059]suburb theatre in Vienna. He had nothing to do with the theatre then; I

[039-060]did not understand what he did, but I think he was continually at a

[039-061]gambling house, though he was careful always about taking me to the

[039-062]theatre. I was very miserable. The plays I acted in were detestable to

[039-063]me. Men came about us and wanted to talk to me: women and men seemed to

[039-064]look at me with a sneering smile; it was no better than a fiery

[039-065]furnace. Perhaps I make it worse than it was—you don’t know that life:

[039-066]but the glare and the faces, and my having to go on and act and sing

[039-067]what I hated, and then see people who came to stare at me behind the

[039-068]scenes—it was all so much worse than when I was a little girl. I went

[039-069]through with it; I did it; I had set my mind to obey my father and

[039-070]work, for I saw nothing better that I could do. But I felt that my

[039-071]voice was getting weaker, and I knew that my acting was not good except

[039-072]when it was not really acting, but the part was one that I could be

[039-073]myself in, and some feeling within me carried me along. That was seldom.

[039-074]“Then, in the midst of all this, the news came to me one morning that

[039-075]my father had been taken to prison, and he had sent for me. He did not

[039-076]tell me the reason why he was there, but he ordered me to go to an

[039-077]address he gave me, to see a Count who would be able to get him

[039-078]released. The address was to some public rooms where I was to ask for

[039-079]the Count, and beg him to come to my father. I found him, and

[039-080]recognized him as a gentleman whom I had seen the other night for the

[039-081]first time behind the scenes. That agitated me, for I remembered his

[039-082]way of looking at me and kissing my hand—I thought it was in mockery.

[039-083]But I delivered my errand, and he promised to go immediately to my

[039-084]father, who came home again that very evening, bringing the Count with

[039-085]him. I now began to feel a horrible dread of this man, for he worried

[039-086]me with his attentions, his eyes were always on me: I felt sure that

[039-087]whatever else there might be in his mind toward me, below it all there

[039-088]was scorn for the Jewess and the actress. And when he came to me the

[039-089]next day in the theatre and would put my shawl around me, a terror took

[039-090]hold of me; I saw that my father wanted me to look pleased. The Count

[039-091]was neither very young nor very old; his hair and eyes were pale; he

[039-092]was tall and walked heavily, and his face was heavy and grave except

[039-093]when he looked at me. He smiled at me, and his smile went through me

[039-094]with horror: I could not tell why he was so much worse to me than other

[039-095]men. Some feelings are like our hearing: they come as sounds do, before

[039-096]we know their reason. My father talked to me about him when we were

[039-097]alone, and praised him—said what a good friend he had been. I said

[039-098]nothing, because I supposed he had got my father out of prison. When

[039-099]the Count came again, my father left the room. He asked me if I liked

[039-100]being on the stage. I said No, I only acted in obedience to my father.

[039-101]He always spoke French, and called me _petite ange_ and such things,

[039-102]which I felt insulting. I knew he meant to make love to me, and I had

[039-103]it firmly in my mind that a nobleman and one who was not a Jew could

[039-104]have no love for me that was not half contempt. But then he told me

[039-105]that I need not act any longer; he wished me to visit him at his

[039-106]beautiful place, where I might be queen of everything. It was difficult

[039-107]to me to speak, I felt so shaken with anger: I could only say, ‘I would

[039-108]rather stay on the stage forever,’ and I left him there. Hurrying out

[039-109]of the room I saw my father sauntering in the passage. My heart was

[039-110]crushed. I went past him and locked myself up. It had sunk into me that

[039-111]my father was in a conspiracy with that man against me. But the next

[039-112]day he persuaded me to come out: he said that I had mistaken

[039-113]everything, and he would explain: if I did not come out and act and

[039-114]fulfill my engagement, we should be ruined and he must starve. So I

[039-115]went on acting, and for a week or more the Count never came near me. My

[039-116]father changed our lodgings, and kept at home except when he went to

[039-117]the theatre with me. He began one day to speak discouragingly of my

[039-118]acting, and say, I could never go on singing in public—I should lose

[039-119]my voice—I ought to think of my future, and not put my nonsensical

[039-120]feelings between me and my fortune. He said, ‘What will you do? You

[039-121]will be brought down to sing and beg at people’s doors. You have had a

[039-122]splendid offer and ought to accept it.’ I could not speak: a horror

[039-123]took possession of me when I thought of my mother and of him. I felt

[039-124]for the first time that I should not do wrong to leave him. But the

[039-125]next day he told me that he had put an end to my engagement at the

[039-126]theatre, and that we were to go to Prague. I was getting suspicious of

[039-127]everything, and my will was hardening to act against him. It took us

[039-128]two days to pack and get ready; and I had it in my mind that I might be

[039-129]obliged to run away from my father, and then I would come to [[london|London]] and

[039-130]try if it were possible to find my mother. I had a little money, and I

[039-131]sold some things to get more. I packed a few clothes in a little bag

[039-132]that I could carry with me, and I kept my mind on the watch. My

[039-133]father’s silence—his letting drop that subject of the Count’s

[039-134]offer—made me feel sure that there was a plan against me. I felt as if

[039-135]it had been a plan to take me to a madhouse. I once saw a picture of a

[039-136]madhouse, that I could never forget; it seemed to me very much like

[039-137]some of the life I had seen—the people strutting, quarreling,

[039-138]leering—the faces with cunning and malice in them. It was my will to

[039-139]keep myself from wickedness; and I prayed for help. I had seen what

[039-140]despised women were: and my heart turned against my father, for I saw

[039-141]always behind him that man who made me shudder. You will think I had

[039-142]not enough reason for my suspicions, and perhaps I had not, outside my

[039-143]own feeling; but it seemed to me that my mind had been lit up, and all

[039-144]that might be stood out clear and sharp. If I slept, it was only to see

[039-145]the same sort of things, and I could hardly sleep at all. Through our

[039-146]journey I was everywhere on the watch. I don’t know why, but it came

[039-147]before me like a real event, that my father would suddenly leave me and

[039-148]I should find myself with the Count where I could not get away from

[039-149]him. I thought God was warning me: my mother’s voice was in my soul. It

[039-150]was dark when we reached Prague, and though the strange bunches of

[039-151]lamps were lit it was difficult to distinguish faces as we drove along

[039-152]the street. My father chose to sit outside—he was always smoking

[039-153]now—and I watched everything in spite of the darkness. I do believe I

[039-154]could see better then than I ever did before: the strange clearness

[039-155]within seemed to have got outside me. It was not my habit to notice

[039-156]faces and figures much in the street; but this night I saw every one;

[039-157]and when we passed before a great hotel I caught sight only of a back

[039-158]that was passing in—the light of the great bunch of lamps a good way

[039-159]off fell on it. I knew it—before the face was turned, as it fell into

[039-160]shadow, I knew who it was. Help came to me. I feel sure help came. I

[039-161]did not sleep that night. I put on my plainest things—the cloak and

[039-162]hat I have worn ever since; and I sat watching for the light and the

[039-163]sound of the doors being unbarred. Some one rose early—at four

[039-164]o’clock, to go to the railway. That gave me courage. I slipped out,

[039-165]with my little bag under my cloak, and none noticed me. I had been a

[039-166]long while attending to the railway guide that I might learn the way to

[039-167]England; and before the sun had risen I was in the train for Dresden.

[039-168]Then I cried for joy. I did not know whether my money would last out,

[039-169]but I trusted. I could sell the things in my bag, and the little rings

[039-170]in my ears, and I could live on bread only. My only terror was lest my

[039-171]father should follow me. But I never paused. I came on, and on, and on,

[039-172]only eating bread now and then. When I got to Brussels I saw that I

[039-173]should not have enough money, and I sold all that I could sell; but

[039-174]here a strange thing happened. Putting my hand into the pocket of my

[039-175]cloak, I found a half-napoleon. Wondering and wondering how it came

[039-176]there, I remembered that on the way from Cologne there was a young

[039-177]workman sitting against me. I was frightened at every one, and did not

[039-178]like to be spoken to. At first he tried to talk, but when he saw that I

[039-179]did not like it, he left off. It was a long journey; I ate nothing but

[039-180]a bit of bread, and he once offered me some of the food he brought in,

[039-181]but I refused it. I do believe it was he who put that bit of gold in my

[039-182]pocket. Without it I could hardly have got to [[dover|Dover]], and I did walk a

[039-183]good deal of the way from Dover to London. I knew I should look like a

[039-184]miserable beggar-girl. I wanted not to look very miserable, because if

[039-185]I found my mother it would grieve her to see me so. But oh, how vain my

[039-186]hope was that she would be there to see me come! As soon as I set foot

[039-187]in London, I began to ask for Lambeth and Blackfriars Bridge, but they

[039-188]were a long way off, and I went wrong. At last I got to Blackfriars

[039-189]Bridge and asked for Colman Street. People shook their heads. None knew

[039-190]it. I saw it in my mind—our doorsteps, and the white tiles hung in the

[039-191]windows, and the large brick building opposite with wide doors. But

[039-192]there was nothing like it. At last when I asked a tradesman where the

[039-193]Coburg Theatre and Colman Street were, he said, ‘Oh, my little woman,

[039-194]that’s all done away with. The old streets have been pulled down;

[039-195]everything is new.’ I turned away and felt as if death had laid a hand

[039-196]on me. He said: ‘Stop, stop! young woman; what is it you’re wanting

[039-197]with Colman Street, eh?’ meaning well, perhaps. But his tone was what I

[039-198]could not bear; and how could I tell him what I wanted? I felt blinded

[039-199]and bewildered with a sudden shock. I suddenly felt that I was very

[039-200]weak and weary, and yet where could I go? for I looked so poor and

[039-201]dusty, and had nothing with me—I looked like a street-beggar. And I

[039-202]was afraid of all places where I could enter. I lost my trust. I

[039-203]thought I was forsaken. It seemed that I had been in a fever of

[039-204]hope—delirious—all the way from Prague: I thought that I was helped,

[039-205]and I did nothing but strain my mind forward and think of finding my

[039-206]mother; and now—there I stood in a strange world. All who saw me would

[039-207]think ill of me, and I must herd with beggars. I stood on the bridge

[039-208]and looked along the river. People were going on to a steamboat. Many

[039-209]of them seemed poor, and I felt as if it would be a refuge to get away

[039-210]from the streets; perhaps the boat would take me where I could soon get

[039-211]into a solitude. I had still some pence left, and I bought a loaf when

[039-212]I went on the boat. I wanted to have a little time and strength to

[039-213]think of life and death. How could I live? And now again it seemed that

[039-214]if ever I were to find my mother again, death was the way to her. I

[039-215]ate, that I might have strength to think. The boat set me down at a

[039-216]place along the river—I don’t know where—and it was late in the

[039-217]evening. I found some large trees apart from the road, and I sat down

[039-218]under them that I might rest through the night. Sleep must have soon

[039-219]come to me, and when I awoke it was morning. The birds were singing,

[039-220]and the dew was white about me, I felt chill and oh, so lonely! I got

[039-221]up and walked and followed the river a long way and then turned back

[039-222]again. There was no reason why I should go anywhere. The world about me

[039-223]seemed like a vision that was hurrying by while I stood still with my

[039-224]pain. My thoughts were stronger than I was; they rushed in and forced

[039-225]me to see all my life from the beginning; ever since I was carried away

[039-226]from my mother I had felt myself a lost child taken up and used by

[039-227]strangers, who did not care what my life was to me, but only what I

[039-228]could do for them. It seemed all a weary wandering and

[039-229]heart-loneliness—as if I had been forced to go to merrymakings without

[039-230]the expectation of joy. And now it was worse. I was lost again, and I

[039-231]dreaded lest any stranger should notice me and speak to me. I had a

[039-232]terror of the world. None knew me; all would mistake me. I had seen so

[039-233]many in my life who made themselves glad with scorning, and laughed at

[039-234]another’s shame. What could I do? This life seemed to be closing in

[039-235]upon me with a wall of fire—everywhere there was scorching that made

[039-236]me shrink. The high sunlight made me shrink. And I began to think that

[039-237]my despair was the voice of God telling me to die. But it would take me

[039-238]long to die of hunger. Then I thought of my people, how they had been

[039-239]driven from land to land and been afflicted, and multitudes had died of

[039-240]misery in their wandering—was I the first? And in the wars and

[039-241]troubles when Christians were cruelest, our fathers had sometimes slain

[039-242]their children and afterward themselves: it was to save them from being

[039-243]false apostates. That seemed to make it right for me to put an end to

[039-244]my life; for calamity had closed me in too, and I saw no pathway but to

[039-245]evil. But my mind got into war with itself, for there were contrary

[039-246]things in it. I knew that some had held it wrong to hasten their own

[039-247]death, though they were in the midst of flames; and while I had some

[039-248]strength left it was a longing to bear if I ought to bear—else where

[039-249]was the good of all my life? It had not been happy since the first

[039-250]years: when the light came every morning I used to think, ‘I will bear

[039-251]it.’ But always before I had some hope; now it was gone. With these

[039-252]thoughts I wandered and wandered, inwardly crying to the Most High,

[039-253]from whom I should not flee in death more than in life—though I had no

[039-254]strong [[religion|faith]] that He cared for me. The strength seemed departing from

[039-255]my soul; deep below all my cries was the feeling that I was alone and

[039-256]forsaken. The more I thought the wearier I got, till it seemed I was

[039-257]not thinking at all, but only the sky and the river and the Eternal God

[039-258]were in my soul. And what was it whether I died or lived? If I lay down

[039-259]to die in the river, was it more than lying down to sleep?—for there

[039-260]too I committed my soul—I gave myself up. I could not bear memories

[039-261]any more; I could only feel what was present in me—it was all one

[039-262]longing to cease from my weary life, which seemed only a pain outside

[039-263]the great peace that I might enter into. That was how it was. When the

[039-264]evening came and the sun was gone, it seemed as if that was all I had

[039-265]to wait for. And a new strength came into me to will what I would do.

[039-266]You know what I did. I was going to die. You know what happened—did he

[039-267]not tell you? Faith came to me again; I was not forsaken. He told you

[039-268]how he found me?”
