---
id: ch031
label: "Section 31"
type: chapter
description: "It is in such experiences of a boy or girlhood, while elders are"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[031-001]It is in such experiences of a boy or girlhood, while elders are

[031-002]debating whether most education lies in science or literature, that the

[031-003]main lines of character are often laid down. If Daniel had been of a

[031-004]less ardently affectionate nature, the reserve about himself and the

[031-005]supposition that others had something to his disadvantage in their

[031-006]minds, might have turned into a hard, proud antagonism. But inborn

[031-007]lovingness was strong enough to keep itself level with resentment.

[031-008]There was hardly any creature in his habitual world that he was not

[031-009]fond of; teasing them occasionally, of course—all except his uncle, or

[031-010]“Nunc,” as [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] had taught him to say; for the baronet was the

[031-011]reverse of a strait-laced man, and left his dignity to take care of

[031-012]itself. Him Daniel loved in that deep-rooted filial way which makes

[031-013]children always the happier for being in the same room with father or

[031-014]mother, though their occupations may be quite apart. Sir Hugo’s

[031-015]watch-chain and seals, his handwriting, his mode of smoking and of

[031-016]talking to his dogs and horses, had all a rightness and charm about

[031-017]them to the boy which went along with the happiness of morning and

[031-018]breakfast time. That Sir Hugo had always been a Whig, made Tories and

[031-019]Radicals equally opponents of the truest and best; and the books he had

[031-020]written were all seen under the same consecration of loving belief

[031-021]which differenced what was his from what was not his, in spite of

[031-022]general resemblance. Those writings were various, from volumes of

[031-023]travel in the brilliant style, to articles on things in general, and

[031-024]pamphlets on political crises; but to Daniel they were alike in having

[031-025]an unquestionable rightness by which other people’s information could

[031-026]be tested.

[031-027]Who cannot imagine the bitterness of a first suspicion that something

[031-028]in this object of complete love was _not_ quite right? Children demand

[031-029]that their heroes should be fleckless, and easily believe them so:

[031-030]perhaps a first discovery to the contrary is hardly a less

[031-031]revolutionary shock to a passionate child than the threatened downfall

[031-032]of habitual beliefs which makes the world seem to totter for us in

[031-033]maturer life.

[031-034]But some time after this renewal of Daniel’s agitation it appeared that

[031-035]Sir Hugo must have been making a merely playful experiment in his

[031-036]question about the [[music|singing]]. He sent for Daniel into the library, and

[031-037]looking up from his writing as the boy entered threw himself sideways

[031-038]in his arm-chair. “Ah, Dan!” he said kindly, drawing one of the old

[031-039]embroidered stools close to him. “Come and sit down here.”

[031-040]Daniel obeyed, and Sir Hugo put a gentle hand on his shoulder, looking

[031-041]at him affectionately.

[031-042]“What is it, my boy? Have you heard anything that has put you out of

[031-043]spirits lately?”

[031-044]Daniel was determined not to let the tears come, but he could not speak.

[031-045]“All changes are painful when people have been happy, you know,” said

[031-046]Sir Hugo, lifting his hand from the boy’s shoulder to his dark curls

[031-047]and rubbing them gently. “You can’t be educated exactly as I wish you

[031-048]to be without our parting. And I think you will find a great deal to

[031-049]like at school.”

[031-050]This was not what Daniel expected, and was so far a relief, which gave

[031-051]him spirit to answer,

[031-052]“Am I to go to school?”

[031-053]“Yes, I mean you to go to Eton. I wish you to have the education of an

[031-054]English gentleman; and for that it is necessary that you should go to a

[031-055]public school in preparation for the university: Cambridge I mean you

[031-056]to go to; it was my own university.”

[031-057]Daniel’s color came and went.

[031-058]“What do you say, Sirrah?” said Sir Hugo, smiling.

[031-059]“I should like to be a gentleman,” said Daniel, with firm distinctness,

[031-060]“and go to school, if that is what a gentleman’s son must do.”

[031-061]Sir Hugo watched him silently for a few moments, thinking he understood

[031-062]now why the lad had seemed angry at the notion of becoming a singer.

[031-063]Then he said tenderly,

[031-064]“And so you won’t mind about leaving your old Nunc?”

[031-065]“Yes, I shall,” said Daniel, clasping Sir Hugo’s caressing arm with

[031-066]both his hands. “But sha’n’t I come home and be with you in the

[031-067]holidays?”

[031-068]“Oh yes, generally,” said Sir Hugo. “But now I mean you to go at once

[031-069]to a new tutor, to break the change for you before you go to Eton.”

[031-070]After this interview Daniel’s spirit rose again. He was meant to be a

[031-071]gentleman, and in some unaccountable way it might be that his

[031-072]conjectures were all wrong. The very keenness of the lad taught him to

[031-073]find comfort in his ignorance. While he was busying his mind in the

[031-074]construction of possibilities, it became plain to him that there must

[031-075]be possibilities of which he knew nothing. He left off brooding, young

[031-076]joy and the spirit of adventure not being easily quenched within him,

[031-077]and in the interval before his going away he sang about the house,

[031-078]danced among the old servants, making them parting gifts, and insisted

[031-079]many times to the groom on the care that was to be taken of the black

[031-080]pony.

[031-081]“Do you think I shall know much less than the other boys, Mr. Fraser?”

[031-082]said Daniel. It was his bent to think that every stranger would be

[031-083]surprised at his ignorance.

[031-084]“There are dunces to be found everywhere,” said the judicious Fraser.

[031-085]“You’ll not be the biggest; but you’ve not the makings of a Porson in

[031-086]you, or a Leibnitz either.”

[031-087]“I don’t want to be a Porson or a Leibnitz,” said Daniel. “I would

[031-088]rather be a greater leader, like Pericles or Washington.”

[031-089]“Ay, ay; you’ve a notion they did with little parsing, and less

[031-090]algebra,” said Fraser. But in reality he thought his pupil a remarkable

[031-091]lad, to whom one thing was as easy as another, if he had only a mind to

[031-092]it.

[031-093]Things went on very well with Daniel in his new world, except that a

[031-094]boy with whom he was at once inclined to strike up a close friendship

[031-095]talked to him a great deal about his home and parents, and seemed to

[031-096]expect a like expansiveness in return. Daniel immediately shrank into

[031-097]reserve, and this experience remained a check on his naturally strong

[031-098]bent toward the formation of intimate friendship. Every one, his tutor

[031-099]included, set him down as a reserved boy, though he was so good-humored

[031-100]and unassuming, as well as quick, both at study and sport, that nobody

[031-101]called his reserve disagreeable. Certainly his face had a great deal to

[031-102]do with that favorable interpretation; but in this instance the beauty

[031-103]of the closed lips told no falsehood.

[031-104]A surprise that came to him before his first vacation strengthened the

[031-105]silent consciousness of a grief within, which might be compared in some

[031-106]ways with Byron’s susceptibility about his deformed foot. Sir Hugo

[031-107]wrote word that he was married to Miss Raymond, a sweet lady, whom

[031-108]Daniel must remember having seen. The event would make no difference

[031-109]about his spending the vacation at the Abbey; he would find Lady

[031-110]Mallinger a new friend whom he would be sure to love—and much more to

[031-111]the usual effect when a man, having done something agreeable to

[031-112]himself, is disposed to congratulate others on his own good fortune,

[031-113]and the deducible satisfactoriness of events in general.

[031-114]Let Sir Hugo be partly excused until the grounds of his action can be

[031-115]more fully known. The mistakes in his behavior to [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] were due to

[031-116]that dullness toward what may be going on in other minds, especially

[031-117]the minds of children, which is among the commonest deficiencies, even

[031-118]in good-natured men like him, when life has been generally easy to

[031-119]themselves, and their energies have been quietly spent in feeling

[031-120]gratified. No one was better aware than he that Daniel was generally

[031-121]suspected to be his own son. But he was pleased with that suspicion;

[031-122]and his imagination had never once been troubled with the way in which

[031-123]the boy himself might be affected, either then or in the future, by the

[031-124]enigmatic aspect of his circumstances. He was as fond of him as could

[031-125]be, and meant the best by him. And, considering the lightness with

[031-126]which the preparation of young lives seem to lie on respectable

[031-127]consciences, Sir Hugo Mallinger can hardly be held open to exceptional

[031-128]reproach. He had been a bachelor till he was five-and-forty, had always

[031-129]been regarded as a fascinating man of elegant tastes; what could be

[031-130]more natural, even according to the index of language, than that he

[031-131]should have a beautiful boy like the little Deronda to take care of?

[031-132]The mother might even, perhaps, be in the great world—met with in Sir

[031-133]Hugo’s residence abroad. The only person to feel any objection was the

[031-134]boy himself, who could not have been consulted. And the boy’s

[031-135]objections had never been dreamed of by anybody but himself.

[031-136]By the time Deronda was ready to go to Cambridge, Lady Mallinger had

[031-137]already three daughters—charming babies, all three, but whose sex was

[031-138]announced as a melancholy alternative, the offspring desired being a

[031-139]son; if Sir Hugo had no son the succession must go to his nephew,

[031-140]Mallinger [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]. Daniel no longer held a wavering opinion about

[031-141]his own birth. His fuller knowledge had tended to convince him that Sir

[031-142]Hugo was his father, and he conceived that the baronet, since he never

[031-143]approached a communication on the subject, wished him to have a tacit

[031-144]understanding of the fact, and to accept in silence what would be

[031-145]generally considered more than the due love and nurture. Sir Hugo’s

[031-146]marriage might certainly have been felt as a new ground of resentment

[031-147]by some youths in Deronda’s position, and the timid Lady Mallinger with

[031-148]her fast-coming little ones might have been images to scowl at, as

[031-149]likely to divert much that was disposable in the feelings and

[031-150]possessions of the baronet from one who felt his own claim to be prior.

[031-151]But hatred of innocent human obstacles was a form of moral stupidity

[031-152]not in Deronda’s grain; even the indignation which had long mingled

[031-153]itself with his affection for Sir Hugo took the quality of pain rather

[031-154]than of temper; and as his mind ripened to the idea of tolerance toward

[031-155]error, he habitually liked the idea with his own silent grievances.

[031-156]The sense of an entailed disadvantage—the deformed foot doubtfully

[031-157]hidden by the shoe, makes a restlessly active spiritual yeast, and

[031-158]easily turns a self-centered, unloving nature into an Ishmaelite. But

[031-159]in the rarer sort, who presently see their own frustrated claim as one

[031-160]among a myriad, the inexorable sorrow takes the form of fellowship and

[031-161]makes the imagination tender. Deronda’s early-weakened susceptibility,

[031-162]charged at first with ready indignation and resistant pride, had raised

[031-163]in him a premature reflection on certain questions of life; it had

[031-164]given a bias to his conscience, a sympathy with certain ills, and a

[031-165]tension of resolve in certain directions, who marked him off from other

[031-166]youths much more than any talents he possessed.

[031-167]One day near the end of the long vacation, when he had been making a

[031-168]tour in the Rhineland with his Eton tutor, and was come for a farewell

[031-169]stay at the Abbey before going to Cambridge, he said to Sir Hugo,

[031-170]“What do you intend me to be, sir?” They were in the library, and it

[031-171]was the fresh morning. Sir Hugo had called him in to read a letter from

[031-172]a Cambridge Don who was to be interested in him; and since the baronet

[031-173]wore an air at once business-like and leisurely, the moment seemed

[031-174]propitious for entering on a grave subject which had never yet been

[031-175]thoroughly discussed.

[031-176]“Whatever your inclination leads you to, my boy. I thought it right to

[031-177]give you the option of the army, but you shut the door on that, and I

[031-178]was glad. I don’t expect you to choose just yet—by-and-by, when you

[031-179]have looked about you a little more and tried your mettle among older

[031-180]men. The university has a good wide opening into the forum. There are

[031-181]prizes to be won, and a bit of good fortune often gives the turn to a

[031-182]man’s taste. From what I see and hear, I should think you can take up

[031-183]anything you like. You are in the deeper water with your classics than

[031-184]I ever got into, and if you are rather sick of that swimming, Cambridge

[031-185]is the place where you can go into mathematics with a will, and disport

[031-186]yourself on the dry sand as much as you like. I floundered along like a

[031-187]carp.”
