---
id: ch034
label: "Section 34"
type: chapter
description: "“Nessun maggior dolore"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[034-001]“Nessun maggior dolore

[034-002]Che ricordarsi del tempo felice

[034-003]Nella miseria”:[*]

[034-004][* [[dantes-divine-comedy|Dante]]’s words are best rendered by our own poet in the lines at

[034-005]the head of the chapter.]

[034-006]and, as he rested on his oar, the pianissimo fall of the melodic wail

[034-007]“nella miseria” was distinctly audible on the brink of the water. Three

[034-008]or four persons had paused at various spots to watch the barge passing

[034-009]the bridge, and doubtless included in their notice the young gentleman

[034-010]in the boat; but probably it was only to one ear that the low vocal

[034-011]sounds came with more significance than if they had been an

[034-012]insect-murmur amidst the sum of current noises. [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], awaiting the

[034-013]barge, now turning his head to the river-side, and saw at a few yards’

[034-014]distant from him a figure which might have been an impersonation of the

[034-015]misery he was unconsciously giving voice to: a girl hardly more than

[034-016]eighteen, of low slim figure, with most delicate little face, her dark

[034-017]curls pushed behind her ears under a large black hat, a long woolen

[034-018]cloak over her shoulders. Her hands were hanging down clasped before

[034-019]her, and her eyes were fixed on the river with a look of immovable,

[034-020]statue-like despair. This strong arrest of his attention made him cease

[034-021][[music|singing]]: apparently his voice had entered her inner world without her

[034-022]taking any note of whence it came, for when it suddenly ceased she

[034-023]changed her attitude slightly, and, looking round with a frightened

[034-024]glance, met Deronda’s face. It was but a couple of moments, but that

[034-025]seemed a long while for two people to look straight at each other. Her

[034-026]look was something like that of a fawn or other gentle animal before it

[034-027]turns to run away: no blush, no special alarm, but only some timidity

[034-028]which yet could not hinder her from a long look before she turned. In

[034-029]fact, it seemed to Deronda that she was only half conscious of her

[034-030]surroundings: was she hungry, or was there some other cause of

[034-031]bewilderment? He felt an outleap of interest and [[sympathy|compassion]] toward her;

[034-032]but the next instant she had turned and walked away to a neighboring

[034-033]bench under a tree. He had no right to linger and watch her:

[034-034]poorly-dressed, melancholy women are common sights; it was only the

[034-035]delicate beauty, picturesque lines and color of the image that was

[034-036]exceptional, and these conditions made it more markedly impossible that

[034-037]he should obtrude his interest upon her. He began to row away and was

[034-038]soon far up the river; but no other thoughts were busy enough quite to

[034-039]expel that pale image of unhappy girlhood. He fell again and again to

[034-040]speculating on the probable romance that lay behind that loneliness and

[034-041]look of desolation; then to smile at his own share in the prejudice

[034-042]that interesting faces must have interesting adventures; then to

[034-043]justify himself for feeling that sorrow was the more tragic when it

[034-044]befell delicate, childlike beauty.

[034-045]“I should not have forgotten the look of misery if she had been ugly

[034-046]and vulgar,” he said to himself. But there was no denying that the

[034-047]attractiveness of the image made it likelier to last. It was clear to

[034-048]him as an onyx cameo; the brown-black drapery, the white face with

[034-049]small, small features and dark, long-lashed eyes. His mind glanced over

[034-050]the girl-tragedies that are going on in the world, hidden, unheeded, as

[034-051]if they were but tragedies of the copse or hedgerow, where the helpless

[034-052]drag wounded wings forsakenly, and streak the shadowed moss with the

[034-053]red moment-hand of their own death. Deronda of late, in his solitary

[034-054]excursions, had been occupied chiefly with uncertainties about his own

[034-055]course; but those uncertainties, being much at their leisure, were wont

[034-056]to have such wide-sweeping connections with all life and history that

[034-057]the new image of helpless sorrow easily blent itself with what seemed

[034-058]to him the strong array of reasons why he should shrink from getting

[034-059]into that routine of the world which makes men apologize for all its

[034-060]wrong-doing, and take opinions as mere professional equipment—why he

[034-061]should not draw strongly at any thread in the hopelessly-entangled

[034-062]scheme of things.

[034-063]He used his oars little, satisfied to go with the tide and be taken

[034-064]back by it. It was his habit to indulge himself in that solemn

[034-065]passivity which easily comes with the lengthening shadows and mellow

[034-066]light, when thinking and desiring melt together imperceptibly, and what

[034-067]in other hours may have seemed argument takes the quality of passionate

[034-068]vision. By the time he had come back again with the tide past Richmond

[034-069]Bridge the sun was near setting: and the approach of his favorite

[034-070]hour—with its deepening stillness and darkening masses of tree and

[034-071]building between the double glow of the sky and the river—disposed him

[034-072]to linger as if they had been an unfinished strain of [[art|music]]. He looked

[034-073]out for a perfectly solitary spot where he could lodge his boat against

[034-074]the bank, and, throwing himself on his back with his head propped on

[034-075]the cushions, could watch out the light of sunset and the opening of

[034-076]that bead-roll which some oriental poet describes as God’s call to the

[034-077]little stars, who each answer, “Here am I.” He chose a spot in the bend

[034-078]of the river just opposite Kew Gardens, where he had a great breadth of

[034-079]water before him reflecting the glory of the sky, while he himself was

[034-080]in shadow. He lay with his hands behind his head, propped on a level

[034-081]with the boat’s edge, so that he could see all round him, but could not

[034-082]be seen by any one at a few yards’ distance; and for a long while he

[034-083]never turned his eyes from the view right in front of him. He was

[034-084]forgetting everything else in a half-speculative, half-involuntary

[034-085]identification of himself with the objects he was looking at, thinking

[034-086]how far it might be possible habitually to shift his centre till his

[034-087]own personality would be no less outside him than the landscape—when

[034-088]the sense of something moving on the bank opposite him where it was

[034-089]bordered by a line of willow bushes, made him turn his glance

[034-090]thitherward. In the first moment he had a darting presentiment about

[034-091]the moving figure; and now he could see the small face with the strange

[034-092]dying sunlight upon it. He feared to frighten her by a sudden movement,

[034-093]and watched her with motionless attention. She looked round, but seemed

[034-094]only to gather security from the apparent solitude, hid her hat among

[034-095]the willows, and immediately took off her woolen cloak. Presently she

[034-096]seated herself and deliberately dipped the cloak in the water, holding

[034-097]it there a little while, then taking it out with effort, rising from

[034-098]her seat as she did so. By this time Deronda felt sure that she meant

[034-099]to wrap the wet cloak round her as a drowning shroud; there was no

[034-100]longer time to hesitate about frightening her. He rose and seized his

[034-101]oar to ply across; happily her position lay a little below him. The

[034-102]poor thing, overcome with terror at this sign of discovery from the

[034-103]opposite bank, sank down on the brink again, holding her cloak half out

[034-104]of the water. She crouched and covered her face as if she kept a faint

[034-105]hope that she had not been seen, and that the boatman was accidentally

[034-106]coming toward her. But soon he was within brief space of her, steadying

[034-107]his boat against the bank, and speaking, but very gently,

[034-108]“Don’t be afraid. You are unhappy. Pray, trust me. Tell me what I can

[034-109]do to help you.”

[034-110]She raised her head and looked up at him. His face now was toward the

[034-111]light, and she knew it again. But she did not speak for a few moments

[034-112]which were a renewal of their former gaze at each other. At last she

[034-113]said in a low sweet voice, with an accent so distinct that it suggested

[034-114]foreignness and yet was not foreign, “I saw you before,” and then added

[034-115]dreamily, after a like pause, “nella miseria.”

[034-116]Deronda, not understanding the connection of her thoughts, supposed

[034-117]that her mind was weakened by distress and hunger.

[034-118]“It was you, singing?” she went on, hesitatingly—“Nessun maggior

[034-119]dolore.” The mere words themselves uttered in her sweet undertones

[034-120]seemed to give the melody to Deronda’s ear.

[034-121]“Ah, yes,” he said, understanding now, “I am often singing them. But I

[034-122]fear you will injure yourself staying here. Pray let me take you in my

[034-123]boat to some place of safety. And that wet cloak—let me take it.”

[034-124]He would not attempt to take it without her leave, dreading lest he

[034-125]should scare her. Even at his words, he fancied that she shrank and

[034-126]clutched the cloak more tenaciously. But her eyes were fixed on him

[034-127]with a question in them as she said, “You look good. Perhaps it is

[034-128]God’s command.”

[034-129]“Do trust me. Let me help you. I will die before I will let any harm

[034-130]come to you.”

[034-131]She rose from her sitting posture, first dragging the saturated cloak

[034-132]and then letting it fall on the ground—it was too heavy for her tired

[034-133]arms. Her little woman’s figure as she laid her delicate chilled hands

[034-134]together one over the other against her waist, and went a step backward

[034-135]while she leaned her head forward as if not to lose sight of his face,

[034-136]was unspeakably touching.

[034-137]“Great God!” the words escaped Deronda in a tone so low and solemn that

[034-138]they seemed like a prayer become unconsciously vocal. The agitating

[034-139]impression this forsaken girl was making on him stirred a fibre that

[034-140]lay close to his deepest interest in the fates of women—“perhaps my

[034-141]mother was like this one.” The old thought had come now with a new

[034-142]impetus of mingled feeling, and urged that exclamation in which both

[034-143]East and West have for ages concentrated their awe in the presence of

[034-144]inexorable calamity.

[034-145]The low-toned words seemed to have some reassurance in them for the

[034-146]hearer: she stepped forward close to the boat’s side, and Deronda put

[034-147]out his hand, hoping now that she would let him help her in. She had

[034-148]already put her tiny hand into his which closed around it, when some

[034-149]new thought struck her, and drawing back she said,

[034-150]“I have nowhere to go—nobody belonging to me in all this land.”

[034-151]“I will take you to a lady who has daughters,” said Deronda,

[034-152]immediately. He felt a sort of relief in gathering that the wretched

[034-153]home and cruel friends he imagined her to be fleeing from were not in

[034-154]the near background. Still she hesitated, and said more timidly than

[034-155]ever,

[034-156]“Do you belong to the theatre?”

[034-157]“No; I have nothing to do with the theatre,” said Deronda, in a decided

[034-158]tone. Then beseechingly, “I will put you in perfect safety at once;

[034-159]with a lady, a good woman; I am sure she will be kind. Let us lose no

[034-160]time: you will make yourself ill. Life may still become sweet to you.

[034-161]There are good people—there are good women who will take care of you.”

[034-162]She drew backward no more, but stepped in easily, as if she were used

[034-163]to such action, and sat down on the cushions.

[034-164]“You had a covering for your head,” said Deronda.

[034-165]“My hat?” (She lifted up her hands to her head.) “It is quite hidden in

[034-166]the bush.”

[034-167]“I will find it,” said Deronda, putting out his hand deprecatingly as

[034-168]she attempted to rise. “The boat is fixed.”

[034-169]He jumped out, found the hat, and lifted up the saturated cloak,

[034-170]wringing it and throwing it into the bottom of the boat.

[034-171]“We must carry the cloak away, to prevent any one who may have noticed

[034-172]you from thinking you have been drowned,” he said, cheerfully, as he

[034-173]got in again and presented the old hat to her. “I wish I had any other

[034-174]garment than my coat to offer you. But shall you mind throwing it over

[034-175]your shoulders while we are on the water? It is quite an ordinary thing

[034-176]to do, when people return late and are not enough provided with wraps.”

[034-177]He held out the coat toward her with a smile, and there came a faint

[034-178]melancholy smile in answer, as she took it and put it on very cleverly.
