---
id: ch049
label: "Section 49"
type: chapter
description: "But when the talk turned on furniture for the cottage Gwendolen was not"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[049-001]But when the talk turned on furniture for the cottage [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] was not

[049-002]roused to show even a languid interest. She thought that she had done

[049-003]as much as could be expected of her this morning, and indeed felt at an

[049-004]heroic pitch in keeping to herself the struggle that was going on

[049-005]within her. The recoil of her mind from the only definite prospect

[049-006]allowed her, was stronger than even she had imagined beforehand. The

[049-007]idea of presenting herself before Mrs. Mompert in the first instance,

[049-008]to be approved or disapproved, came as pressure on an already painful

[049-009]bruise; even as a governess, it appeared she was to be tested and was

[049-010]liable to rejection. After she had done herself the violence to accept

[049-011]the bishop and his wife, they were still to consider whether they would

[049-012]accept her; it was at her peril that she was to look, speak, or be

[049-013]silent. And even when she had entered on her dismal task of

[049-014]self-constraint in the society of three girls whom she was bound

[049-015]incessantly to edify, the same process of inspection was to go on:

[049-016]there was always to be Mrs. Mompert’s supervision; always something or

[049-017]other would be expected of her to which she had not the slightest

[049-018]inclination; and perhaps the bishop would examine her on serious

[049-019]topics. Gwendolen, lately used to the social successes of a handsome

[049-020]girl, whose lively venturesomeness of talk has the effect of wit, and

[049-021]who six weeks before would have pitied the dullness of the bishop

[049-022]rather than have been embarrassed by him, saw the life before her as an

[049-023]entrance into a penitentiary. Wild thoughts of running away to be an

[049-024]actress, in spite of [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]], came to her with the lure of freedom; but

[049-025]his words still hung heavily on her soul; they had alarmed her pride

[049-026]and even her maidenly dignity: dimly she conceived herself getting

[049-027]amongst vulgar people who would treat her with rude familiarity—odious

[049-028]men, whose grins and smirks would not be seen through the strong

[049-029]grating of polite society. Gwendolen’s daring was not in the least that

[049-030]of the adventuress; the demand to be held a lady was in her very

[049-031]marrow; and when she had dreamed that she might be the heroine of the

[049-032][[gambling|gaming]]-table, it was with the understanding that no one should treat

[049-033]her with the less consideration, or presume to look at her with irony

[049-034]as [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] had done. To be protected and petted, and to have her

[049-035]susceptibilities consulted in every detail, had gone along with her

[049-036]food and clothing as matters of course in her life: even without any

[049-037]such warning as Klesmer’s she could not have thought it an attractive

[049-038]freedom to be thrown in solitary dependence on the doubtful civility of

[049-039]strangers. The endurance of the episcopal penitentiary was less

[049-040]repulsive than that; though here too she would certainly never be

[049-041]petted or have her susceptibilities consulted. Her rebellion against

[049-042]this hard necessity which had come just to her of all people in the

[049-043]world—to her whom all circumstances had concurred in preparing for

[049-044]something quite different—was exaggerated instead of diminished as one

[049-045]hour followed another, with the imagination of what she might have

[049-046]expected in her lot and what it was actually to be. The family

[049-047]troubles, she thought, were easier for every one than for her—even for

[049-048]poor dear mamma, because she had always used herself to not enjoying.

[049-049]As to hoping that if she went to the Momperts’ and was patient a little

[049-050]while, things might get better—it would be stupid to entertain hopes

[049-051]for herself after all that had happened: her talents, it appeared,

[049-052]would never be recognized as anything remarkable, and there was not a

[049-053]single direction in which probability seemed to flatter her wishes.

[049-054]Some beautiful girls who, like her, had read romances where even plain

[049-055]governesses are centres of attraction and are sought in marriage, might

[049-056]have solaced themselves a little by transporting such pictures into

[049-057]their own future; but even if Gwendolen’s experience had led her to

[049-058]dwell on love-making and marriage as her elysium, her heart was too

[049-059]much oppressed by what was near to her, in both the past and the

[049-060]future, for her to project her anticipations very far off. She had a

[049-061]world-nausea upon her, and saw no reason all through her life why she

[049-062]should wish to live. No religious view of trouble helped her: her

[049-063]troubles had in her opinion all been caused by other people’s

[049-064]disagreeable or wicked conduct; and there was really nothing pleasant

[049-065]to be counted on in the world: that was her feeling; everything else

[049-066]she had heard said about trouble was mere phrase-making not attractive

[049-067]enough for her to have caught it up and repeated it. As to the

[049-068]sweetness of labor and fulfilled claims; the interest of inward and

[049-069]outward activity; the impersonal delights of life as a perpetual

[049-070]discovery; the dues of courage, fortitude, industry, which it is mere

[049-071]baseness not to pay toward the common burden; the supreme worth of the

[049-072]teacher’s vocation;—these, even if they had been eloquently preached

[049-073]to her, could have been no more than faintly apprehended doctrines: the

[049-074]fact which wrought upon her was her invariable observation that for a

[049-075]lady to become a governess—to “take a situation”—was to descend in

[049-076]life and to be treated at best with a compassionate patronage. And poor

[049-077]Gwendolen had never dissociated happiness from personal pre-eminence

[049-078]and _éclat_. That where these threatened to forsake her, she should

[049-079]take life to be hardly worth the having, cannot make her so unlike the

[049-080]rest of us, men or women, that we should cast her out of our

[049-081][[sympathy|compassion]]; our moments of temptation to a mean opinion of things in

[049-082]general being usually dependent on some susceptibility about ourselves

[049-083]and some dullness to subjects which every one else would consider more

[049-084]important. Surely a young creature is pitiable who has the labyrinth of

[049-085]life before her and no clue—to whom distrust in herself and her good

[049-086]fortune has come as a sudden shock, like a rent across the path that

[049-087]she was treading carelessly.

[049-088]In spite of her healthy frame, her irreconcilable repugnance affected

[049-089]her even physically; she felt a sort of numbness and could set about

[049-090]nothing; the least urgency, even that she should take her meals, was an

[049-091]irritation to her; the speech of others on any subject seemed

[049-092]unreasonable, because it did not include her feeling and was an

[049-093]ignorant claim on her. It was not in her nature to busy herself with

[049-094]the fancies of suicide to which disappointed young people are prone:

[049-095]what occupied and exasperated her was the sense that there was nothing

[049-096]for her but to live in a way she hated. She avoided going to the

[049-097]rectory again: it was too intolerable to have to look and talk as if

[049-098]she were compliant; and she could not exert herself to show interest

[049-099]about the furniture of that horrible cottage. Miss Merry was staying on

[049-100]purpose to help, and such people as Jocosa liked that sort of thing.

[049-101]Her mother had to make excuses for her not appearing, even when Anna

[049-102]came to see her. For that calm which Gwendolen had promised herself to

[049-103]maintain had changed into sick motivelessness: she thought, “I suppose

[049-104]I shall begin to pretend by-and-by, but why should I do it now?”

[049-105]Her mother watched her with silent distress; and, lapsing into the

[049-106]habit of indulgent tenderness, she began to think what she imagined

[049-107]that Gwendolen was thinking, and to wish that everything should give

[049-108]way to the possibility of making her darling less miserable.

[049-109]One day when she was in the black and yellow bedroom and her mother was

[049-110]lingering there under the pretext of considering and arranging

[049-111]Gwendolen’s articles of dress, she suddenly roused herself to fetch the

[049-112]casket which contained the ornaments.

[049-113]“Mamma,” she began, glancing over the upper layer, “I had forgotten

[049-114]these things. Why didn’t you remind me of them? Do see about getting

[049-115]them sold. You will not mind about parting with them. You gave them all

[049-116]to me long ago.”

[049-117]She lifted the upper tray and looked below.

[049-118]“If we can do without them, darling, I would rather keep them for you,”

[049-119]said [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], seating herself beside Gwendolen with a feeling of

[049-120]relief that she was beginning to talk about something. The usual

[049-121]relation between them had become reversed. It was now the mother who

[049-122]tried to cheer the daughter. “Why, how came you to put that pocket

[049-123]handkerchief in here?”

[049-124]It was the handkerchief with the corner torn off which Gwendolen had

[049-125]thrust in with the turquoise necklace.

[049-126]“It happened to be with the necklace—I was in a hurry,” said

[049-127]Gwendolen, taking the handkerchief away and putting it in her pocket.

[049-128]“Don’t sell the necklace, mamma,” she added, a new feeling having come

[049-129]over her about that rescue of it which had formerly been so offensive.

[049-130]“No, dear, no; it was made out of your dear father’s chain. And I

[049-131]should prefer not selling the other things. None of them are of any

[049-132]great value. All my best ornaments were taken from me long ago.”

[049-133]Mrs. Davilow colored. She usually avoided any reference to such facts

[049-134]about Gwendolen’s step-father as that he had carried off his wife’s

[049-135]jewelry and disposed of it. After a moment’s pause she went on,

[049-136]“And these things have not been reckoned on for any expenses. Carry

[049-137]them with you.”

[049-138]“That would be quite useless, mamma,” said Gwendolen, coldly.

[049-139]“Governesses don’t wear ornaments. You had better get me a gray frieze

[049-140]livery and a straw poke, such as my aunt’s charity children wear.”

[049-141]“No, dear, no; don’t take that view of it. I feel sure the Momperts

[049-142]will like you the better for being graceful and elegant.”

[049-143]“I am not at all sure what the Momperts will like me to be. It is

[049-144]enough that I am expected to be what they like,” said Gwendolen

[049-145]bitterly.

[049-146]“If there is anything you would object to less—anything that could be

[049-147]done—instead of your going to the bishop’s, do say so, Gwendolen. Tell

[049-148]me what is in your heart. I will try for anything you wish,” said the

[049-149]mother, beseechingly. “Don’t keep things away from me. Let us bear them

[049-150]together.”

[049-151]“Oh, mamma, there is nothing to tell. I can’t do anything better. I

[049-152]must think myself fortunate if they will have me. I shall get some

[049-153]money for you. That is the only thing I have to think of. I shall not

[049-154]spend any money this year: you will have all the eighty pounds. I don’t

[049-155]know how far that will go in housekeeping; but you need not stitch your

[049-156]poor fingers to the bone, and stare away all the sight that the tears

[049-157]have left in your dear eyes.”

[049-158]Gwendolen did not give any caresses with her words as she had been used

[049-159]to do. She did not even look at her mother, but was looking at the

[049-160]turquoise necklace as she turned it over her fingers.

[049-161]“Bless you for your tenderness, my good darling!” said Mrs. Davilow,

[049-162]with tears in her eyes. “Don’t despair because there are clouds now.

[049-163]You are so young. There may be great happiness in store for you yet.”

[049-164]“I don’t see any reason for expecting it, mamma,” said Gwendolen, in a

[049-165]hard tone; and Mrs. Davilow was silent, thinking as she had often

[049-166]thought before—“What did happen between her and [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]]?”

[049-167]“I _will_ keep this necklace, mamma,” said Gwendolen, laying it apart

[049-168]and then closing the casket. “But do get the other things sold, even if

[049-169]they will not bring much. Ask my uncle what to do with them. I shall

[049-170]certainly not use them again. I am going to take the veil. I wonder if

[049-171]all the poor wretches who have ever taken it felt as I do.”

[049-172]“Don’t exaggerate evils, dear.”

[049-173]“How can any one know that I exaggerate, when I am speaking of my own

[049-174]feeling? I did not say what any one else felt.”
