---
id: ch040
label: "Section 40"
type: chapter
description: "Mrs. Meyrick gave no audible answer, but pressed her lips against"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[040-001]Mrs. Meyrick gave no audible answer, but pressed her lips against

[040-002][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s forehead.

[040-003]* * * * *

[040-004]“She’s just a pearl; the mud has only washed her,” was the fervid

[040-005]little woman’s closing commentary when, _tête-à-tête_ with [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] in

[040-006]the back parlor that evening, she had conveyed Mirah’s story to him

[040-007]with much vividness.

[040-008]“What is your feeling about a search for this mother?” said Deronda.

[040-009]“Have you no fears? I have, I confess.”

[040-010]“Oh, I believe the mother’s good,” said Mrs. Meyrick, with rapid

[040-011]decisiveness; “or _was_ good. She may be dead—that’s my fear. A good

[040-012]woman, you may depend: you may know it by the scoundrel the father is.

[040-013]Where did the child get her goodness from? Wheaten flour has to be

[040-014]accounted for.”

[040-015]Deronda was rather disappointed at this answer; he had wanted a

[040-016]confirmation of his own judgment, and he began to put in demurrers. The

[040-017]argument about the mother would not apply to the brother; and Mrs.

[040-018]Meyrick admitted that the brother might be an ugly likeness of the

[040-019]father. Then, as to advertising, if the name was Cohen, you might as

[040-020]well advertise for two undescribed terriers; and here Mrs. Meyrick

[040-021]helped him, for the idea of an advertisement, already mentioned to

[040-022]Mirah, had roused the poor child’s terror; she was convinced that her

[040-023]father would see it—he saw everything in the papers. Certainly there

[040-024]were safer means than advertising; men might be set to work whose

[040-025]business it was to find missing persons; but Deronda wished Mrs.

[040-026]Meyrick to feel with him that it would be wiser to wait, before seeking

[040-027]a dubious—perhaps a deplorable result; especially as he was engaged to

[040-028]go abroad the next week for a couple of months. If a search were made,

[040-029]he would like to be at hand, so that Mrs. Meyrick might not be unaided

[040-030]in meeting any consequences—supposing that she would generously

[040-031]continue to watch over Mirah.

[040-032]“We should be very jealous of any one who took the task from us,” said

[040-033]Mrs. Meyrick. “She will stay under my roof; there is [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]]’s old room

[040-034]for her.”

[040-035]“Will she be content to wait?” said Deronda, anxiously.

[040-036]“No trouble there. It is not her nature to run into planning and

[040-037]devising: only to submit. See how she submitted to that father! It was

[040-038]a wonder to herself how she found the will and contrivance to run away

[040-039]from him. [[About]] finding her mother, her only notion now is to trust;

[040-040]since you were sent to save her and we are good to her, she trusts that

[040-041]her mother will be found in the same unsought way. And when she is

[040-042]talking I catch her feeling like a child.”

[040-043]Mrs. Meyrick hoped that the sum Deronda put into her hands as a

[040-044]provision for Mirah’s wants was more than would be needed; after a

[040-045]little while Mirah would perhaps like to occupy herself as the other

[040-046]girls did, and make herself independent. Deronda pleaded that she must

[040-047]need a long rest. “Oh, yes; we will hurry nothing,” said Mrs. Meyrick.

[040-048]“Rely upon it, she shall be taken tender care of. If you like to give

[040-049]me your address abroad, I will write to let you know how we get on. It

[040-050]is not fair that we should have all the pleasure of her salvation to

[040-051]ourselves. And besides, I want to make believe that I am doing

[040-052]something for you as well as for Mirah.”

[040-053]“That is no make-believe. What should I have done without you last

[040-054]night? Everything would have gone wrong. I shall tell Hans that the

[040-055]best of having him for a friend is, knowing his mother.”

[040-056]After that they joined the girls in the other room, where Mirah was

[040-057]seated placidly, while the others were telling her what they knew about

[040-058]Mr. Deronda—his goodness to Hans, and all the virtues that Hans had

[040-059]reported of him.

[040-060]“Kate burns a pastille before his portrait every day,” said Mab. “And I

[040-061]carry his signature in a little black-silk bag round my neck to keep

[040-062]off the cramp. And Amy says the multiplication-table in his name. We

[040-063]must all do something extra in honor of him, now he has brought you to

[040-064]us.”

[040-065]“I suppose he is too great a person to want anything,” said Mirah,

[040-066]smiling at Mab, and appealing to the graver Amy. “He is perhaps very

[040-067]high in the world?”

[040-068]“He is very much above us in rank,” said Amy. “He is related to grand

[040-069]people. I dare say he leans on some of the satin cushions we prick our

[040-070]fingers over.”

[040-071]“I am glad he is of high rank,” said Mirah, with her usual quietness.

[040-072]“Now, why are you glad of that?” said Amy, rather suspicious of this

[040-073]sentiment, and on the watch for Jewish peculiarities which had not

[040-074]appeared.

[040-075]“Because I have always disliked men of high rank before.”

[040-076]“Oh, Mr. Deronda is not so very high,” said Kate, “He need not hinder

[040-077]us from thinking ill of the whole peerage and baronetage if we like.”

[040-078]When he entered, Mirah rose with the same look of grateful reverence

[040-079]that she had lifted to him the evening before: impossible to see a

[040-080]creature freer at once from embarrassment and boldness. Her theatrical

[040-081]training had left no recognizable trace; probably her manners had not

[040-082]much changed since she played the forsaken child at nine years of age;

[040-083]and she had grown up in her simplicity and truthfulness like a little

[040-084]flower-seed that absorbs the chance confusion of its surrounding into

[040-085]its own definite mould of beauty. Deronda felt that he was making

[040-086]acquaintance with something quite new to him in the form of womanhood.

[040-087]For Mirah was not childlike from ignorance: her experience of evil and

[040-088]trouble was deeper and stranger than his own. He felt inclined to watch

[040-089]her and listen to her as if she had come from a far off shore inhabited

[040-090]by a race different from our own.

[040-091]But for that very reason he made his visit brief with his usual

[040-092]activity of imagination as to how his conduct might affect others, he

[040-093]shrank from what might seem like curiosity or the assumption of a right

[040-094]to know as much as he pleased of one to whom he had done a service. For

[040-095]example, he would have liked to hear her sing, but he would have felt

[040-096]the expression of such a wish to be rudeness in him—since she could

[040-097]not refuse, and he would all the while have a sense that she was being

[040-098]treated like one whose accomplishments were to be ready on demand. And

[040-099]whatever reverence could be shown to woman, he was bent on showing to

[040-100]this girl. Why? He gave himself several good reasons; but whatever one

[040-101]does with a strong unhesitating outflow of will has a store of motive

[040-102]that it would be hard to put into words. Some deeds seem little more

[040-103]than interjections which give vent to the long passion of a life.

[040-104]So Deronda soon took his farewell for the two months during which he

[040-105]expected to be absent from [[london|London]], and in a few days he was on his way

[040-106]with [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] and Lady Mallinger to [[Leubronn]].

[040-107]He had fulfilled his intention of telling them about Mirah. The baronet

[040-108]was decidedly of opinion that the search for the mother and brother had

[040-109]better be let alone. Lady Mallinger was much interested in the poor

[040-110]girl, observing that there was a society for the conversion of the

[040-111]Jews, and that it was to be hoped Mirah would embrace [[religion|Christianity]]; but

[040-112]perceiving that Sir Hugo looked at her with amusement, she concluded

[040-113]that she had said something foolish. Lady Mallinger felt apologetically

[040-114]about herself as a woman who had produced nothing but daughters in a

[040-115]case where sons were required, and hence regarded the apparent

[040-116]contradictions of the world as probably due to the weakness of her own

[040-117]understanding. But when she was much puzzled, it was her habit to say

[040-118]to herself, “I will ask Daniel.” Deronda was altogether a convenience

[040-119]in the family; and Sir Hugo too, after intending to do the best for

[040-120]him, had begun to feel that the pleasantest result would be to have

[040-121]this substitute for a son always ready at his elbow.

[040-122]This was the history of Deronda, so far as he knew it, up to the time

[040-123]of that visit to Leubronn in which he saw [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen Harleth]] at the

[040-124][[gambling|gaming]]-table.

[040-125]CHAPTER XXI.

[040-126]It is a common sentence that Knowledge is power; but who hath duly

[040-127]considered or set forth the power of Ignorance? Knowledge slowly

[040-128]builds up what Ignorance in an hour pulls down. Knowledge, through

[040-129]patient and frugal centuries, enlarges discovery and makes record of

[040-130]it; Ignorance, wanting its day’s dinner, lights a fire with the

[040-131]record, and gives a flavor to its one roast with the burned souls of

[040-132]many generations. Knowledge, instructing the sense, refining and

[040-133]multiplying needs, transforms itself into skill and makes life various

[040-134]with a new six days’ work; comes Ignorance drunk on the seventh, with

[040-135]a firkin of oil and a match and an easy “Let there not be,” and the

[040-136]many-colored creation is shriveled up in blackness. Of a truth,

[040-137]Knowledge is power, but it is a power reined by scruple, having a

[040-138]conscience of what must be and what may be; whereas Ignorance is a

[040-139]blind giant who, let him but wax unbound, would make it a sport to

[040-140]seize the pillars that hold up the long-wrought fabric of human good,

[040-141]and turn all the places of joy dark as a buried Babylon. And looking

[040-142]at life parcel-wise, in the growth of a single lot, who having a

[040-143]practiced vision may not see that ignorance of the true bond between

[040-144]events, and false conceit of means whereby sequences may be

[040-145]compelled—like that falsity of eyesight which overlooks the gradations of

[040-146]distance, seeing that which is afar off as if it were within a step or

[040-147]a grasp—precipitates the mistaken soul on destruction?

[040-148]It was half-past ten in the morning when Gwendolen Harleth, after her

[040-149]gloomy journey from Leubronn, arrived at the station from which she

[040-150]must [[ambition|drive]] to [[Offendene]]. No carriage or friend was awaiting her, for in

[040-151]the telegram she had sent from [[dover|Dover]] she had mentioned a later train,

[040-152]and in her impatience of lingering at a London station she had set off

[040-153]without picturing what it would be to arrive unannounced at half an

[040-154]hour’s drive from home—at one of those stations which have been fixed

[040-155]on not as near anywhere, but as equidistant from everywhere. Deposited

[040-156]as a _femme sole_ with her large trunks, and having to wait while a

[040-157]vehicle was being got from the large-sized lantern called the Railway

[040-158]Inn, Gwendolen felt that the dirty paint in the waiting-room, the dusty

[040-159]decanter of flat water, and the texts in large letters calling on her

[040-160]to repent and be converted, were part of the dreary prospect opened by

[040-161]her family troubles; and she hurried away to the outer door looking

[040-162]toward the lane and fields. But here the very gleams of sunshine seemed

[040-163]melancholy, for the autumnal leaves and grass were shivering, and the

[040-164]wind was turning up the feathers of a cock and two croaking hens which

[040-165]had doubtless parted with their grown-up offspring and did not know

[040-166]what to do with themselves. The railway official also seemed without

[040-167]resources, and his innocent demeanor in observing Gwendolen and her

[040-168]trunks was rendered intolerable by the cast in his eye; especially

[040-169]since, being a new man, he did not know her, and must conclude that she

[040-170]was not very high in the world. The vehicle—a dirty old barouche—was

[040-171]within sight, and was being slowly prepared by an elderly laborer.

[040-172]Contemptible details these, to make part of a history; yet the turn of

[040-173]most lives is hardly to be accounted for without them. They are

[040-174]continually entering with cumulative force into a mood until it gets

[040-175]the mass and momentum of a theory or a motive. Even philosophy is not

[040-176]quite free from such determining influences; and to be dropped solitary

[040-177]at an ugly, irrelevant-looking spot, with a sense of no income on the

[040-178]mind, might well prompt a man to discouraging speculation on the origin

[040-179]of things and the reason of a world where a subtle thinker found

[040-180]himself so badly off. How much more might such trifles tell on a young

[040-181]lady equipped for society with a fastidious taste, an Indian shawl over

[040-182]her arm, some twenty cubic feet of trunks by her side, and a mortal

[040-183]dislike to the new consciousness of poverty which was stimulating her

[040-184]imagination of disagreeables? At any rate they told heavily on poor

[040-185]Gwendolen, and helped to quell her resistant spirit. What was the good

[040-186]of living in the midst of hardships, ugliness, and [[shame|humiliation]]? This

[040-187]was the beginning of being at home again, and it was a sample of what

[040-188]she had to expect.
