---
id: ch046
label: "Section 46"
type: chapter
description: "“I am quite prepared to bear hardships at first. Of course no one can"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[046-001]“I am quite prepared to bear hardships at first. Of course no one can

[046-002]become celebrated all at once. And it is not necessary that every one

[046-003]should be first-rate—either actresses or singers. If you would be so

[046-004]kind as to tell me what steps I should take, I shall have the courage

[046-005]to take them. I don’t mind going up hill. It will be easier than the

[046-006]dead level of being a governess. I will take any steps you recommend.”

[046-007][[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] was convinced now that he must speak plainly.

[046-008]“I will tell you the steps, not that I recommend, but that will be

[046-009]forced upon you. It is all one, so far, what your goal will

[046-010]be—excellence, celebrity, second, third rateness—it is all one. You

[046-011]must go to town under the protection of your mother. You must put

[046-012]yourself under training—musical, dramatic, theatrical:—whatever you

[046-013]desire to do you have to learn”—here [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] looked as if she were

[046-014]going to speak, but Klesmer lifted up his hand and said, decisively, “I

[046-015]know. You have exercised your talents—you recite—you sing—from the

[046-016]drawing-room _Standpunkt_. My dear Fräulein, you must unlearn all that.

[046-017]You have not yet conceived what excellence is: you must unlearn your

[046-018]mistaken admirations. You must know what you have to strive for, and

[046-019]then you must subdue your mind and body to unbroken discipline. Your

[046-020]mind, I say. For you must not be thinking of celebrity: put that candle

[046-021]out of your eyes, and look only at excellence. You would of course earn

[046-022]nothing—you could get no engagement for a long while. You would need

[046-023]money for yourself and your family. But that,” here Klesmer frowned and

[046-024]shook his fingers as if to dismiss a triviality, “that could perhaps be

[046-025]found.”

[046-026]Gwendolen turned pink and pale during this speech. Her pride had felt a

[046-027]terrible knife-edge, and the last sentence only made the smart keener.

[046-028]She was conscious of appearing moved, and tried to escape from her

[046-029]weakness by suddenly walking to a seat and pointing out a chair to

[046-030]Klesmer. He did not take it, but turned a little in order to face her

[046-031]and leaned against the piano. At that moment she wished that she had

[046-032]not sent for him: this first experience of being taken on some other

[046-033]ground than that of her social rank and her beauty was becoming bitter

[046-034]to her. Klesmer, preoccupied with a serious purpose, went on without

[046-035]change of tone.

[046-036]“Now, what sort of issue might be fairly expected from all this

[046-037]self-denial? You would ask that. It is right that your eyes should be

[046-038]open to it. I will tell you truthfully. This issue would be uncertain,

[046-039]and, most probably, would not be worth much.”

[046-040]At these relentless words Klesmer put out his lip and looked through

[046-041]his spectacles with the air of a monster impenetrable by beauty.

[046-042]Gwendolen’s eyes began to burn, but the dread of showing weakness urged

[046-043]her to added self-control. She compelled herself to say, in a hard

[046-044]tone,

[046-045]“You think I want talent, or am too old to begin.”

[046-046]Klesmer made a sort of hum, and then descended on an emphatic “Yes! The

[046-047]desire and the training should have begun seven years ago—or a good

[046-048]deal earlier. A mountebank’s child who helps her father to earn

[046-049]shillings when she is six years old—a child that inherits a [[music|singing]]

[046-050]throat from a long line of choristers and learns to sing as it learns

[046-051]to talk, has a likelier beginning. Any great achievement in acting or

[046-052]in [[art|music]] grows with the growth. Whenever an artist has been able to

[046-053]say, ‘I came, I saw, I conquered,’ it has been at the end of patient

[046-054]practice. Genius at first is little more than a great capacity for

[046-055]receiving discipline. Singing and acting, like the fine dexterity of

[046-056]the juggler with his cups and balls, require a shaping of the organs

[046-057]toward a finer and finer certainty of effect. Your muscles—your whole

[046-058]frame—must go like a watch, true, true to a hair. That is the work of

[046-059]spring-time, before habits have been determined.”

[046-060]“I did not pretend to genius,” said Gwendolen, still feeling that she

[046-061]might somehow do what Klesmer wanted to represent as impossible. “I

[046-062]only suppose that I might have a little talent—enough to improve.”

[046-063]“I don’t deny that,” said Klesmer. “If you had been put in the right

[046-064]track some years ago and had worked well you might now have made a

[046-065]public singer, though I don’t think your voice would have counted for

[046-066]much in public. For the stage your personal charms and intelligence

[046-067]might then have told without the present drawback of inexperience—lack

[046-068]of discipline—lack of instruction.”

[046-069]Certainly Klesmer seemed cruel, but his feeling was the reverse of

[046-070]cruel. Our speech, even when we are most single-minded, can never take

[046-071]its line absolutely from one impulse; but Klesmer’s was, as far as

[046-072]possible, directed by [[sympathy|compassion]] for poor Gwendolen’s ignorant

[046-073]eagerness to enter on a course of which he saw all the miserable

[046-074]details with a definiteness which he could not if he would have

[046-075]conveyed to her mind.

[046-076]Gwendolen, however, was not convinced. Her self-opinion rallied, and

[046-077]since the counselor whom she had called in gave a decision of such

[046-078]severe peremptoriness, she was tempted to think that his judgment was

[046-079]not only fallible but biased. It occurred to her that a simpler and

[046-080]wiser step for her to have taken would have been to send a letter

[046-081]through the post to the manager of a [[london|London]] theatre, asking him to make

[046-082]an appointment. She would make no further reference to her singing;

[046-083]Klesmer, she saw, had set himself against her singing. But she felt

[046-084]equal to arguing with him about her going on the stage, and she

[046-085]answered in a resistant tone,

[046-086]“I understood, of course, that no one can be a finished actress at

[046-087]once. It may be impossible to tell beforehand whether I should succeed;

[046-088]but that seems to me a reason why I should try. I should have thought

[046-089]that I might have taken an engagement at a theatre meanwhile, so as to

[046-090]earn money and study at the same time.”

[046-091]“Can’t be done, my dear Miss Harleth—I speak plainly—it can’t be

[046-092]done. I must clear your mind of these notions which have no more

[046-093]resemblance to reality than a pantomime. Ladies and gentlemen think

[046-094]that when they have made their toilet and drawn on their gloves they

[046-095]are as presentable on the stage as in a drawing-room. No manager thinks

[046-096]that. With all your grace and charm, if you were to present yourself as

[046-097]an aspirant to the stage, a manager would either require you to pay as

[046-098]an amateur for being allowed to perform or he would tell you to go and

[046-099]be taught—trained to bear yourself on the stage, as a horse, however

[046-100]beautiful, must be trained for the circus; to say nothing of that study

[046-101]which would enable you to personate a character consistently, and

[046-102]animate it with the natural language of face, gesture, and tone. For

[046-103]you to get an engagement fit for you straight away is out of the

[046-104]question.”

[046-105]“I really cannot understand that,” said Gwendolen, rather

[046-106]haughtily—then, checking herself, she added in another tone—“I shall

[046-107]be obliged to you if you will explain how it is that such poor

[046-108]actresses get engaged. I have been to the theatre several times, and I

[046-109]am sure there were actresses who seemed to me to act not at all well

[046-110]and who were quite plain.”

[046-111]“Ah, my dear Miss Harleth, that is the easy criticism of the buyer. We

[046-112]who buy slippers toss away this pair and the other as clumsy; but there

[046-113]went an apprenticeship to the making of them. Excuse me; you could not

[046-114]at present teach one of those actresses; but there is certainly much

[046-115]that she could teach you. For example, she can pitch her voice so as to

[046-116]be heard: ten to one you could not do it till after many trials. Merely

[046-117]to stand and move on the stage is an art—requires practice. It is

[046-118]understood that we are not now talking of a _comparse_ in a petty

[046-119]theatre who earns the wages of a needle-woman. That is out of the

[046-120]question for you.”

[046-121]“Of course I must earn more than that,” said Gwendolen, with a sense of

[046-122]wincing rather than of being refuted, “but I think I could soon learn

[046-123]to do tolerably well all those little things you have mentioned. I am

[046-124]not so very stupid. And even in [[paris|Paris]], I am sure, I saw two actresses

[046-125]playing important ladies’ parts who were not at all ladies and quite

[046-126]ugly. I suppose I have no particular talent, but I _must_ think it is

[046-127]an advantage, even on the stage, to be a lady and not a perfect fright.”

[046-128]“Ah, let us understand each other,” said Klesmer, with a flash of new

[046-129]meaning. “I was speaking of what you would have to go through if you

[046-130]aimed at becoming a real artist—if you took music and the drama as a

[046-131]higher vocation in which you would strive after excellence. On that

[046-132]head, what I have said stands fast. You would find—after your

[046-133]education in doing things slackly for one-and-twenty years—great

[046-134]difficulties in study; you would find mortifications in the treatment

[046-135]you would get when you presented yourself on the footing of skill. You

[046-136]would be subjected to tests; people would no longer feign not to see

[046-137]your blunders. You would at first only be accepted on trial. You would

[046-138]have to bear what I may call a glaring insignificance: any success must

[046-139]be won by the utmost patience. You would have to keep your place in a

[046-140]crowd, and after all it is likely you would lose it and get out of

[046-141]sight. If you determine to face these hardships and still try, you will

[046-142]have the dignity of a high purpose, even though you may have chosen

[046-143]unfortunately. You will have some merit, though you may win no prize.

[046-144]You have asked my judgment on your chances of winning. I don’t pretend

[046-145]to speak absolutely; but measuring probabilities, my judgment is:—you

[046-146]will hardly achieve more than mediocrity.”

[046-147]Klesmer had delivered himself with emphatic rapidity, and now paused a

[046-148]moment. Gwendolen was motionless, looking at her hands, which lay over

[046-149]each other on her lap, till the deep-toned, long-drawn “_But_,” with

[046-150]which he resumed, had a startling effect, and made her look at him

[046-151]again.

[046-152]“But—there are certainly other ideas, other dispositions with which a

[046-153]young lady may take up an art that will bring her before the public.

[046-154]She may rely on the unquestioned power of her beauty as a passport. She

[046-155]may desire to exhibit herself to an admiration which dispenses with

[046-156]skill. This goes a certain way on the stage: not in music: but on the

[046-157]stage, beauty is taken when there is nothing more commanding to be had.

[046-158]Not without some drilling, however: as I have said before,

[046-159]technicalities have in any case to be mastered. But these excepted, we

[046-160]have here nothing to do with art. The woman who takes up this career is

[046-161]not an artist: she is usually one who thinks of entering on a luxurious

[046-162]life by a short and easy road—perhaps by marriage—that is her most

[046-163]brilliant chance, and the rarest. Still, her career will not be

[046-164]luxurious to begin with: she can hardly earn her own poor bread

[046-165]independently at once, and the indignities she will be liable to are

[046-166]such as I will not speak of.”

[046-167]“I desire to be independent,” said Gwendolen, deeply stung and

[046-168]confusedly apprehending some scorn for herself in Klesmer’s words.

[046-169]“That was my reason for asking whether I could not get an immediate

[046-170]engagement. Of course I cannot know how things go on about theatres.

[046-171]But I thought that I could have made myself independent. I have no

[046-172]money, and I will not accept help from any one.”
