---
id: ch042
label: "Section 42"
type: chapter
description: "“What! be like Miss Graves at Madame Meunier’s? No.”"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[042-001]“What! be like Miss Graves at Madame Meunier’s? No.”

[042-002]“I think, myself, that Dr. Monpert’s would be more suitable. There

[042-003]could be no hardship in a bishop’s family.”

[042-004]“Excuse me, mamma. There are hardships everywhere for a governess. And

[042-005]I don’t see that it would be pleasanter to be looked down on in a

[042-006]bishop’s family than in any other. Besides, you know very well I hate

[042-007]teaching. Fancy me shut up with three awkward girls something like

[042-008]Alice! I would rather emigrate than be a governess.”

[042-009]What it precisely was to emigrate, [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] was not called on to

[042-010]explain. [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] was mute, seeing no outlet, and thinking with

[042-011]dread of the collision that might happen when Gwendolen had to meet her

[042-012]uncle and aunt. There was an air of reticence in Gwendolen’s haughty,

[042-013]resistant speeches which implied that she had a definite plan in

[042-014]reserve; and her practical ignorance continually exhibited, could not

[042-015]nullify the mother’s belief in the effectiveness of that forcible will

[042-016]and daring which had held mastery over herself.

[042-017]“I have some ornaments, mamma, and I could sell them,” said Gwendolen.

[042-018]“They would make a sum: I want a little sum—just to go on with. I dare

[042-019]say Marshall, at Wanchester, would take them: I know he showed me some

[042-020]bracelets once that he said he had bought from a lady. Jocosa might go

[042-021]and ask him. Jocosa is going to leave us, of course. But she might do

[042-022]that first.”

[042-023]“She would do anything she could, poor, dear soul. I have not told you

[042-024]yet—she wanted me to take all her savings—her three hundred pounds. I

[042-025]tell her to set up a little school. It will be hard for her to go into

[042-026]a new family now she has been so long with us.”

[042-027]“Oh, recommend her for the bishop’s daughters,” said Gwendolen, with a

[042-028]sudden gleam of laughter in her face. “I am sure she will do better

[042-029]than I should.”

[042-030]“Do take care not to say such things to your uncle,” said Mrs. Davilow.

[042-031]“He will be hurt at your despising what he has exerted himself about.

[042-032]But I dare say you have something else in your mind that he might not

[042-033]disapprove, if you consulted him.”

[042-034]“There is some one else I want to consult first. Are the Arrowpoints

[042-035]at [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]] still, and is [[Herr-Klesmer|Herr Klesmer]] there? But I daresay you know

[042-036]nothing about it, poor, dear mamma. Can Jeffries go on horseback with a

[042-037]note?”

[042-038]“Oh, my dear, Jeffries is not here, and the dealer has taken the

[042-039]horses. But some one could go for us from Leek’s farm. The Arrowpoints

[042-040]are at Quetcham, I know. [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]] left her card the other day: I

[042-041]could not see her. But I don’t know about Herr Klesmer. Do you want to

[042-042]send before to-morrow?”

[042-043]“Yes, as soon as possible. I will write a note,” said Gwendolen, rising.

[042-044]“What can you be thinking of, Gwen?” said Mrs. Davilow, relieved in the

[042-045]midst of her wonderment by signs of alacrity and better humor.

[042-046]“Don’t mind what, there’s a dear, good mamma,” said Gwendolen,

[042-047]reseating herself a moment to give atoning caresses. “I mean to do

[042-048]something. Never mind what until it is all settled. And then you shall

[042-049]be comforted. The dear face!—it is ten years older in these three

[042-050]weeks. Now, now, now! don’t cry”—Gwendolen, holding her mamma’s head

[042-051]with both hands, kissed the trembling eyelids. “But mind you don’t

[042-052]contradict me or put hindrances in my way. I must decide for myself. I

[042-053]cannot be dictated to by my uncle or any one else. My life is my own

[042-054]affair. And I think”—here her tone took an edge of scorn—“I think I

[042-055]can do better for you than let you live in Sawyer’s Cottage.”

[042-056]In uttering this last sentence Gwendolen again rose, and went to a desk

[042-057]where she wrote the following note to Klesmer:—

[042-058]Miss Harleth presents her compliments to Herr Klesmer, and ventures

[042-059]to request of him the very great favor that he will call upon her, if

[042-060]possible, to-morrow. Her reason for presuming so far on his kindness

[042-061]is of a very serious nature. Unfortunate family circumstances have

[042-062]obliged her to take a course in which she can only turn for advice to

[042-063]the great knowledge and judgment of Herr Klesmer.

[042-064]“Pray get this sent to Quetcham at once, mamma,” said Gwendolen, as she

[042-065]addressed the letter. “The man must be told to wait for an answer. Let

[042-066]no time be lost.”

[042-067]For the moment, the absorbing purpose was to get the letter dispatched;

[042-068]but when she had been assured on this point, another anxiety arose and

[042-069]kept her in a state of uneasy excitement. If Klesmer happened not to be

[042-070]at Quetcham, what could she do next? Gwendolen’s belief in her star, so

[042-071]to speak, had had some bruises. Things had gone against her. A splendid

[042-072]marriage which presented itself within reach had shown a hideous flaw.

[042-073]The chances of [[gambling|roulette]] had not adjusted themselves to her claims; and

[042-074]a man of whom she knew nothing had thrust himself between her and her

[042-075]intentions. The conduct of those uninteresting people who managed the

[042-076]business of the world had been culpable just in the points most

[042-077]injurious to her in particular. Gwendolen Harleth, with all her beauty

[042-078]and conscious force, felt the close threats of [[shame|humiliation]]: for the

[042-079]first time the conditions of this world seemed to her like a hurrying

[042-080]roaring crowd in which she had got astray, no more cared for and

[042-081]protected than a myriad of other girls, in spite of its being a

[042-082]peculiar hardship to her. If Klesmer were not at Quetcham—that would

[042-083]be all of a piece with the rest: the unwelcome negative urged itself as

[042-084]a probability, and set her brain working at desperate alternatives

[042-085]which might deliver her from Sawyer’s Cottage or the ultimate necessity

[042-086]of “taking a situation,” a phrase that summed up for her the

[042-087]disagreeables most wounding to her pride, most irksome to her tastes;

[042-088]at least so far as her experience enabled her to imagine disagreeables.

[042-089]Still Klesmer might be there, and Gwendolen thought of the result in

[042-090]that case with a hopefulness which even cast a satisfactory light over

[042-091]her peculiar troubles, as what might well enter into the biography of

[042-092]celebrities and remarkable persons. And if she had heard her immediate

[042-093]acquaintances cross-examined as to whether they thought her remarkable,

[042-094]the first who said “No” would have surprised her.

[042-095]CHAPTER XXII.

[042-096]We please our fancy with ideal webs

[042-097]Of innovation, but our life meanwhile

[042-098]Is in the loom, where busy passion plies

[042-099]The shuttle to and fro, and gives our deeds

[042-100]The accustomed pattern.

[042-101]Gwendolen’s note, coming “pat betwixt too early and too late,” was put

[042-102]into Klesmer’s hands just when he was leaving Quetcham, and in order to

[042-103]meet her appeal to his kindness he, with some inconvenience to himself

[042-104]spent the night at Wanchester. There were reasons why he would not

[042-105]remain at Quetcham.

[042-106]That magnificent mansion, fitted with regard to the greatest expense,

[042-107]had in fact became too hot for him, its owners having, like some great

[042-108]politicians, been astonished at an insurrection against the established

[042-109]order of things, which we plain people after the event can perceive to

[042-110]have been prepared under their very noses.

[042-111]There were as usual many guests in the house, and among them one in

[042-112]whom Miss Arrowpoint foresaw a new pretender to her hand: a political

[042-113]man of good family who confidently expected a peerage, and felt on

[042-114]public grounds that he required a larger fortune to support the title

[042-115]properly. Heiresses vary, and persons interested in one of them

[042-116]beforehand are prepared to find that she is too yellow or too red, tall

[042-117]and toppling or short and square, violent and capricious or moony and

[042-118]insipid; but in every case it is taken for granted that she will

[042-119]consider herself an appendage to her fortune, and marry where others

[042-120]think her fortunes ought to go. Nature, however, not only accommodates

[042-121]herself ill to our favorite practices by making “only children”

[042-122]daughters, but also now and then endows the misplaced daughter with a

[042-123]clear head and a strong will. The Arrowpoints had already felt some

[042-124]anxiety owing to these endowments of their Catherine. She would not

[042-125]accept the view of her social duty which required her to marry a needy

[042-126]nobleman or a commoner on the ladder toward nobility; and they were not

[042-127]without uneasiness concerning her persistence in declining suitable

[042-128]offers. As to the possibility of her being in love with Klesmer they

[042-129]were not at all uneasy—a very common sort of blindness. For in general

[042-130]mortals have a great power of being astonished at the presence of an

[042-131]effect toward which they have done everything, and at the absence of an

[042-132]effect toward which they had done nothing but desire it. Parents are

[042-133]astonished at the ignorance of their sons, though they have used the

[042-134]most time-honored and expensive means of securing it; husbands and

[042-135]wives are mutually astonished at the loss of affection which they have

[042-136]taken no pains to keep; and all of us in our turn are apt to be

[042-137]astonished that our neighbors do not admire us. In this way it happens

[042-138]that the truth seems highly improbable. The truth is something

[042-139]different from the habitual lazy combinations begotten by our wishes.

[042-140]The Arrowpoints’ hour of astonishment was come.

[042-141]When there is a passion between an heiress and a proud

[042-142]independent-spirited man, it is difficult for them to come to an

[042-143]understanding; but the difficulties are likely to be overcome unless

[042-144]the proud man secures himself by a constant _alibi_. Brief meetings

[042-145]after studied absence are potent in disclosure: but more potent still

[042-146]is frequent companionship, with full sympathy in taste and admirable

[042-147]qualities on both sides; especially where the one is in the position of

[042-148]teacher and the other is delightedly conscious of receptive ability

[042-149]which also gives the teacher delight. The situation is famous in

[042-150]history, and has no less charm now than it had in the days of Abelard.

[042-151]But this kind of comparison had not occurred to the Arrowpoints when

[042-152]they first engaged Klesmer to come down to Quetcham. To have a

[042-153]first-rate musician in your house is a privilege of wealth; Catherine’s

[042-154]musical talent demanded every advantage; and she particularly desired

[042-155]to use her quieter time in the country for more thorough study. Klesmer

[042-156]was not yet a Liszt, understood to be adored by ladies of all European

[042-157]countries with the exception of Lapland: and even with that

[042-158]understanding it did not follow that he would make proposals to an

[042-159]heiress. No musician of honor would do so. Still less was it

[042-160]conceivable that Catherine would give him the slightest pretext for

[042-161]such daring. The large check that Mr. Arrowpoint was to draw in

[042-162]Klesmer’s name seemed to make him as safe an inmate as a footman. Where

[042-163]marriage is inconceivable, a girl’s sentiments are safe.

[042-164]Klesmer was eminently a man of honor, but marriages rarely begin with

[042-165]formal proposals, and moreover, Catherine’s limit of the conceivable

[042-166]did not exactly correspond with her mother’s.

[042-167]Outsiders might have been more apt to think that Klesmer’s position was

[042-168]dangerous for himself if Miss Arrowpoint had been an acknowledged

[042-169]beauty; not taking into account that the most powerful of all beauty is

[042-170]that which reveals itself after sympathy and not before it. There is a

[042-171]charm of eye and lip which comes with every little phrase that

[042-172]certifies delicate perception or fine judgment, with every

[042-173]unostentatious word or smile that shows a heart awake to others; and no

[042-174]sweep of garment or turn of figure is more satisfying than that which

[042-175]enters as a restoration of confidence that one person is present on

[042-176]whom no intention will be lost. What dignity of meaning goes on

[042-177]gathering in frowns and laughs which are never observed in the wrong

[042-178]place; what suffused adorableness in a human frame where there is a

[042-179]mind that can flash out comprehension and hands that can execute

[042-180]finely! The more obvious beauty, also adorable sometimes—one may say

[042-181]it without blasphemy—begins by being an apology for folly, and ends

[042-182]like other apologies in becoming tiresome by iteration; and that

[042-183]Klesmer, though very susceptible to it, should have a passionate

[042-184]attachment to Miss Arrowpoint, was no more a paradox than any other

[042-185]triumph of a manifold sympathy over a monotonous attraction. We object

[042-186]less to be taxed with the enslaving excess of our passions than with

[042-187]our deficiency in wider passion; but if the truth were known, our

[042-188]reputed intensity is often the dullness of not knowing what else to do

[042-189]with ourselves. Tannhäuser, one suspects, was a knight of ill-furnished

[042-190]imagination, hardly of larger discourse than a heavy Guardsman; Merlin

[042-191]had certainly seen his best days, and was merely repeating himself,

[042-192]when he fell into that hopeless captivity; and we know that Ulysses

[042-193]felt so manifest an _ennui_ under similar circumstances that Calypso

[042-194]herself furthered his departure. There is indeed a report that he

[042-195]afterward left Penelope; but since she was habitually absorbed in

[042-196]worsted work, and it was probably from her that Telemachus got his

[042-197]mean, pettifogging disposition, always anxious about the property and

[042-198]the daily consumption of meat, no inference can be drawn from this

[042-199]already dubious scandal as to the relation between companionship and

[042-200]constancy.
