---
id: ch045
label: "Section 45"
type: chapter
description: "“You would not mind Isabel sitting with you? She would be reading in a"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[045-001]“You would not mind Isabel sitting with you? She would be reading in a

[045-002]corner.”

[045-003]“No; she could not: she would bite her nails and stare. It would be too

[045-004]irritating. Trust my judgment, mamma, I must be alone. Take them all to

[045-005]church.”

[045-006][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] had her way, of course; only that Miss Merry and two of the

[045-007]girls stayed at home, to give the house a look of habitation by sitting

[045-008]at the dining-room windows.

[045-009]It was a delicious Sunday morning. The melancholy waning sunshine of

[045-010]autumn rested on the half-strown grass and came mildly through the

[045-011]windows in slanting bands of brightness over the old furniture, and the

[045-012]glass panel that reflected the furniture; over the tapestried chairs

[045-013]with their faded flower-wreaths, the dark enigmatic pictures, the

[045-014]superannuated organ at which Gwendolen had pleased herself with acting

[045-015]Saint Cecelia on her first joyous arrival, the crowd of pallid, dusty

[045-016]knick-knacks seen through the open doors of the antechamber where she had

[045-017]achieved the wearing of her Greek dress as Hermione. This last memory

[045-018]was just now very busy in her; for had not [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] then been struck

[045-019]with admiration of her pose and expression? Whatever he had said,

[045-020]whatever she imagined him to have thought, was at this moment pointed

[045-021]with keenest interest for her: perhaps she had never before in her life

[045-022]felt so inwardly dependent, so consciously in need of another person’s

[045-023]opinion. There was a new fluttering of spirit within her, a new element

[045-024]of deliberation in her self-estimate which had hitherto been a blissful

[045-025]gift of intuition. Still it was the recurrent burden of her inward

[045-026]soliloquy that Klesmer had seen but little of her, and any unfavorable

[045-027]conclusion of his must have too narrow a foundation. She really felt

[045-028]clever enough for anything.

[045-029]To fill up the time she collected her volumes and pieces of [[art|music]], and

[045-030]laying them on the top of the piano, set herself to classify them. Then

[045-031]catching the reflection of her movements in the glass panel, she was

[045-032]diverted to the contemplation of the image there and walked toward it.

[045-033]Dressed in black, without a single ornament, and with the warm

[045-034]whiteness of her skin set off between her light-brown coronet of hair

[045-035]and her square-cut bodice, she might have tempted an artist to try

[045-036]again the Roman trick of a statue in black, white, and tawny marble.

[045-037]Seeing her image slowly advancing, she thought “I _am_ beautiful”—not

[045-038]exultingly, but with grave decision. Being beautiful was after all the

[045-039]condition on which she most needed external testimony. If any one

[045-040]objected to the turn of her nose or the form of her neck and chin, she

[045-041]had not the sense that she could presently show her power of attainment

[045-042]in these branches of feminine perfection.

[045-043]There was not much time to fill up in this way before the sound of

[045-044]wheels, the loud ring, and the opening doors assured her that she was

[045-045]not by any accident to be disappointed. This slightly increased her

[045-046]inward flutter. In spite of her self-confidence, she dreaded Klesmer as

[045-047]part of that unmanageable world which was independent of her

[045-048]wishes—something vitriolic that would not cease to burn because you

[045-049]smiled or frowned at it. Poor thing! she was at a higher crisis of her

[045-050]woman’s fate than in her last experience with [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]. The

[045-051]questioning then, was whether she should take a particular man as a

[045-052]husband. The inmost fold of her questioning now was whether she need

[045-053]take a husband at all—whether she could not achieve substantially for

[045-054]herself and know gratified ambition without bondage.

[045-055]Klesmer made his most deferential bow in the wide doorway of the

[045-056]antechamber—showing also the deference of the finest gray kerseymere

[045-057]trousers and perfect gloves (the ‘masters of those who know’ are

[045-058]happily altogether human). Gwendolen met him with unusual gravity, and

[045-059]holding out her hand said, “It is most kind of you to come, Herr

[045-060]Klesmer. I hope you have not thought me presumptuous.”

[045-061]“I took your wish as a command that did me honor,” said Klesmer, with

[045-062]answering gravity. He was really putting by his own affairs in order to

[045-063]give his utmost attention to what Gwendolen might have to say; but his

[045-064]temperament was still in a state of excitation from the events of

[045-065]yesterday, likely enough to give his expressions a more than usually

[045-066]biting edge.

[045-067]Gwendolen for once was under too great a strain of feeling to remember

[045-068]formalities. She continued standing near the piano, and Klesmer took

[045-069]his stand near the other end of it with his back to the light and his

[045-070]terribly omniscient eyes upon her. No affectation was of use, and she

[045-071]began without delay.

[045-072]“I wish to consult you, Herr Klesmer. We have lost all our fortune; we

[045-073]have nothing. I must get my own bread, and I desire to provide for my

[045-074]mamma, so as to save her from any hardship. The only way I can think

[045-075]of—and I should like it better than anything—is to be an actress—to

[045-076]go on the stage. But, of course, I should like to take a high position,

[045-077]and I thought—if you thought I could”—here Gwendolen became a little

[045-078]more nervous—“it would be better for me to be a singer—to study

[045-079][[music|singing]] also.”

[045-080]Klesmer put down his hat upon the piano, and folded his arms as if to

[045-081]concentrate himself.

[045-082]“I know,” Gwendolen resumed, turning from pale to pink and back

[045-083]again—“I know that my method of singing is very defective; but I have

[045-084]been ill taught. I could be better taught; I could study. And you will

[045-085]understand my wish:—to sing and act too, like Grisi, is a much higher

[045-086]position. Naturally, I should wish to take as high rank as I can. And I

[045-087]can rely on your judgment. I am sure you will tell me the truth.”

[045-088]Gwendolen somehow had the conviction that now she made this serious

[045-089]appeal the truth would be favorable.

[045-090]Still Klesmer did not speak. He drew off his gloves quickly, tossed

[045-091]them into his hat, rested his hands on his hips, and walked to the

[045-092]other end of the room. He was filled with [[sympathy|compassion]] for this girl: he

[045-093]wanted to put a guard on his speech. When he turned again, he looked at

[045-094]her with a mild frown of inquiry, and said with gentle though quick

[045-095]utterance, “You have never seen anything, I think, of artists and their

[045-096]lives?—I mean of musicians, actors, artists of that kind?”

[045-097]“Oh, no,” said Gwendolen, not perturbed by a reference to this obvious

[045-098]fact in the history of a young lady hitherto well provided for.

[045-099]“You are—pardon me,” said Klesmer, again pausing near the piano—“in

[045-100]coming to a conclusion on such a matter as this, everything must be

[045-101]taken into consideration—you are perhaps twenty?”

[045-102]“I am twenty-one,” said Gwendolen, a slight fear rising in her. “Do you

[045-103]think I am too old?”

[045-104]Klesmer pouted his under lip and shook his long fingers upward in a

[045-105]manner totally enigmatic.

[045-106]“Many persons begin later than others,” said Gwendolen, betrayed by her

[045-107]habitual consciousness of having valuable information to bestow.

[045-108]Klesmer took no notice, but said with more studied gentleness than

[045-109]ever, “You have probably not thought of an artistic career until now:

[045-110]you did not entertain the notion, the longing—what shall I say?—you

[045-111]did not wish yourself an actress, or anything of that sort, till the

[045-112]present trouble?”

[045-113]“Not exactly: but I was fond of acting. I have acted; you saw me, if

[045-114]you remember—you saw me here in charades, and as Hermione,” said

[045-115]Gwendolen, really fearing that Klesmer had forgotten.

[045-116]“Yes, yes,” he answered quickly, “I remember—I remember perfectly,”

[045-117]and again walked to the other end of the room. It was difficult for him

[045-118]to refrain from this kind of movement when he was in any argument

[045-119]either audible or silent.

[045-120]Gwendolen felt that she was being weighed. The delay was unpleasant.

[045-121]But she did not yet conceive that the scale could dip on the wrong

[045-122]side, and it seemed to her only graceful to say, “I shall be very much

[045-123]obliged to you for taking the trouble to give me your advice, whatever

[045-124]it maybe.”

[045-125]“Miss Harleth,” said Klesmer, turning toward her and speaking with a

[045-126]slight increase of accent, “I will veil nothing from you in this

[045-127]matter. I should reckon myself guilty if I put a false visage on

[045-128]things—made them too black or too white. The gods have a curse for him

[045-129]who willingly tells another the wrong road. And if I misled one who is

[045-130]so young, so beautiful—who, I trust, will find her happiness along the

[045-131]right road, I should regard myself as a—_Bösewicht_.” In the last word

[045-132]Klesmer’s voice had dropped to a loud whisper.

[045-133]Gwendolen felt a sinking of heart under this unexpected solemnity, and

[045-134]kept a sort of fascinated gaze on Klesmer’s face, as he went on.

[045-135]“You are a beautiful young lady—you have been brought up in ease—you

[045-136]have done what you would—you have not said to yourself, ‘I must know

[045-137]this exactly,’ ‘I must understand this exactly,’ ‘I must do this

[045-138]exactly,’”—in uttering these three terrible _musts_, Klesmer lifted up

[045-139]three long fingers in succession. “In sum, you have not been called

[045-140]upon to be anything but a charming young lady, whom it is an

[045-141]impoliteness to find fault with.”

[045-142]He paused an instant; then resting his fingers on his hips again, and

[045-143]thrusting out his powerful chin, he said,

[045-144]“Well, then, with that preparation, you wish to try the life of an

[045-145]artist; you wish to try a life of arduous, unceasing work,

[045-146]and—uncertain praise. Your praise would have to be earned, like your

[045-147]bread; and both would come slowly, scantily—what do I say?—they may

[045-148]hardly come at all.”

[045-149]This tone of discouragement, which Klesmer had hoped might suffice

[045-150]without anything more unpleasant, roused some resistance in Gwendolen.

[045-151]With a slight turn of her head away from him, and an air of pique, she

[045-152]said,

[045-153]“I thought that you, being an artist, would consider the life one of

[045-154]the most honorable and delightful. And if I can do nothing better?—I

[045-155]suppose I can put up with the same risks as other people do.”

[045-156]“Do nothing better?” said Klesmer, a little fired. “No, my dear Miss

[045-157]Harleth, you could do nothing better—neither man nor woman could do

[045-158]anything better—if you could do what was best or good of its kind. I

[045-159]am not decrying the life of the true artist. I am exalting it. I say,

[045-160]it is out of the reach of any but choice organizations—natures framed

[045-161]to love perfection and to labor for it; ready, like all true lovers, to

[045-162]endure, to wait, to say, I am not yet worthy, but she—Art, my

[045-163]mistress—is worthy, and I will live to merit her. An honorable life?

[045-164]Yes. But the honor comes from the inward vocation and the hard-won

[045-165]achievement: there is no honor in donning the life as a livery.”

[045-166]Some excitement of yesterday had revived in Klesmer and hurried him

[045-167]into speech a little aloof from his immediate friendly purpose. He had

[045-168]wished as delicately as possible to rouse in Gwendolen a sense of her

[045-169]unfitness for a perilous, difficult course; but it was his wont to be

[045-170]angry with the pretensions of incompetence, and he was in danger of

[045-171]getting chafed. Conscious of this, he paused suddenly. But Gwendolen’s

[045-172]chief impression was that he had not yet denied her the power of doing

[045-173]what would be good of its kind. Klesmer’s fervor seemed to be a sort of

[045-174]glamor such as he was prone to throw over things in general; and what

[045-175]she desired to assure him of was that she was not afraid of some

[045-176]preliminary hardships. The belief that to present herself in public on

[045-177]the stage must produce an effect such as she had been used to feel

[045-178]certain of in private life, was like a bit of her flesh—it was not to

[045-179]be peeled off readily, but must come with blood and pain. She said, in

[045-180]a tone of some insistence;
