---
id: ch047
label: "Section 47"
type: chapter
description: "Her wounded pride could not rest without making this disclaimer. It was"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[047-001]Her [[pride|wounded pride]] could not rest without making this disclaimer. It was

[047-002]intolerable to her that [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] should imagine her to have expected

[047-003]other help from him than advice.

[047-004]“That is a hard saying for your friends,” said Klesmer, recovering the

[047-005]gentleness of tone with which he had begun the conversation. “I have

[047-006]given you pain. That was inevitable. I was bound to put the truth, the

[047-007]unvarnished truth, before you. I have not said—I will not say—you

[047-008]will do wrong to choose the hard, climbing path of an endeavoring

[047-009]artist. You have to compare its difficulties with those of any less

[047-010]hazardous—any more private course which opens itself to you. If you

[047-011]take that more courageous resolve I will ask leave to shake hands with

[047-012]you on the strength of our freemasonry, where we are all vowed to the

[047-013]service of art, and to serve her by helping every fellow-servant.”

[047-014][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] was silent, again looking at her hands. She felt herself very

[047-015]far away from taking the resolve that would enforce acceptance; and

[047-016]after waiting an instant or two, Klesmer went on with deepened

[047-017]seriousness.

[047-018]“Where there is the duty of service there must be the duty of accepting

[047-019]it. The question is not one of personal [[duty|obligation]]. And in relation to

[047-020]practical matters immediately affecting your future—excuse my

[047-021]permitting myself to mention in confidence an affair of my own. I am

[047-022]expecting an event which would make it easy for me to exert myself on

[047-023]your behalf in furthering your opportunities of instruction and

[047-024]residence in [[london|London]]—under the care, that is, of your family—without

[047-025]need for anxiety on your part. If you resolve to take art as a

[047-026]bread-study, you need only undertake the study at first; the bread will

[047-027]be found without trouble. The event I mean is my marriage—in fact—you

[047-028]will receive this as a matter of confidence—my marriage with Miss

[047-029]Arrowpoint, which will more than double such right as I have to be

[047-030]trusted by you as a friend. Your friendship will have greatly risen in

[047-031]value for _her_ by your having adopted that generous labor.”

[047-032]Gwendolen’s face had begun to burn. That Klesmer was about to marry

[047-033][[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]] caused her no surprise, and at another moment she would

[047-034]have amused herself in quickly imagining the scenes that must have

[047-035]occurred at [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]]. But what engrossed her feeling, what filled her

[047-036]imagination now, was the panorama of her own immediate future that

[047-037]Klesmer’s words seemed to have unfolded. The suggestion of Miss

[047-038]Arrowpoint as a patroness was only another detail added to its

[047-039]repulsiveness: Klesmer’s proposal to help her seemed an additional

[047-040]irritation after the humiliating judgment he had passed on her

[047-041]capabilities. His words had really bitten into her self-confidence and

[047-042]turned it into the pain of a bleeding wound; and the idea of presenting

[047-043]herself before other judges was now poisoned with the dread that they

[047-044]also might be harsh; they also would not recognize the talent she was

[047-045]conscious of. But she controlled herself, and rose from her seat before

[047-046]she made any answer. It seemed natural that she should pause. She went

[047-047]to the piano and looked absently at leaves of [[art|music]], pinching up the

[047-048]corners. At last she turned toward Klesmer and said, with almost her

[047-049]usual air of proud equality, which in this interview had not been

[047-050]hitherto perceptible.

[047-051]“I congratulate you sincerely, Herr Klesmer. I think I never saw any

[047-052]one so admirable as Miss Arrowpoint. And I have to thank you for every

[047-053]sort of kindness this morning. But I can’t decide now. If I make the

[047-054]resolve you have spoken of, I will use your permission—I will let you

[047-055]know. But I fear the obstacles are too great. In any case, I am deeply

[047-056]obliged to you. It was very bold of me to ask you to take this trouble.”

[047-057]Klesmer’s inward remark was, “She will never let me know.” But with the

[047-058]most thorough respect in his manner, he said, “Command me at any time.

[047-059]There is an address on this card which will always find me with little

[047-060]delay.”

[047-061]When he had taken up his hat and was going to make his bow, Gwendolen’s

[047-062]better self, conscious of an ingratitude which the clear-seeing Klesmer

[047-063]must have penetrated, made a desperate effort to find its way above the

[047-064]stifling layers of egoistic disappointment and irritation. Looking at

[047-065]him with a glance of the old gayety, she put out her hand, and said

[047-066]with a smile, “If I take the wrong road, it will not be because of your

[047-067]flattery.”

[047-068]“God forbid that you should take any road but one where you will find

[047-069]and give happiness!” said Klesmer, fervently. Then, in foreign fashion,

[047-070]he touched her fingers lightly with his lips, and in another minute she

[047-071]heard the sound of his departing wheels getting more distant on the

[047-072]gravel.

[047-073]Gwendolen had never in her life felt so miserable. No sob came, no

[047-074]passion of tears, to relieve her. Her eyes were burning; and the

[047-075]noonday only brought into more dreary clearness the absence of interest

[047-076]from her life. All memories, all objects, the pieces of music

[047-077]displayed, the open piano—the very reflection of herself in the

[047-078]glass—seemed no better than the packed-up shows of a departing fair.

[047-079]For the first time since her consciousness began, she was having a

[047-080]vision of herself on the common level, and had lost the innate sense

[047-081]that there were reasons why she should not be slighted, elbowed,

[047-082]jostled—treated like a passenger with a third-class ticket, in spite

[047-083]of private objections on her own part. She did not move about; the

[047-084]prospects begotten by disappointment were too oppressively

[047-085]preoccupying; she threw herself into the shadiest corner of a settee,

[047-086]and pressed her fingers over her burning eyelids. Every word that

[047-087]Klesmer had said seemed to have been branded into her memory, as most

[047-088]words are which bring with them a new set of impressions and make an

[047-089]epoch for us. Only a few hours before, the dawning smile of

[047-090]self-contentment rested on her lips as she vaguely imagined a future

[047-091]suited to her wishes: it seemed but the affair of a year or so for her

[047-092]to become the most approved Juliet of the time: or, if Klesmer

[047-093]encouraged her idea of being a singer, to proceed by more gradual steps

[047-094]to her place in the [[opera-as-art|opera]], while she won money and applause by

[047-095]occasional performances. Why not? At home, at school, among

[047-096]acquaintances, she had been used to have her conscious superiority

[047-097]admitted; and she had moved in a society where everything, from low

[047-098]arithmetic to high art, is of the amateur kind, politely supposed to

[047-099]fall short of perfection only because gentlemen and ladies are not

[047-100]obliged to do more than they like—otherwise they would probably give

[047-101]forth abler writings, and show themselves more commanding artists than

[047-102]any the world is at present obliged to put up with. The self-confident

[047-103]visions that had beguiled her were not of a highly exceptional kind;

[047-104]and she had at least shown some rationality in consulting the person

[047-105]who knew the most and had flattered her the least. In asking Klesmer’s

[047-106]advice, however, she had rather been borne up by a belief in his latent

[047-107]admiration than bent on knowing anything more unfavorable that might

[047-108]have lain behind his slight objections to her [[music|singing]]; and the truth

[047-109]she had asked for, with an expectation that it would be agreeable, had

[047-110]come like a lacerating thong.

[047-111]“Too old—should have begun seven years ago—you will not, at best,

[047-112]achieve more than mediocrity—hard, incessant work, uncertain

[047-113]praise—bread coming slowly, scantily, perhaps not at

[047-114]all—mortifications, people no longer feigning not to see your

[047-115]blunders—glaring insignificance”—all these phrases rankled in her;

[047-116]and even more galling was the hint that she could only be accepted on

[047-117]the stage as a beauty who hoped to get a husband. The “indignities”

[047-118]that she might be visited with had no very definite form for her, but

[047-119]the mere association of anything called “indignity” with herself,

[047-120]roused a resentful alarm. And along with the vaguer images which were

[047-121]raised by those biting words, came the precise conception of

[047-122]disagreeables which her experience enabled her to imagine. How could

[047-123]she take her mamma and the four sisters to London, if it were not

[047-124]possible for her to earn money at once? And as for submitting to be a

[047-125]_protégée_, and asking her mamma to submit with her to the [[shame|humiliation]]

[047-126]of being supported by Miss Arrowpoint—that was as bad as being a

[047-127]governess; nay, worse; for suppose the end of all her study to be as

[047-128]worthless as Klesmer clearly expected it to be, the sense of favors

[047-129]received and never repaid, would embitter the miseries of

[047-130]disappointment. Klesmer doubtless had magnificent ideas about helping

[047-131]artists; but how could he know the feelings of ladies in such matters?

[047-132]It was all over: she had entertained a mistaken hope; and there was an

[047-133]end of it.

[047-134]“An end of it!” said Gwendolen, aloud, starting from her seat as she

[047-135]heard the steps and voices of her mamma and sisters coming in from

[047-136]church. She hurried to the piano and began gathering together her

[047-137]pieces of music with assumed diligence, while the expression on her

[047-138]pale face and in her burning eyes was what would have suited a woman

[047-139]enduring a wrong which she might not resent, but would probably revenge.

[047-140]“Well, my darling,” said gentle [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], entering, “I see by the

[047-141]wheel-marks that Klesmer has been here. Have you been satisfied with

[047-142]the interview?” She had some guesses as to its object, but felt timid

[047-143]about implying them.

[047-144]“Satisfied, mamma? oh, yes,” said Gwendolen, in a high, hard tone, for

[047-145]which she must be excused, because she dreaded a scene of emotion. If

[047-146]she did not set herself resolutely to feign proud indifference, she

[047-147]felt that she must fall into a passionate outburst of despair, which

[047-148]would cut her mamma more deeply than all the rest of their calamities.

[047-149]“Your uncle and aunt were disappointed at not seeing you,” said Mrs.

[047-150]Davilow, coming near the piano, and watching Gwendolen’s movements. “I

[047-151]only said that you wanted rest.”

[047-152]“Quite right, mamma,” said Gwendolen, in the same tone, turning to put

[047-153]away some music.

[047-154]“Am I not to know anything now, Gwendolen? Am I always to be in the

[047-155]dark?” said Mrs. Davilow, too keenly sensitive to her daughter’s manner

[047-156]and expression not to fear that something painful had occurred.

[047-157]“There is really nothing to tell now, mamma,” said Gwendolen, in a

[047-158]still higher voice. “I had a mistaken idea about something I could do.

[047-159]Herr Klesmer has undeceived me. That is all.”

[047-160]“Don’t look and speak in that way, my dear child: I cannot bear it,”

[047-161]said Mrs. Davilow, breaking down. She felt an undefinable terror.

[047-162]Gwendolen looked at her a moment in silence, biting her inner lip; then

[047-163]she went up to her, and putting her hands on her mamma’s shoulders,

[047-164]said, with a drop in her voice to the lowest undertone, “Mamma, don’t

[047-165]speak to me now. It is useless to cry and waste our strength over what

[047-166]can’t be altered. You will live at Sawyer’s Cottage, and I am going to

[047-167]the bishop’s daughters. There is no more to be said. Things cannot be

[047-168]altered, and who cares? It makes no difference to any one else what we

[047-169]do. We must try not to care ourselves. We must not give way. I dread

[047-170]giving way. Help me to be quiet.”

[047-171]Mrs. Davilow was like a frightened child under her daughter’s face and

[047-172]voice; her tears were arrested and she went away in silence.

[047-173]CHAPTER XXIV.

[047-174]“I question things but do not find

[047-175]One that will answer to my mind:

[047-176]And all the world appears unkind.”

[047-177]—WORDSWORTH.

[047-178]Gwendolen was glad that she had got through her interview with Klesmer

[047-179]before meeting her uncle and aunt. She had made up her mind now that

[047-180]there were only disagreeables before her, and she felt able to maintain

[047-181]a dogged calm in the face of any humiliation that might be proposed.
