---
id: ch043
label: "Section 43"
type: chapter
description: "Klesmer was as versatile and fascinating as a young Ulysses on a"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[043-001][[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] was as versatile and fascinating as a young Ulysses on a

[043-002]sufficient acquaintance—one whom nature seemed to have first made

[043-003]generously and then to have added [[art|music]] as a dominant power using all

[043-004]the abundant rest, and, as in Mendelssohn, finding expression for

[043-005]itself not only in the highest finish of execution, but in that fervor

[043-006]of creative work and theoretic belief which pierces the whole future of

[043-007]a life with the delight of congruous devoted purpose. His foibles of

[043-008]arrogance and [[pride|vanity]] did not exceed such as may be found in the best

[043-009]English families; and [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Catherine Arrowpoint]] had no corresponding

[043-010]restlessness to clash with his: notwithstanding her native kindliness

[043-011]she was perhaps too coolly firm and self-sustained. But she was one of

[043-012]those satisfactory creatures whose intercourse has the charm of

[043-013]discovery; whose integrity of faculty and expression begets a wish to

[043-014]know what they will say on all subjects or how they will perform

[043-015]whatever they undertake; so that they end by raising not only a

[043-016]continual expectation but a continual sense of fulfillment—the systole

[043-017]and diastole of blissful companionship. In such cases the outward

[043-018]presentment easily becomes what the image is to the worshipper. It was

[043-019]not long before the two became aware that each was interesting to the

[043-020]other; but the “how far” remained a matter of doubt. Klesmer did not

[043-021]conceive that Miss Arrowpoint was likely to think of him as a possible

[043-022]lover, and she was not accustomed to think of herself as likely to stir

[043-023]more than a friendly regard, or to fear the expression of more from any

[043-024]man who was not enamored of her fortune. Each was content to suffer some

[043-025]unshared sense of denial for the sake of loving the other’s society a

[043-026]little too well; and under these conditions no need had been felt to

[043-027]restrict Klesmer’s visits for the last year either in country or in

[043-028]town. He knew very well that if Miss Arrowpoint had been poor he would

[043-029]have made ardent love to her instead of sending a storm through the

[043-030]piano, or folding his arms and pouring out a hyperbolical tirade about

[043-031]something as impersonal as the north pole; and she was not less aware

[043-032]that if it had been possible for Klesmer to wish for her hand she would

[043-033]have found overmastering reasons for giving it to him. Here was the

[043-034]safety of full cups, which are as secure from overflow as the half-empty,

[043-035]always supposing no disturbance. Naturally, silent feeling had

[043-036]not remained at the same point any more than the stealthly dial-hand,

[043-037]and in the present visit to [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]], Klesmer had begun to think that he

[043-038]would not come again; while Catherine was more sensitive to his frequent

[043-039]_brusquerie_, which she rather resented as a needless effort to assert

[043-040]his footing of superior in every sense except the conventional.

[043-041]Meanwhile enters the expectant peer, Mr. Bult, an esteemed party man

[043-042]who, rather neutral in private life, had strong opinions concerning the

[043-043]districts of the Niger, was much at home also in Brazils, spoke with

[043-044]decision of affairs in the South Seas, was studious of his

[043-045]Parliamentary and itinerant speeches, and had the general solidity and

[043-046]suffusive pinkness of a healthy Briton on the central table-land of

[043-047]life. Catherine, aware of a tacit understanding that he was an

[043-048]undeniable husband for an heiress, had nothing to say against him but

[043-049]that he was thoroughly tiresome to her. Mr. Bult was amiably confident,

[043-050]and had no idea that his insensibility to counterpoint could ever be

[043-051]reckoned against him. Klesmer he hardly regarded in the light of a

[043-052]serious human being who ought to have a vote; and he did not mind Miss

[043-053]Arrowpoint’s addiction to music any more than her probable expenses in

[043-054]antique lace. He was consequently a little amazed at an after-dinner

[043-055]outburst of Klesmer’s on the lack of idealism in English politics,

[043-056]which left all mutuality between distant races to be determined simply

[043-057]by the need of a market; the crusades, to his mind, had at least this

[043-058]excuse, that they had a banner of sentiment round which generous

[043-059]feelings could rally: of course, the scoundrels rallied too, but what

[043-060]then? they rally in equal force round your advertisement van of “Buy

[043-061]cheap, sell dear.” On this theme Klesmer’s eloquence, gesticulatory and

[043-062]other, went on for a little while like stray fireworks accidentally

[043-063]ignited, and then sank into immovable silence. Mr. Bult was not

[043-064]surprised that Klesmer’s opinions should be flighty, but was astonished

[043-065]at his command of English idiom and his ability to put a point in a way

[043-066]that would have told at a constituents’ dinner—to be accounted for

[043-067]probably by his being a Pole, or a Czech, or something of that

[043-068]fermenting sort, in a state of political refugeeism which had obliged

[043-069]him to make a profession of his music; and that evening in the

[043-070]drawing-room he for the first time went up to Klesmer at the piano,

[043-071]Miss Arrowpoint being near, and said,

[043-072]“I had no idea before that you were a political man.”

[043-073]Klesmer’s only answer was to fold his arms, put out his nether lip, and

[043-074]stare at Mr. Bult.

[043-075]“You must have been used to public speaking. You speak uncommonly well,

[043-076]though I don’t agree with you. From what you said about sentiment, I

[043-077]fancy you are a Panslavist.”

[043-078]“No; my name is Elijah. I am the Wandering Jew,” said Klesmer, flashing

[043-079]a smile at Miss Arrowpoint, and suddenly making a mysterious, wind-like

[043-080]rush backward and forward on the piano. Mr. Bult felt this buffoonery

[043-081]rather offensive and Polish, but—Miss Arrowpoint being there—did not

[043-082]like to move away.

[043-083]“Herr Klesmer has cosmopolitan ideas,” said Miss Arrowpoint, trying to

[043-084]make the best of the situation. “He looks forward to a fusion of races.”

[043-085]“With all my heart,” said Mr. Bult, willing to be gracious. “I was sure

[043-086]he had too much talent to be a mere musician.”

[043-087]“Ah, sir, you are under some mistake there,” said Klesmer, firing up.

[043-088]“No man has too much talent to be a musician. Most men have too little.

[043-089]A creative artist is no more a mere musician than a great statesman is

[043-090]a mere politician. We are not ingenious puppets, sir, who live in a box

[043-091]and look out on the world only when it is gaping for amusement. We help

[043-092]to rule the nations and make the age as much as any other public men.

[043-093]We count ourselves on level benches with legislators. And a man who

[043-094]speaks effectively through music is compelled to something more

[043-095]difficult than parliamentary eloquence.”

[043-096]With the last word Klesmer wheeled from the piano and walked away.

[043-097]Miss Arrowpoint colored, and Mr. Bult observed, with his usual

[043-098]phlegmatic stolidity, “Your pianist does not think small beer of

[043-099]himself.”

[043-100]“Herr Klesmer is something more than a pianist,” said Miss Arrowpoint,

[043-101]apologetically. “He is a great musician in the fullest sense of the

[043-102]word. He will rank with [[schuberts-music|Schubert]] and Mendelssohn.”

[043-103]“Ah, you ladies understand these things,” said Mr. Bult, none the less

[043-104]convinced that these things were frivolous because Klesmer had shown

[043-105]himself a coxcomb.

[043-106]Catherine, always sorry when Klesmer gave himself airs, found an

[043-107]opportunity the next day in the music-room to say, “Why were you so

[043-108]heated last night with Mr. Bult? He meant no harm.”

[043-109]“You wish me to be complaisant to him?” said Klesmer, rather fiercely.

[043-110]“I think it is hardly worth your while to be other than civil.”

[043-111]“You find no difficulty in tolerating him, then?—you have a respect

[043-112]for a political platitudinarian as insensible as an ox to everything he

[043-113]can’t turn into political capital. You think his monumental obtuseness

[043-114]suited to the dignity of the English gentleman.”

[043-115]“I did not say that.”

[043-116]“You mean that I acted without dignity, and you are offended with me.”

[043-117]“Now you are slightly nearer the truth,” said Catherine, smiling.

[043-118]“Then I had better put my burial-clothes in my portmanteau and set off

[043-119]at once.”

[043-120]“I don’t see that. If I have to bear your criticism of my operetta, you

[043-121]should not mind my criticism of your impatience.”

[043-122]“But I do mind it. You would have wished me to take his ignorant

[043-123]impertinence about a ‘mere musician’ without letting him know his

[043-124]place. I am to hear my gods blasphemed as well as myself insulted. But

[043-125]I beg pardon. It is impossible you should see the matter as I do. Even

[043-126]you can’t understand the wrath of the artist: he is of another caste

[043-127]for you.”

[043-128]“That is true,” said Catherine, with some betrayal of feeling. “He is

[043-129]of a caste to which I look up—a caste above mine.”

[043-130]Klesmer, who had been seated at a table looking over scores, started up

[043-131]and walked to a little distance, from which he said,

[043-132]“That is finely felt—I am grateful. But I had better go, all the same.

[043-133]I have made up my mind to go, for good and all. You can get on

[043-134]exceedingly well without me: your operetta is on wheels—it will go of

[043-135]itself. And your Mr. Bull’s company fits me ‘wie die Faust ins Auge.’ I

[043-136]am neglecting my engagements. I must go off to St. Petersburg.”

[043-137]There was no answer.

[043-138]“You agree with me that I had better go?” said Klesmer, with some

[043-139]irritation.

[043-140]“Certainly; if that is what your business and feeling prompt. I have

[043-141]only to wonder that you have consented to give us so much of your time

[043-142]in the last year. There must be treble the interest to you anywhere

[043-143]else. I have never thought of you consenting to come here as anything

[043-144]else than a sacrifice.”

[043-145]“Why should I make the sacrifice?” said Klesmer, going to seat himself

[043-146]at the piano, and touching the keys so as to give with the delicacy of

[043-147]an echo in the far distance a melody which he had set to Heine’s “Ich

[043-148]hab’ dich geliebet und liebe dich noch.”

[043-149]“That is the mystery,” said Catherine, not wanting to affect anything,

[043-150]but from mere agitation. From the same cause she was tearing a piece of

[043-151]paper into minute morsels, as if at a task of utmost multiplication

[043-152]imposed by a cruel fairy.

[043-153]“You can conceive no motive?” said Klesmer, folding his arms.

[043-154]“None that seems in the least probable.”

[043-155]“Then I shall tell you. It is because you are to me the chief woman in

[043-156]the world—the throned lady whose colors I carry between my heart and

[043-157]my armor.”

[043-158]Catherine’s hands trembled so much that she could no longer tear the

[043-159]paper: still less could her lips utter a word. Klesmer went on,

[043-160]“This would be the last impertinence in me, if I meant to found

[043-161]anything upon it. That is out of the question. I meant no such thing.

[043-162]But you once said it was your doom to suspect every man who courted you

[043-163]of being an adventurer, and what made you angriest was men’s imputing

[043-164]to you the folly of believing that they courted you for your own sake.

[043-165]Did you not say so?”

[043-166]“Very likely,” was the answer, in a low murmur.

[043-167]“It was a bitter word. Well, at least one man who has seen women as

[043-168]plenty as flowers in May has lingered about you for your own sake. And

[043-169]since he is one whom you can never marry, you will believe him. There

[043-170]is an argument in favor of some other man. But don’t give yourself for

[043-171]a meal to a minotaur like Bult. I shall go now and pack. I shall make

[043-172]my excuses to Mrs. Arrowpoint.” Klesmer rose as he ended, and walked

[043-173]quickly toward the door.

[043-174]“You must take this heap of manuscript,” then said Catherine, suddenly

[043-175]making a desperate effort. She had risen to fetch the heap from another

[043-176]table. Klesmer came back, and they had the length of the folio sheets

[043-177]between them.

[043-178]“Why should I not marry the man who loves me, if I love him?” said

[043-179]Catherine. To her the effort was something like the leap of a woman

[043-180]from the deck into the lifeboat.
