---
id: ch057
label: "Section 57"
type: chapter
description: "“No. I am going myself.”"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[057-001]“No. I am going myself.”

[057-002]“[[About]] your being rather hard up. Have you thought of that plan—”

[057-003]“Just leave me alone, will you?” said [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]], in his lowest audible

[057-004]tone, tossing his cigar into the fire, and rising to walk away.

[057-005]He spent the evening in the solitude of the smaller drawing-room,

[057-006]where, with various new publications on the table of the kind a

[057-007]gentleman may like to have on hand without touching, he employed

[057-008]himself (as a philosopher might have done) in sitting meditatively on

[057-009]the sofa and abstaining from literature—political, comic, cynical, or

[057-010]romantic. In this way hours may pass surprisingly soon, without the

[057-011]arduous invisible chase of philosophy; not from love of thought, but

[057-012]from hatred of effort—from a state of the inward world, something like

[057-013]premature age, where the need for action lapses into a mere image of

[057-014]what has been, is, and may or might be; where impulse is born and dies

[057-015]in a phantasmal world, pausing in rejection of even a shadowy

[057-016]fulfillment. That is a condition which often comes with whitening hair;

[057-017]and sometimes, too, an intense obstinacy and tenacity of rule, like the

[057-018]main trunk of an exorbitant egoism, conspicuous in proportion as the

[057-019]varied susceptibilities of younger years are stripped away.

[057-020]But Grandcourt’s hair, though he had not much of it, was of a fine,

[057-021]sunny blonde, and his moods were not entirely to be explained as ebbing

[057-022]energy. We mortals have a strange spiritual chemistry going on within

[057-023]us, so that a lazy stagnation or even a cottony milkiness may be

[057-024]preparing one knows not what biting or explosive material. The navvy

[057-025]waking from sleep and without malice heaving a stone to crush the life

[057-026]out of his still sleeping comrade, is understood to lack the trained

[057-027]motive which makes a character fairly calculable in its actions; but by

[057-028]a roundabout course even a gentleman may make of himself a chancy

[057-029]personage, raising an uncertainty as to what he may do next, that sadly

[057-030]spoils companionship.

[057-031]Grandcourt’s thoughts this evening were like the circlets one sees in a

[057-032]dark pool, continually dying out and continually started again by some

[057-033]impulse from below the surface. The deeper central impulse came from

[057-034]the image of [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]; but the thoughts it stirred would be

[057-035]imperfectly illustrated by a reference to the amatory poets of all

[057-036]ages. It was characteristic that he got none of his satisfaction from

[057-037]the belief that Gwendolen was in love with him; and that love had

[057-038]overcome the jealous resentment which had made her run away from him.

[057-039]On the contrary, he believed that this girl was rather exceptional in

[057-040]the fact that, in spite of his assiduous attention to her, she was not

[057-041]in love with him; and it seemed to him very likely that if it had not

[057-042]been for the sudden poverty which had come over her family, she would

[057-043]not have accepted him. From the very first there had been an

[057-044]exasperating fascination in the tricksiness with which she had—not met

[057-045]his advances, but—wheeled away from them. She had been brought to

[057-046]accept him in spite of everything—brought to kneel down like a horse

[057-047]under training for the arena, though she might have an objection to it

[057-048]all the while. On the whole, Grandcourt got more pleasure out of this

[057-049]notion than he could have done out of winning a girl of whom he was

[057-050]sure that she had a strong inclination for him personally. And yet this

[057-051]pleasure in mastering reluctance flourished along with the habitual

[057-052]persuasion that no woman whom he favored could be quite indifferent to

[057-053]his personal influence; and it seemed to him not unlikely that

[057-054]by-and-by Gwendolen might be more enamored of him than he of her. In

[057-055]any case, she would have to submit; and he enjoyed thinking of her as

[057-056]his future wife, whose pride and spirit were suited to command every

[057-057]one but himself. He had no taste for a woman who was all tenderness to

[057-058]him, full of petitioning solicitude and willing obedience. He meant to

[057-059]be master of a woman who would have liked to master him, and who

[057-060]perhaps would have been capable of mastering another man.

[057-061][[Lush]], having failed in his attempted reminder to Grandcourt, thought it

[057-062]well to communicate with [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], in whom, as a man having perhaps

[057-063]interest enough to command the bestowal of some place where the work

[057-064]was light, gentlemanly, and not ill-paid, he was anxious to cultivate a

[057-065]sense of friendly [[duty|obligation]], not feeling at all secure against the

[057-066]future need of such a place. He wrote the following letter, and

[057-067]addressed it to Park Lane, whither he knew the family had returned from

[057-068][[Leubronn]]:

[057-069]MY DEAR SIR HUGO—Since we came home the marriage has been absolutely

[057-070]decided on, and is to take place in less than three weeks. It is so

[057-071]far the worse for him that her mother has lately lost all her fortune,

[057-072]and he will have to find supplies. Grandcourt, I know, is feeling the

[057-073]want of cash; and unless some other plan is resorted to, he will be

[057-074]raising money in a foolish way. I am going to leave [[diplow-hall|Diplow]]

[057-075]immediately, and I shall not be able to start the topic. What I should

[057-076]advise is, that [[Daniel-Deronda|Mr. Deronda]], who I know has your confidence, should

[057-077]propose to come and pay a short visit here, according to invitation

[057-078](there are going to be other people in the house), and that you should

[057-079]put him fully in possession of your wishes and the possible extent of

[057-080]your offer. Then, that he should introduce the subject to Grandcourt

[057-081]so as not to imply that you suspect any particular want of money on

[057-082]his part, but only that there is a strong wish on yours. What I have

[057-083]formerly said to him has been in the way of a conjecture that you

[057-084]might be willing to give a good sum for his chance of Diplow; but if

[057-085]Mr. Deronda came armed with a definite offer, that would take another

[057-086]sort of hold. Ten to one he will not close for some time to come; but

[057-087]the proposal will have got a stronger lodgment in his mind; and though

[057-088]at present he has a great notion of the hunting here, I see a

[057-089]likelihood, under the circumstances, that he will get a distaste for

[057-090]the neighborhood, and there will be the notion of the money sticking

[057-091]by him without being urged. I would bet on your ultimate success. As I

[057-092]am not to be exiled to Siberia, but am to be within call, it is

[057-093]possible that, by and by, I may be of more service to you. But at

[057-094]present I can think of no medium so good as Mr. Deronda. Nothing puts

[057-095]Grandcourt in worse humor than having the lawyers thrust their paper

[057-096]under his nose uninvited.

[057-097]Trusting that your visit to Leubronn has put you in excellent

[057-098]condition for the winter, I remain, my dear Sir Hugo, yours very

[057-099]faithfully,

[057-100]THOMAS CRANMER LUSH.

[057-101]Sir Hugo, having received this letter at breakfast, handed it to

[057-102]Deronda, who, though he had chambers in town, was somehow hardly ever

[057-103]in them, Sir Hugo not being contented without him. The chatty baronet

[057-104]would have liked a young companion even if there had been no peculiar

[057-105]reasons for attachment between them: one with a fine harmonious

[057-106]unspoiled face fitted to keep up a cheerful view of posterity and

[057-107]inheritance generally, notwithstanding particular disappointments; and

[057-108]his affection for Deronda was not diminished by the deep-lying though

[057-109]not obtrusive difference in their notions and tastes. Perhaps it was

[057-110]all the stronger; acting as the same sort of difference does between a

[057-111]man and a woman in giving a piquancy to the attachment which subsists

[057-112]in spite of it. Sir Hugo did not think unapprovingly of himself; but he

[057-113]looked at men and society from a liberal-menagerie point of view, and

[057-114]he had a certain pride in Deronda’s differing from him, which, if it

[057-115]had found voice, might have said—“You see this fine young fellow—not

[057-116]such as you see every day, is he?—he belongs to me in a sort of way. I

[057-117]brought him up from a child; but you would not ticket him off easily,

[057-118]he has notions of his own, and he’s as far as the poles asunder from

[057-119]what I was at his age.” This state of feeling was kept up by the mental

[057-120]balance in Deronda, who was moved by an affectionateness such as we are

[057-121]apt to call feminine, disposing him to yield in ordinary details, while

[057-122]he had a certain inflexibility of judgment, and [[freedom|independence]] of

[057-123]opinion, held to be rightfully masculine.

[057-124]When he had read the letter, he returned it without speaking, inwardly

[057-125]wincing under Lush’s mode of attributing a neutral usefulness to him in

[057-126]the family affairs.

[057-127]“What do you say, Dan? It would be pleasant enough for you. You have

[057-128]not seen the place for a good many years now, and you might have a

[057-129]famous run with the harriers if you went down next week,” said Sir Hugo.

[057-130]“I should not go on that account,” said Deronda, buttering his bread

[057-131]attentively. He had an objection to this transparent kind of

[057-132]persuasiveness, which all intelligent animals are seen to treat with

[057-133]indifference. If he went to Diplow he should be doing something

[057-134]disagreeable to oblige Sir Hugo.

[057-135]“I think Lush’s notion is a good one. And it would be a pity to lose

[057-136]the occasion.”

[057-137]“That is a different matter—if you think my going of importance to

[057-138]your object,” said Deronda, still with that aloofness of manner which

[057-139]implied some suppression. He knew that the baronet had set his heart on

[057-140]the affair.

[057-141]“Why, you will see the fair gambler, the Leubronn Diana, I shouldn’t

[057-142]wonder,” said Sir Hugo, gaily. “We shall have to invite her to the

[057-143]Abbey, when they are married,” he added, turning to Lady Mallinger, as

[057-144]if she too had read the letter.

[057-145]“I cannot conceive whom you mean,” said Lady Mallinger, who in fact had

[057-146]not been listening, her mind having been taken up with her first sips

[057-147]of coffee, the objectionable cuff of her sleeve, and the necessity of

[057-148]carrying Theresa to the dentist—innocent and partly laudable

[057-149]preoccupations, as the gentle lady’s usually were. Should her

[057-150]appearance be inquired after, let it be said that she had reddish

[057-151]blonde hair (the hair of the period), a small Roman nose, rather

[057-152]prominent blue eyes and delicate eyelids, with a figure which her

[057-153]thinner friends called fat, her hands showing curves and dimples like a

[057-154]magnified baby’s.

[057-155]“I mean that Grandcourt is going to marry the girl you saw at

[057-156]Leubronn—don’t you remember her—the Miss Harleth who used to play at

[057-157][[gambling|roulette]].”

[057-158]“Dear me! Is that a good match for him?”

[057-159]“That depends on the sort of goodness he wants,” said Sir Hugo,

[057-160]smiling. “However, she and her friends have nothing, and she will bring

[057-161]him expenses. It’s a good match for my purposes, because if I am

[057-162]willing to fork out a sum of money, he may be willing to give up his

[057-163]chance of Diplow, so that we shall have it out and out, and when I die

[057-164]you will have the consolation of going to the place you would like to

[057-165]go to—wherever I may go.”

[057-166]“I wish you would not talk of dying in that light way, dear.”

[057-167]“It’s rather a heavy way, Lou, for I shall have to pay a heavy

[057-168]sum—forty thousand, at least.”

[057-169]“But why are we to invite them to the Abbey?” said Lady Mallinger. “I

[057-170]do _not_ like women who gamble, like Lady Cragstone.”

[057-171]“Oh, you will not mind her for a week. Besides, she is not like Lady

[057-172]Cragstone because she gambled a little, any more than I am like a

[057-173]broker because I’m a Whig. I want to keep Grandcourt in good humor, and

[057-174]to let him see plenty of this place, that he may think the less of

[057-175]Diplow. I don’t know yet whether I shall get him to meet me in this

[057-176]matter. And if Dan were to go over on a visit there, he might hold out

[057-177]the bait to him. It would be doing me a great service.” This was meant

[057-178]for Deronda.
