---
id: ch058
label: "Section 58"
type: chapter
description: "“Daniel is not fond of Mr. Grandcourt, I think, is he?” said Lady"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[058-001]“Daniel is not fond of [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]], I think, is he?” said Lady

[058-002]Mallinger, looking at [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] inquiringly.

[058-003]“There is no avoiding everybody one doesn’t happen to be fond of,” said

[058-004]Deronda. “I will go to [[diplow-hall|Diplow]]—I don’t know that I have anything better

[058-005]to do—since [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] wishes it.”

[058-006]“That’s a trump!” said Sir Hugo, well pleased. “And if you don’t find

[058-007]it very pleasant, it’s so much experience. Nothing used to come amiss

[058-008]to me when I was young. You must see men and manners.”

[058-009]“Yes; but I have seen that man, and something of his manners too,” said

[058-010]Deronda.

[058-011]“Not nice manners, I think,” said Lady Mallinger.

[058-012]“Well, you see they succeed with your sex,” said Sir Hugo, provokingly.

[058-013]“And he was an uncommonly good-looking fellow when he was two or three

[058-014]and twenty—like his father. He doesn’t take after his father in

[058-015]marrying the heiress, though. If he had got [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Miss Arrowpoint]] and my land

[058-016]too, confound him, he would have had a fine principality.”

[058-017]Deronda, in anticipating the projected visit, felt less disinclination

[058-018]than when consenting to it. The story of that girl’s marriage did

[058-019]interest him: what he had heard through [[Lush]] of her having run away

[058-020]from the suit of the man she was now going to take as a husband, had

[058-021]thrown a new sort of light on her gambling; and it was probably the

[058-022]transition from that fevered worldliness into poverty which had urged

[058-023]her acceptance where she must in some way have felt repulsion. All this

[058-024]implied a nature liable to difficulty and struggle—elements of life

[058-025]which had a predominant attraction for his sympathy, due perhaps to his

[058-026]early pain in dwelling on the conjectured story of his own existence.

[058-027]Persons attracted him, as [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans Meyrick]] had done, in proportion to the

[058-028]possibility of his defending them, rescuing them, telling upon their

[058-029]lives with some sort of redeeming influence; and he had to resist an

[058-030]inclination, easily accounted for, to withdraw coldly from the

[058-031]fortunate. But in the movement which had led him to repurchase

[058-032][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s necklace for her, and which was at work in him still, there

[058-033]was something beyond his habitual compassionate fervor—something due

[058-034]to the fascination of her womanhood. He was very open to that sort of

[058-035]charm, and mingled it with the consciously Utopian pictures of his own

[058-036]future; yet any one able to trace the folds of his character might have

[058-037]conceived that he would be more likely than many less passionate men to

[058-038]love a woman without telling her of it. Sprinkle food before a

[058-039]delicate-eared bird: there is nothing he would more willingly take, yet

[058-040]he keeps aloof, because of his sensibility to checks which to you are

[058-041]imperceptible. And one man differs from another, as we all differ from

[058-042]the Bosjesman, in a sensibility to checks, that come from variety of

[058-043]needs, spiritual or other. It seemed to foreshadow that capability of

[058-044]reticence in Deronda that his imagination was much occupied with two

[058-045]women, to neither of whom would he have held it possible that he should

[058-046]ever make love. Hans Meyrick had laughed at him for having something of

[058-047]the knight-errant in his disposition; and he would have found his proof

[058-048]if he had known what was just now going on in Deronda’s mind about

[058-049][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] and Gwendolen.

[058-050]Deronda wrote without delay to announce his visit to Diplow, and

[058-051]received in reply a polite assurance that his coming would give great

[058-052]pleasure. That was not altogether untrue. Grandcourt thought it

[058-053]probable that the visit was prompted by Sir Hugo’s desire to court him

[058-054]for a purpose which he did not make up his mind to resist; and it was

[058-055]not a disagreeable idea to him that this fine fellow, whom he believed

[058-056]to be his cousin under the rose, would witness, perhaps with some

[058-057]jealousy, Henleigh Mallinger Grandcourt play the commanding part of

[058-058]betrothed lover to a splendid girl whom the cousin had already looked

[058-059]at with admiration.

[058-060]Grandcourt himself was not jealous of anything unless it threatened his

[058-061]mastery—which he did not think himself likely to lose.

[058-062]CHAPTER XXIX.

[058-063]“Surely whoever speaks to me in the right voice,

[058-064]him or her I shall follow.

[058-065]As the water follows the moon, silently,

[058-066]with fluid steps anywhere around the globe.”

[058-067]—WALT WHITMAN.

[058-068]“Now my cousins are at Diplow,” said Grandcourt, “will you go

[058-069]there?—to-morrow? The carriage shall come for [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]]. You can

[058-070]tell me what you would like done in the rooms. Things must be put in

[058-071]decent order while we are away at [[ryelands|Ryelands]]. And to-morrow is the only

[058-072]day.”

[058-073]He was sitting sideways on a sofa in the drawing-room at [[Offendene]], one

[058-074]hand and elbow resting on the back, and the other hand thrust between

[058-075]his crossed knees—in the attitude of a man who is much interested in

[058-076]watching the person next to him. Gwendolen, who had always disliked

[058-077]needlework, had taken to it with apparent zeal since her engagement,

[058-078]and now held a piece of white embroidery which, on examination, would

[058-079]have shown many false stitches. During the last eight or nine days

[058-080]their hours had been chiefly spent on horseback, but some margin had

[058-081]always been left for this more difficult sort of companionship, which,

[058-082]however, Gwendolen had not found disagreeable. She was very well

[058-083]satisfied with Grandcourt. His answers to her lively questions about

[058-084]what he had seen and done in his life, bore drawling very well. From

[058-085]the first she had noticed that he knew what to say; and she was

[058-086]constantly feeling not only that he had nothing of the fool in his

[058-087]composition, but that by some subtle means he communicated to her the

[058-088]impression that all the folly lay with other people, who did what he

[058-089]did not care to do. A man who seems to have been able to command the

[058-090]best, has a sovereign power of depreciation. Then Grandcourt’s behavior

[058-091]as a lover had hardly at all passed the limit of an amorous homage

[058-092]which was inobtrusive as a wafted odor of roses, and spent all its

[058-093]effects in a gratified [[pride|vanity]]. One day, indeed, he had kissed not her

[058-094]cheek but her neck a little below her ear; and Gwendolen, taken by

[058-095]surprise, had started up with a marked agitation which made him rise

[058-096]too and say, “I beg your pardon—did I annoy you?” “Oh, it was

[058-097]nothing,” said Gwendolen, rather afraid of herself, “only I cannot

[058-098]bear—to be kissed under my ear.” She sat down again with a little

[058-099]playful laugh, but all the while she felt her heart beating with a

[058-100]vague fear: she was no longer at [[freedom|liberty]] to flout him as she had

[058-101]flouted poor [[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]]. Her agitation seemed not uncomplimentary, and he had

[058-102]been contented not to transgress again.

[058-103]To-day a slight rain hindered riding; but to compensate, a package had

[058-104]come from [[london|London]], and Mrs. Davilow had just left the room after

[058-105]bringing in for admiration the beautiful things (of Grandcourt’s

[058-106]ordering) which lay scattered about on the tables. Gwendolen was just

[058-107]then enjoying the scenery of her life. She let her hands fall on her

[058-108]lap, and said with a pretty air of perversity,

[058-109]“Why is to-morrow the only day?”

[058-110]“Because the next day is the first with the hounds,” said Grandcourt.

[058-111]“And after that?”

[058-112]“After that I must go away for a couple of days—it’s a bore—but I

[058-113]shall go one day and come back the next.” Grandcourt noticed a change

[058-114]in her face, and releasing his hand from under his knees, he laid it on

[058-115]hers, and said, “You object to my going away?”

[058-116]“It’s no use objecting,” said Gwendolen, coldly. She was resisting to

[058-117]the utmost her temptation to tell him that she suspected to whom he was

[058-118]going—the temptation to make a clean breast, speaking without

[058-119]restraint.

[058-120]“Yes it is,” said Grandcourt, enfolding her hand. “I will put off

[058-121]going. And I will travel at night, so as only to be away one day.” He

[058-122]thought that he knew the reason of what he inwardly called this bit of

[058-123]temper, and she was particularly fascinating to him at this moment.

[058-124]“Then don’t put off going, but travel at night,” said Gwendolen,

[058-125]feeling that she could command him, and finding in this peremptoriness

[058-126]a small outlet for her irritation.

[058-127]“Then you will go to Diplow to-morrow?”

[058-128]“Oh, yes, if you wish it,” said Gwendolen, in a high tone of careless

[058-129]assent. Her concentration in other feelings had really hindered her

[058-130]from taking notice that her hand was being held.

[058-131]“How you treat us poor devils of men!” said Grandcourt, lowering his

[058-132]tone. “We are always getting the worst of it.”

[058-133]“_Are_ you?” said Gwendolen, in a tone of inquiry, looking at him more

[058-134]naively than usual. She longed to believe this commonplace _badinage_

[058-135]as the serious truth about her lover: in that case, she too was

[058-136]justified. If she knew everything, [[Lydia-Glasher|Mrs. Glasher]] would appear more

[058-137]blamable than Grandcourt. “_Are_ you always getting the worst?”

[058-138]“Yes. Are you as kind to me as I am to you?” said Grandcourt, looking

[058-139]into her eyes with his narrow gaze.

[058-140]Gwendolen felt herself stricken. She was conscious of having received

[058-141]so much, that her sense of command was checked, and sank away in the

[058-142]perception that, look around her as she might, she could not turn back:

[058-143]it was as if she had consented to mount a chariot where another held

[058-144]the reins; and it was not in her nature to leap out in the eyes of the

[058-145]world. She had not consented in ignorance, and all she could say now

[058-146]would be a confession that she had not been ignorant. Her right to

[058-147]explanation was gone. All she had to do now was to adjust herself, so

[058-148]that the spikes of that unwilling penance which conscience imposed

[058-149]should not gall her. With a sort of mental shiver, she resolutely

[058-150]changed her mental attitude. There had been a little pause, during

[058-151]which she had not turned away her eyes; and with a sudden break into a

[058-152]smile, she said,

[058-153]“If I were as kind to you as you are to me, that would spoil your

[058-154]generosity: it would no longer be as great as it could be—and it is

[058-155]that now.”

[058-156]“Then I am not to ask for one kiss,” said Grandcourt, contented to pay

[058-157]a large price for this new kind of love-making, which introduced

[058-158]marriage by the finest contrast.

[058-159]“Not one?” said Gwendolen, getting saucy, and nodding at him defiantly.

[058-160]He lifted her little left hand to his lips, and then released it

[058-161]respectfully. Clearly it was faint praise to say of him that he was not

[058-162]disgusting: he was almost charming; and she felt at this moment that it

[058-163]was not likely she could ever have loved another man better than this

[058-164]one. His reticence gave her some inexplicable, delightful consciousness.

[058-165]“Apropos,” she said, taking up her work again, “is there any one

[058-166]besides Captain and Mrs. Torrington at Diplow?—or do you leave them

[058-167]_tête-à-tête_? I suppose he converses in cigars, and she answers with

[058-168]her chignon.”

[058-169]“She has a sister with her,” said Grandcourt, with his shadow of a

[058-170]smile, “and there are two men besides—one of them you know, I believe.”

[058-171]“Ah, then, I have a poor opinion of him,” said Gwendolen, shaking her

[058-172]head.

[058-173]“You saw him at [[Leubronn]]—young Deronda—a young fellow with the

[058-174]Mallingers.”

[058-175]Gwendolen felt as if her heart were making a sudden gambol, and her

[058-176]fingers, which tried to keep a firm hold on her work, got cold.

[058-177]“I never spoke to him,” she said, dreading any discernible change in

[058-178]herself. “Is he not disagreeable?”

[058-179]“No, not particularly,” said Grandcourt, in his most languid way. “He

[058-180]thinks a little too much of himself. I thought he had been introduced

[058-181]to you.”

[058-182]“No. Some one told me his name the evening before I came away. That was

[058-183]all. What is he?”

[058-184]“A sort of ward of Sir Hugo Mallinger’s. Nothing of any consequence.”
