---
id: ch052
label: "Section 52"
type: chapter
description: "“You will find an interest in varied experience, my dear, and I have no"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[052-001]“You will find an interest in varied experience, my dear, and I have no

[052-002]doubt you will be a more valuable woman for having sustained such a

[052-003]part as you are called to.”

[052-004]“I cannot pretend to believe that I shall like it,” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], for

[052-005]the first time showing her uncle some petulance. “But I am quite aware

[052-006]that I am obliged to bear it.”

[052-007]She remembered having submitted to his admonition on a different

[052-008]occasion when she was expected to like a very different prospect.

[052-009]“And your good sense will teach you to behave suitably under it,” said

[052-010][[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]], with a shade more gravity. “I feel sure that Mrs.

[052-011]Mompert will be pleased with you. You will know how to conduct yourself

[052-012]to a woman who holds in all senses the relation of a superior to you.

[052-013]This trouble has come on you young, but that makes it in some respects

[052-014]easier, and there is a benefit in all chastisement if we adjust our

[052-015]minds to it.”

[052-016]This was precisely what Gwendolen was unable to do; and after her uncle

[052-017]was gone, the bitter tears, which had rarely come during the late

[052-018]trouble, rose and fell slowly as she sat alone. Her heart denied that

[052-019]the trouble was easier because she was young. When was she to have any

[052-020]happiness, if it did not come while she was young? Not that her visions

[052-021]of possible happiness for herself were as unmixed with necessary evil

[052-022]as they used to be—not that she could still imagine herself plucking

[052-023]the fruits of life without suspicion of their core. But this general

[052-024]disenchantment with the world—nay, with herself, since it appeared

[052-025]that she was not made for easy pre-eminence—only intensified her sense

[052-026]of forlornness; it was a visibly sterile distance enclosing the dreary

[052-027]path at her feet, in which she had no courage to tread. She was in that

[052-028]first crisis of passionate youthful rebellion against what is not fitly

[052-029]called pain, but rather the absence of joy—that first rage of

[052-030]disappointment in life’s morning, which we whom the years have subdued

[052-031]are apt to remember but dimly as part of our own experience, and so to

[052-032]be intolerant of its self-enclosed unreasonableness and impiety. What

[052-033]passion seems more absurd, when we have got outside it and looked at

[052-034]calamity as a collective risk, than this amazed anguish that I and not

[052-035]Thou, He or She, should be just the smitten one? Yet perhaps some who

[052-036]have afterward made themselves a willing fence before the breast of

[052-037]another, and have carried their own heart-wound in heroic silence—some

[052-038]who have made their deeds great, nevertheless began with this angry

[052-039]amazement at their own smart, and on the mere denial of their fantastic

[052-040]desires raged as if under the sting of wasps which reduced the universe

[052-041]for them to an unjust infliction of pain. This was nearly poor

[052-042]Gwendolen’s condition. What though such a reverse as hers had often

[052-043]happened to other girls? The one point she had been all her life

[052-044]learning to care for was that it had happened to _her_: it was what

[052-045]_she_ felt under [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]]’s demonstration that she was not remarkable

[052-046]enough to command fortune by force of will and merit; it was what _she_

[052-047]would feel under the rigors of Mrs. Mompert’s constant expectation,

[052-048]under the dull demand that she should be cheerful with three Miss

[052-049]Momperts, under the necessity of showing herself entirely submissive,

[052-050]and keeping her thoughts to herself. To be a queen disthroned is not so

[052-051]hard as some other down-stepping: imagine one who had been made to

[052-052]believe in his own divinity finding all homage withdrawn, and himself

[052-053]unable to perform a miracle that would recall the homage and restore

[052-054]his own confidence. Something akin to this illusion and this

[052-055]helplessness had befallen the poor spoiled child, with the lovely lips

[052-056]and eyes and the majestic figure—which seemed now to have no magic in

[052-057]them.

[052-058]She rose from the low ottoman where she had been sitting purposeless,

[052-059]and walked up and down the drawing-room, resting her elbow on one palm

[052-060]while she leaned down her cheek on the other, and a slow tear fell. She

[052-061]thought, “I have always, ever since I was little, felt that mamma was

[052-062]not a happy woman; and now I dare say I shall be more unhappy than she

[052-063]has been.”

[052-064]Her mind dwelt for a few moments on the picture of herself losing her

[052-065]youth and ceasing to enjoy—not minding whether she did this or that:

[052-066]but such picturing inevitably brought back the image of her mother.

[052-067]“Poor mamma! it will be still worse for her now. I can get a little

[052-068]money for her—that is all I shall care about now.” And then with an

[052-069]entirely new movement of her imagination, she saw her mother getting

[052-070]quite old and white, and herself no longer young but faded, and their

[052-071]two faces meeting still with memory and love, and she knowing what was

[052-072]in her mother’s mind—“Poor Gwen too is sad and faded now”—and then,

[052-073]for the first time, she sobbed, not in anger, but with a sort of tender

[052-074]misery.

[052-075]Her face was toward the door, and she saw her mother enter. She barely

[052-076]saw that; for her eyes were large with tears, and she pressed her

[052-077]handkerchief against them hurriedly. Before she took it away she felt

[052-078]her mother’s arms round her, and this sensation, which seemed a

[052-079]prolongation of her inward vision, overcame her will to be reticent;

[052-080]she sobbed anew in spite of herself, as they pressed their cheeks

[052-081]together.

[052-082][[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] had brought something in her hand which had already caused

[052-083]her an agitating anxiety, and she dared not speak until her darling had

[052-084]become calmer. But Gwendolen, with whom weeping had always been a

[052-085]painful manifestation to be resisted, if possible, again pressed her

[052-086]handkerchief against her eyes, and, with a deep breath, drew her head

[052-087]backward and looked at her mother, who was pale and tremulous.

[052-088]“It was nothing, mamma,” said Gwendolen, thinking that her mother had

[052-089]been moved in this way simply by finding her in distress. “It is all

[052-090]over now.”

[052-091]But Mrs. Davilow had withdrawn her arms, and Gwendolen perceived a

[052-092]letter in her hand.

[052-093]“What is that letter?—worse news still?” she asked, with a touch of

[052-094]bitterness.

[052-095]“I don’t know what you will think it, dear,” said Mrs. Davilow, keeping

[052-096]the letter in her hand. “You will hardly guess where it comes from.”

[052-097]“Don’t ask me to guess anything,” said Gwendolen, rather impatiently,

[052-098]as if a bruise were being pressed.

[052-099]“It is addressed to you, dear.”

[052-100]Gwendolen gave the slightest perceptible toss of the head.

[052-101]“It comes from [[diplow-hall|Diplow]],” said Mrs. Davilow, giving her the letter.

[052-102]She knew [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]’s indistinct handwriting, and her mother was not

[052-103]surprised to see her blush deeply; but watching her as she read, and

[052-104]wondering much what was the purport of the letter, she saw the color

[052-105]die out. Gwendolen’s lips even were pale as she turned the open note

[052-106]toward her mother. The words were few and formal:

[052-107]Mr. Grandcourt presents his compliments to Miss Harleth, and begs to

[052-108]know whether he may be permitted to call at [[Offendene]] to-morrow after

[052-109]two and to see her alone. Mr. Grandcourt has just returned from

[052-110][[Leubronn]], where he had hoped to find Miss Harleth.

[052-111]Mrs. Davilow read, and then looked at her daughter inquiringly, leaving

[052-112]the note in her hand. Gwendolen let it fall to the floor, and turned

[052-113]away.

[052-114]“It must be answered, darling,” said Mrs. Davilow, timidly. “The man

[052-115]waits.”

[052-116]Gwendolen sank on the settee, clasped her hands, and looked straight

[052-117]before her, not at her mother. She had the expression of one who had

[052-118]been startled by a sound and was listening to know what would come of

[052-119]it. The sudden change of the situation was bewildering. A few minutes

[052-120]before she was looking along an inescapable path of repulsive monotony,

[052-121]with hopeless inward rebellion against the imperious lot which left her

[052-122]no choice: and lo, now, a moment of choice was come. Yet—was it

[052-123]triumph she felt most or terror? Impossible for Gwendolen not to feel

[052-124]some triumph in a tribute to her power at a time when she was first

[052-125]tasting the bitterness of insignificance: again she seemed to be

[052-126]getting a sort of empire over her own life. But how to use it? Here

[052-127]came the terror. Quick, quick, like pictures in a book beaten open with

[052-128]a sense of hurry, came back vividly, yet in fragments, all that she had

[052-129]gone through in relation to Grandcourt—the allurements, the

[052-130]vacillations, the resolve to accede, the final repulsion; the incisive

[052-131]face of that dark-eyed lady with the lovely boy: her own pledge (was it

[052-132]a pledge not to marry him?)—the new disbelief in the worth of men and

[052-133]things for which that scene of disclosure had become a symbol. That

[052-134]unalterable experience made a vision at which in the first agitated

[052-135]moment, before tempering reflections could suggest themselves, her

[052-136]native terror shrank.

[052-137]Where was the good of choice coming again? What did she wish? Anything

[052-138]different? No! And yet in the dark seed-growths of consciousness a new

[052-139]wish was forming itself—“I wish I had never known it!” Something,

[052-140]anything she wished for that would have saved her from the dread to let

[052-141]Grandcourt come.

[052-142]It was no long while—yet it seemed long to Mrs. Davilow, before she

[052-143]thought it well to say, gently,

[052-144]“It will be necessary for you to write, dear. Or shall I write an

[052-145]answer for you—which you will dictate?”

[052-146]“No, mamma,” said Gwendolen, drawing a deep breath. “But please lay me

[052-147]out the pen and paper.”

[052-148]That was gaining time. Was she to decline Grandcourt’s visit—close the

[052-149]shutters—not even look out on what would happen?—though with the

[052-150]assurance that she should remain just where she was? The young activity

[052-151]within her made a warm current through her terror and stirred toward

[052-152]something that would be an event—toward an opportunity in which she

[052-153]could look and speak with the former effectiveness. The interest of the

[052-154]morrow was no longer at a deadlock.

[052-155]“There is really no reason on earth why you should be so alarmed at the

[052-156]man’s waiting a few minutes, mamma,” said Gwendolen, remonstrantly, as

[052-157]Mrs. Davilow, having prepared the writing materials, looked toward her

[052-158]expectantly. “Servants expect nothing else than to wait. It is not to

[052-159]be supposed that I must write on the instant.”

[052-160]“No, dear,” said Mrs. Davilow, in the tone of one corrected, turning to

[052-161]sit down and take up a bit of work that lay at hand; “he can wait

[052-162]another quarter of an hour, if you like.”

[052-163]It was very simple speech and action on her part, but it was what might

[052-164]have been subtly calculated. Gwendolen felt a contradictory desire to

[052-165]be hastened: hurry would save her from deliberate choice.

[052-166]“I did not mean him to wait long enough for that needlework to be

[052-167]finished,” she said, lifting her hands to stroke the backward curves of

[052-168]her hair, while she rose from her seat and stood still.

[052-169]“But if you don’t feel able to decide?” said Mrs. Davilow,

[052-170]sympathizingly.

[052-171]“I _must_ decide,” said Gwendolen, walking to the writing-table and

[052-172]seating herself. All the while there was a busy under-current in her,

[052-173]like the thought of a man who keeps up a dialogue while he is

[052-174]considering how he can slip away. Why should she not let him come? It

[052-175]bound her to nothing. He had been to Leubronn after her: of course he

[052-176]meant a direct unmistakable renewal of the suit which before had been

[052-177]only implied. What then? She could reject him. Why was she to deny

[052-178]herself the freedom of doing this—which she would like to do?

[052-179]“If Mr. Grandcourt has only just returned from Leubronn,” said Mrs.

[052-180]Davilow, observing that Gwendolen leaned back in her chair after taking

[052-181]the pen in her hand—“I wonder whether he has heard of our misfortunes?”
