---
id: ch065
label: "Section 65"
type: chapter
description: "“And what did you think of the future bride on a nearer survey?” said"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[065-001]“And what did you think of the future bride on a nearer survey?” said

[065-002][[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]].

[065-003]“I thought better of her than I did in [[Leubronn]]. Roulette was not a

[065-004]good setting for her; it brought out something of the demon. At [[diplow-hall|Diplow]]

[065-005]she seemed much more womanly and attractive—less hard and

[065-006]self-possessed. I thought her mouth and eyes had quite a different

[065-007]expression.”

[065-008]“Don’t flirt with her too much, Dan,” said Sir Hugo, meaning to be

[065-009]agreeably playful. “If you make [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] savage when they come to the

[065-010]Abbey at Christmas, it will interfere with my affairs.”

[065-011]“I can stay in town, sir.”

[065-012]“No, no. Lady Mallinger and the children can’t do without you at

[065-013]Christmas. Only don’t make mischief—unless you can get up a duel, and

[065-014]manage to shoot Grandcourt, which might be worth a little

[065-015]inconvenience.”

[065-016]“I don’t think you ever saw me flirt,” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], not amused.

[065-017]“Oh, haven’t I, though?” said Sir Hugo, provokingly. “You are always

[065-018]looking tenderly at the women, and talking to them in a Jesuitical way.

[065-019]You are a dangerous young fellow—a kind of Lovelace who will make the

[065-020]Clarissas run after you instead of you running after them.”

[065-021]What was the use of being exasperated at a tasteless joke?—only the

[065-022]exasperation comes before the reflection on utility. Few friendly

[065-023]remarks are more annoying than the information that we are always

[065-024]seeming to do what we never mean to do. Sir Hugo’s notion of flirting,

[065-025]it was to be hoped, was rather peculiar; for his own part, Deronda was

[065-026]sure that he had never flirted. But he was glad that the baronet had no

[065-027]knowledge about the repurchase of [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s necklace to feed his

[065-028]taste for this kind of rallying.

[065-029]He would be on his guard in future; for example, in his behavior at

[065-030]Mrs. Meyrick’s, where he was about to pay his first visit since his

[065-031]arrival from Leubronn. For [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] was certainly a creature in whom it

[065-032]was difficult not to show a tender kind of interest both by looks and

[065-033]speech.

[065-034]Mrs. Meyrick had not failed to send Deronda a report of Mirah’s

[065-035]well-being in her family. “We are getting fonder of her every day,” she

[065-036]had written. “At breakfast-time we all look toward the door with

[065-037]expectation to see her come in; and we watch her and listen to her as

[065-038]if she were a native from a new country. I have not heard a word from

[065-039]her lips that gives me a doubt about her. She is quite contented and

[065-040]full of gratitude. My daughters are learning from her, and they hope to

[065-041]get her other pupils; for she is anxious not to eat the bread of

[065-042]idleness, but to work, like my girls. Mab says our life has become like

[065-043]a fairy tale, and all she is afraid of is that Mirah will turn into a

[065-044]nightingale again and fly away from us. Her voice is just perfect: not

[065-045]loud and strong, but searching and melting, like the thoughts of what

[065-046]has been. That is the way old people like me feel a beautiful voice.”

[065-047]But Mrs. Meyrick did not enter into particulars which would have

[065-048]required her to say that Amy and Mab, who had accompanied Mirah to the

[065-049][[the-synagogue|synagogue]], found the Jewish [[religion|faith]] less reconcilable with their wishes

[065-050]in her case than in that of Scott’s Rebecca. They kept silence out of

[065-051]delicacy to Mirah, with whom her religion was too tender a subject to

[065-052]be touched lightly; but after a while Amy, who was much of a practical

[065-053]reformer, could not restrain a question.

[065-054]“Excuse me, Mirah, but _does_ it seem quite right to you that the women

[065-055]should sit behind rails in a gallery apart?”

[065-056]“Yes, I never thought of anything else,” said Mirah, with mild surprise.

[065-057]“And you like better to see the men with their hats on?” said Mab,

[065-058]cautiously proposing the smallest item of difference.

[065-059]“Oh, yes. I like what I have always seen there, because it brings back

[065-060]to me the same feelings—the feelings I would not part with for

[065-061]anything else in the world.”

[065-062]After this, any criticism, whether of doctrine or practice, would have

[065-063]seemed to these generous little people an inhospitable cruelty. Mirah’s

[065-064]religion was of one fibre with her affections, and had never presented

[065-065]itself to her as a set of propositions.

[065-066]“She says herself she is a very bad Jewess, and does not half know her

[065-067]people’s religion,” said Amy, when Mirah was gone to bed. “Perhaps it

[065-068]would gradually melt away from her, and she would pass into

[065-069]Christianity like the rest of the world, if she got to love us very

[065-070]much, and never found her mother. It is so strange to be of the Jews’

[065-071]religion now.”

[065-072]“Oh, oh, oh!” cried Mab. “I wish I were not such a hideous Christian.

[065-073]How can an ugly Christian, who is always dropping her work, convert a

[065-074]beautiful Jewess, who has not a fault?”

[065-075]“It may be wicked of me,” said shrewd Kate, “but I cannot help wishing

[065-076]that her mother may not be found. There might be something unpleasant.”

[065-077]“I don’t think it, my dear,” said Mrs. Meyrick. “I believe Mirah is cut

[065-078]out after the pattern of her mother. And what a joy it would be to her

[065-079]to have such a daughter brought back again! But a mother’s feelings are

[065-080]not worth reckoning, I suppose” (she shot a mischievous glance at her

[065-081]own daughters), “and a dead mother is worth more than a living one?”

[065-082]“Well, and so she may be, little mother,” said Kate; “but we would

[065-083]rather hold you cheaper, and have you alive.”

[065-084]Not only the Meyricks, whose various knowledge had been acquired by the

[065-085]irregular foraging to which clever girls have usually been reduced, but

[065-086]Deronda himself, with all his masculine instruction, had been roused by

[065-087]this apparition of Mirah to the consciousness of knowing hardly

[065-088]anything about modern Judaism or the inner Jewish history. The Chosen

[065-089]People have been commonly treated as a people chosen for the sake of

[065-090]somebody else; and their thinking as something (no matter exactly what)

[065-091]that ought to have been entirely otherwise; and Deronda, like his

[065-092]neighbors, had regarded Judaism as a sort of eccentric fossilized form

[065-093]which an accomplished man might dispense with studying, and leave to

[065-094]specialists. But Mirah, with her terrified flight from one parent, and

[065-095]her yearning after the other, had flashed on him the hitherto neglected

[065-096]reality that Judaism was something still throbbing in human lives,

[065-097]still making for them the only conceivable vesture of the world; and in

[065-098]the idling excursion on which he immediately afterward set out with Sir

[065-099]Hugo he began to look for the outsides of synagogues, and the title of

[065-100]books about the Jews. This awakening of a new interest—this passing

[065-101]from the supposition that we hold the right opinions on a subject we

[065-102]are careless about, to a sudden care for it, and a sense that our

[065-103]opinions were ignorance—is an effectual remedy for _ennui_, which,

[065-104]unhappily, cannot be secured on a physician’s prescription; but Deronda

[065-105]had carried it with him, and endured his weeks of lounging all the

[065-106]better. It was on this journey that he first entered a Jewish

[065-107]synagogue—at Frankfort—where his party rested on a Friday. In

[065-108]exploring the Juden-gasse, which he had seen long before, he remembered

[065-109]well enough its picturesque old houses; what his eyes chiefly dwelt on

[065-110]now were the human types there; and his thought, busily connecting them

[065-111]with the past phases of their race, stirred that fibre of historic

[065-112]sympathy which had helped to determine in him certain traits worth

[065-113]mentioning for those who are interested in his future. True, when a

[065-114]young man has a fine person, no eccentricity of manners, the education

[065-115]of a gentleman, and a present income, it is not customary to feel a

[065-116]prying curiosity about his way of thinking, or his peculiar tastes. He

[065-117]may very well be settled in life as an agreeable clever young fellow

[065-118]without passing a special examination on those heads. Later, when he is

[065-119]getting rather slovenly and portly, his peculiarities are more

[065-120]distinctly discerned, and it is taken as a mercy if they are not highly

[065-121]objectionable. But any one wishing to understand the effect of

[065-122]after-events on Deronda should know a little more of what he was at

[065-123]five-and-twenty than was evident in ordinary intercourse.

[065-124]It happened that the very vividness of his impressions had often made

[065-125]him the more enigmatic to his friends, and had contributed to an

[065-126]apparent indefiniteness in his sentiments. His early-wakened

[065-127]sensibility and reflectiveness had developed into a many-sided

[065-128]sympathy, which threatened to hinder any persistent course of action:

[065-129]as soon as he took up any antagonism, though only in thought, he seemed

[065-130]to himself like the Sabine warriors in the memorable story—with

[065-131]nothing to meet his spear but flesh of his flesh, and objects that he

[065-132]loved. His imagination had so wrought itself to the habit of seeing

[065-133]things as they probably appeared to others, that a strong partisanship,

[065-134]unless it were against an immediate oppression, had become an

[065-135]insincerity for him. His plenteous, flexible sympathy had ended by

[065-136]falling into one current with that reflective analysis which tends to

[065-137]neutralize sympathy. Few men were able to keep themselves clearer of

[065-138]vices than he; yet he hated vices mildly, being used to think of them

[065-139]less in the abstract than as a part of mixed human natures having an

[065-140]individual history, which it was the bent of his mind to trace with

[065-141]understanding and pity. With the same innate balance he was fervidly

[065-142]democratic in his feeling for the multitude, and yet, through his

[065-143]affections and imagination, intensely conservative; voracious of

[065-144]speculations on government and religion, yet loth to part with

[065-145]long-sanctioned forms which, for him, were quick with memories and

[065-146]sentiments that no argument could lay dead. We fall on the leaning

[065-147]side; and Deronda suspected himself of loving too well the losing

[065-148]causes of the world. Martyrdom changes sides, and he was in danger of

[065-149]changing with it, having a strong repugnance to taking up that clue of

[065-150]success which the order of the world often forces upon us and makes it

[065-151]treason against the common weal to reject. And yet his fear of falling

[065-152]into an unreasoning narrow hatred made a check for him: he apologized

[065-153]for the heirs of privilege; he shrank with dislike from the loser’s

[065-154]bitterness and the denunciatory tone of the unaccepted innovator. A too

[065-155]reflective and diffusive sympathy was in danger of paralyzing in him

[065-156]that indignation against wrong and that selectness of fellowship which

[065-157]are the conditions of moral force; and in the last few years of

[065-158]confirmed manhood he had become so keenly aware of this that what he

[065-159]most longed for was either some external event, or some inward light,

[065-160]that would urge him into a definite line of action, and compress his

[065-161]wandering energy. He was ceasing to care for knowledge—he had no

[065-162]ambition for practice—unless they could both be gathered up into one

[065-163]current with his emotions; and he dreaded, as if it were a

[065-164]dwelling-place of lost souls, that dead anatomy of culture which turns

[065-165]the universe into a mere ceaseless answer to queries, and knows, not

[065-166]everything, but everything else about everything—as if one should be

[065-167]ignorant of nothing concerning the scent of violets except the scent

[065-168]itself for which one had no nostril. But how and whence was the needed

[065-169]event to come?—the influence that would justify partiality, and make

[065-170]him what he longed to be, yet was unable to make himself—an organic

[065-171]part of social life, instead of roaming in it like a yearning

[065-172]disembodied spirit, stirred with a vague social passion, but without

[065-173]fixed local habitation to render fellowship real? To make a little

[065-174]difference for the better was what he was not contented to live

[065-175]without; but how to make it? It is one thing to see your road, another

[065-176]to cut it. He found some of the fault in his birth and the way he had

[065-177]been brought up, which had laid no special demands on him and had given

[065-178]him no fixed relationship except one of a doubtful kind; but he did not

[065-179]attempt to hide from himself that he had fallen into a meditative

[065-180]numbness, and was gliding farther and farther from that life of

[065-181]practically energetic sentiment which he would have proclaimed (if he

[065-182]had been inclined to proclaim anything) to be the best of all life, and

[065-183]for himself the only way worth living. He wanted some way of keeping

[065-184]emotion and its progeny of sentiments—which make the savors of

[065-185]life—substantial and strong in the face of a reflectiveness that

[065-186]threatened to nullify all differences. To pound the objects of

[065-187]sentiment into small dust, yet keep sentiment alive and active, was

[065-188]something like the famous recipe for making cannon—to first take a

[065-189]round hole and then enclose it with iron; whatever you do keeping fast

[065-190]hold of your round hole. Yet how distinguish what our will may wisely

[065-191]save in its completeness, from the heaping of cat-mummies and the

[065-192]expensive cult of enshrined putrefactions?
