---
id: ch064
label: "Section 64"
type: chapter
description: "“Why, you might have said that, if I had been going to Mrs. Mompert’s,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[064-001]“Why, you might have said that, if I had been going to Mrs. Mompert’s,

[064-002]you dear, sad, incorrigible mamma!” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] just putting her

[064-003]hands to her mother’s cheeks with laughing tenderness—then retreating

[064-004]a little and spreading out her arms as if to exhibit herself: “Here am

[064-005]I—Mrs. [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]! what else would you have me, but what I am sure to

[064-006]be? You know you were ready to die with vexation when you thought that

[064-007]I would not be Mrs. Grandcourt.”

[064-008]“Hush, hush, my child, for heaven’s sake!” said [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], almost in

[064-009]a whisper. “How can I help feeling it when I am parting from you. But I

[064-010]can bear anything gladly if you are happy.”

[064-011]“Not gladly, mamma, no!” said Gwendolen, shaking her head, with a

[064-012]bright smile. “Willingly you would bear it, but always sorrowfully.

[064-013]Sorrowing is your sauce; you can take nothing without it.” Then,

[064-014]clasping her mother’s shoulders and raining kisses first on one cheek

[064-015]and then on the other between her words, she said, gaily, “And you

[064-016]shall sorrow over my having everything at my beck—and enjoying

[064-017]everything glorious—splendid houses—and horses—and diamonds, I shall

[064-018]have diamonds—and going to court—and being Lady Certainly—and Lady

[064-019]Perhaps—and grand here—and tantivy there—and always loving you

[064-020]better than anybody else in the world.”

[064-021]“My sweet child!—But I shall not be jealous if you love your husband

[064-022]better; and he will expect to be first.”

[064-023]Gwendolen thrust out her lips and chin with a pretty grimace, saying,

[064-024]“Rather a ridiculous expectation. However, I don’t mean to treat him

[064-025]ill, unless he deserves it.”

[064-026]Then the two fell into a clinging embrace, and Gwendolen could not

[064-027]hinder a rising sob when she said, “I wish you were going with me,

[064-028]mamma.”

[064-029]But the slight dew on her long eyelashes only made her the more

[064-030]charming when she gave her hand to Grandcourt to be led to the carriage.

[064-031]The rector looked in on her to give a final “Good-bye; God bless you;

[064-032]we shall see you again before long,” and then returned to Mrs. Davilow,

[064-033]saying half cheerfully, half solemnly,

[064-034]“Let us be thankful, Fanny. She is in a position well suited to her,

[064-035]and beyond what I should have dared to hope for. And few women can have

[064-036]been chosen more entirely for their own sake. You should feel yourself

[064-037]a happy mother.”

[064-038]* * * * *

[064-039]There was a railway journey of some fifty miles before the new husband

[064-040]and wife reached the station near [[ryelands|Ryelands]]. The sky had veiled itself

[064-041]since the morning, and it was hardly more than twilight when they

[064-042]entered the park-gates, but still Gwendolen, looking out of the

[064-043]carriage-window as they drove rapidly along, could see the grand

[064-044]outlines and the nearer beauties of the scene—the long winding [[ambition|drive]]

[064-045]bordered with evergreens backed by huge gray stems: then the opening of

[064-046]wide grassy spaces and undulations studded with dark clumps; till at

[064-047]last came a wide level where the white house could be seen, with a

[064-048]hanging wood for a background, and the rising and sinking balustrade

[064-049]of a terrace in front.

[064-050]Gwendolen had been at her liveliest during the journey, chatting

[064-051]incessantly, ignoring any change in their mutual position since

[064-052]yesterday; and Grandcourt had been rather ecstatically quiescent, while

[064-053]she turned his gentle seizure of her hand into a grasp of his hand by

[064-054]both hers, with an increased vivacity as of a kitten that will not sit

[064-055]quiet to be petted. She was really getting somewhat febrile in her

[064-056]excitement; and now in this drive through the park her usual

[064-057]susceptibility to changes of light and scenery helped to make her heart

[064-058]palpitate newly. Was it at the novelty simply, or the almost incredible

[064-059]fulfilment about to be given to her girlish dreams of being

[064-060]“somebody”—walking through her own furlong of corridor and under her

[064-061]own ceilings of an out-of-sight loftiness, where her own painted Spring

[064-062]was shedding painted flowers, and her own fore-shortened Zephyrs were

[064-063]blowing their trumpets over her; while her own servants, lackeys in

[064-064]clothing but men in bulk and shape, were as nought in her presence, and

[064-065]revered the propriety of her insolence to them:—being in short the

[064-066]heroine of an admired play without the pains of art? Was it alone the

[064-067]closeness of this fulfilment which made her heart flutter? or was it

[064-068]some dim forecast, the insistent penetration of suppressed experience,

[064-069]mixing the expectation of a triumph with the dread of a crisis? Hers

[064-070]was one of the natures in which exultation inevitably carries an

[064-071]infusion of dread ready to curdle and declare itself.

[064-072]She fell silent in spite of herself as they approached the gates, and

[064-073]when her husband said, “Here we are at home!” and for the first time

[064-074]kissed her on the lips, she hardly knew of it: it was no more than the

[064-075]passive acceptance of a greeting in the midst of an absorbing show. Was

[064-076]not all her hurrying life of the last three months a show, in which her

[064-077]consciousness was a wondering spectator? After the half-willful

[064-078]excitement of the day, a numbness had come over her personality.

[064-079]But there was a brilliant light in the hall—warmth, matting, carpets,

[064-080]full-length portraits, Olympian statues, assiduous servants. Not many

[064-081]servants, however: only a few from [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] in addition to those

[064-082]constantly in charge of the house; and Gwendolen’s new maid, who had

[064-083]come with her, was taken under guidance by the housekeeper. Gwendolen

[064-084]felt herself being led by Grandcourt along a subtly-scented corridor,

[064-085]into an ante-room where she saw an open doorway sending out a rich glow

[064-086]of light and color.

[064-087]“These are our dens,” said Grandcourt. “You will like to be quiet here

[064-088]till dinner. We shall dine early.”

[064-089]He pressed her hand to his lips and moved away, more in love than he

[064-090]had ever expected to be.

[064-091]Gwendolen, yielded up her hat and mantle, threw herself into a chair by

[064-092]the glowing hearth, and saw herself repeated in glass panels with all

[064-093]her faint-green satin surroundings. The housekeeper had passed into

[064-094]this boudoir from the adjoining dressing-room and seemed disposed to

[064-095]linger, Gwendolen thought, in order to look at the new mistress of

[064-096]Ryelands, who, however, being impatient for solitude said to her, “Will

[064-097]you tell Hudson when she has put out my dress to leave everything? I

[064-098]shall not want her again, unless I ring.”

[064-099]The housekeeper, coming forward, said, “Here is a packet, madam, which

[064-100]I was ordered to give into nobody’s hands but yours, when you were

[064-101]alone. The person who brought it said it was a present particularly

[064-102]ordered by Mr. Grandcourt; but he was not to know of its arrival till

[064-103]he saw you wear it. Excuse me, madam; I felt it right to obey orders.”

[064-104]Gwendolen took the packet and let it lie on her lap till she heard the

[064-105]doors close. It came into her mind that the packet might contain the

[064-106]diamonds which Grandcourt had spoken of as being deposited somewhere

[064-107]and to be given to her on her marriage. In this moment of confused

[064-108]feeling and creeping luxurious languor she was glad of this

[064-109]diversion—glad of such an event as having her own diamonds to try on.

[064-110]Within all the sealed paper coverings was a box, but within the box

[064-111]there _was_ a jewel-case; and now she felt no doubt that she had the

[064-112]diamonds. But on opening the case, in the same instant that she saw

[064-113]them gleam she saw a letter lying above them. She knew the handwriting

[064-114]of the address. It was as if an adder had lain on them. Her heart gave

[064-115]a leap which seemed to have spent all her strength; and as she opened

[064-116]the bit of thin paper, it shook with the trembling of her hands. But it

[064-117]was legible as print, and thrust its words upon her.

[064-118]These diamonds, which were once given with ardent love to Lydia

[064-119]Glasher, she passes on to you. You have broken your word to her, that

[064-120]you might possess what was hers. Perhaps you think of being happy, as

[064-121]she once was, and of having beautiful children such as hers, who will

[064-122]thrust hers aside. God is too just for that. The man you have married

[064-123]has a withered heart. His best young love was mine: you could not take

[064-124]that from me when you took the rest. It is dead: but I am the grave

[064-125]in which your chance of happiness is buried as well as mine. You had

[064-126]your warning. You have chosen to injure me and my children. He had

[064-127]meant to marry me. He would have married me at last, if you had not

[064-128]broken your word. You will have your punishment. I desire it with all

[064-129]my soul.

[064-130]Will you give him this letter to set him against me and ruin us

[064-131]more—me and my children? Shall you like to stand before your husband

[064-132]with these diamonds on you, and these words of mine in his thoughts and

[064-133]yours? Will he think you have any right to complain when he has made

[064-134]you miserable? You took him with your eyes open. The willing wrong you

[064-135]have done me will be your curse.

[064-136]It seemed at first as if Gwendolen’s eyes were spell-bound in reading

[064-137]the horrible words of the letter over and over again as a doom of

[064-138]penance; but suddenly a new spasm of terror made her lean forward and

[064-139]stretch out the paper toward the fire, lest accusation and proof at

[064-140]once should meet all eyes. It flew like a feather from her trembling

[064-141]fingers and was caught up in a great draught of flame. In her movement

[064-142]the casket fell on the floor and the diamonds rolled out. She took no

[064-143]notice, but fell back in her chair again helpless. She could not see

[064-144]the reflections of herself then; they were like so many women petrified

[064-145]white; but coming near herself you might have seen the tremor in her

[064-146]lips and hands. She sat so for a long while, knowing little more than

[064-147]that she was feeling ill, and that those written words kept repeating

[064-148]themselves to her.

[064-149]Truly here were poisoned gems, and the poison had entered into this

[064-150]poor young creature.

[064-151]After that long while, there was a tap at the door and Grandcourt

[064-152]entered, dressed for dinner. The sight of him brought a new nervous

[064-153]shock, and Gwendolen screamed again and again with hysterical violence.

[064-154]He had expected to see her dressed and smiling, ready to be led down.

[064-155]He saw her pallid, shrieking as it seemed with terror, the jewels

[064-156]scattered around her on the floor. Was it a fit of madness?

[064-157]In some form or other the furies had crossed his threshold.

[064-158]CHAPTER XXXII.

[064-159]In all ages it hath been a favorite text that a potent love hath the

[064-160]nature of an isolated fatality, whereto the mind’s opinions and wonted

[064-161]resolves are altogether alien; as, for example, Daphnis his frenzy,

[064-162]wherein it had little availed him to have been convinced of Heraclitus

[064-163]his doctrine; or the philtre-bred passion of Tristan, who, though he

[064-164]had been as deep as Duns Scotus, would have had his reasoning marred

[064-165]by that cup too much; or Romeo in his sudden taking for Juliet,

[064-166]wherein any objections he might have held against Ptolemy had made

[064-167]little difference to his discourse under the balcony. Yet all love is

[064-168]not such, even though potent; nay, this passion hath as large scope as

[064-169]any for allying itself with every operation of the soul: so that it

[064-170]shall acknowledge an effect from the imagined light of unproven

[064-171]firmaments, and have its scale set to the grander orbits of what hath

[064-172]been and shall be.

[064-173][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], on his return to town, could assure [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] of his having

[064-174]lodged in Grandcourt’s mind a distinct understanding that he could get

[064-175]fifty thousand pounds by giving up a prospect which was probably

[064-176]distant, and not absolutely certain; but he had no further sign of

[064-177]Grandcourt’s disposition in the matter than that he was evidently

[064-178]inclined to keep up friendly communications.
