---
id: ch069
label: "Section 69"
type: chapter
description: "It lay in Deronda’s nature usually to contemn the feeble, fastidious"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[069-001]It lay in [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]’s nature usually to contemn the feeble, fastidious

[069-002]sympathy which shrinks from the broad life of mankind; but now, with

[069-003][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] before him as a living reality, whose experience he had to care

[069-004]for, he saw every common Jew and Jewess in the light of a comparison

[069-005]with her, and had a presentiment of the collision between her idea of

[069-006]the unknown mother and brother and the discovered fact—a presentiment

[069-007]all the keener in him because of a suppressed consciousness that a not

[069-008]unlike possibility of collision might lie hidden in his own lot. Not

[069-009]that he would have looked with more complacency of expectation at

[069-010]wealthy Jews, outdoing the lords of the Philistines in their sports;

[069-011]but since there was no likelihood of Mirah’s friends being found among

[069-012]that class, their habits did not immediately affect him. In this mood

[069-013]he rambled, without expectation of a more pregnant result than a little

[069-014]preparation of his own mind, perhaps for future theorizing as well as

[069-015]practice—very much as if, Mirah being related to Welsh miners, he had

[069-016]gone to look more closely at the ways of those people, not without

[069-017]wishing at the same time to get a little light of detail on the history

[069-018]of Strikes.

[069-019]He really did not long to find anybody in particular; and when, as his

[069-020]habit was, he looked at the name over a shop door, he was well content

[069-021]that it was not [[Mordecai|Ezra]] Cohen. I confess, he particularly desired that

[069-022]Ezra Cohen should not keep a shop. Wishes are held to be ominous;

[069-023]according to which belief the order of the world is so arranged that if

[069-024]you have an impious objection to a squint, your offspring is the more

[069-025]likely to be born with one; also, that if you happened to desire a

[069-026]squint you would not get it. This desponding view of probability the

[069-027]hopeful entirely reject, taking their wishes as good and sufficient

[069-028]security for all kinds of fulfilment. Who is absolutely neutral?

[069-029]Deronda happening one morning to turn into a little side street out of

[069-030]the noise and obstructions of Holborn, felt the scale dip on the

[069-031]desponding side.

[069-032]He was rather tired of the streets and had paused to hail a hansom cab

[069-033]which he saw coming, when his attention was caught by some fine old

[069-034]clasps in chased silver displayed in the window at his right hand. His

[069-035]first thought was that Lady Mallinger, who had a strictly Protestant

[069-036]taste for such Catholic spoils, might like to have these missal-clasps

[069-037]turned into a bracelet: then his eyes traveled over the other contents

[069-038]of the window, and he saw that the shop was that kind of pawnbroker’s

[069-039]where the lead is given to jewelry, lace and all equivocal objects

[069-040]introduced as _bric-à-brac_. A placard in one corner

[069-041]announced—_Watches and Jewelry exchanged and repaired_. But his survey

[069-042]had been noticed from within, and a figure appeared at the door,

[069-043]looking round at him and saying in a tone of cordial encouragement,

[069-044]“Good day, sir.” The instant was enough for Deronda to see the face,

[069-045]unmistakably Jewish, belonged to a young man about thirty, and wincing

[069-046]from the shopkeeper’s persuasiveness that would probably follow, he had

[069-047]no sooner returned the “good day,” than he passed to the other side of

[069-048]the street and beckoned to the cabman to draw up there. From that

[069-049]station he saw the name over the shop window—_Ezra Cohen_.

[069-050]There might be a hundred Ezra Cohens lettered above shop windows, but

[069-051]Deronda had not seen them. Probably the young man interested in a

[069-052]possible customer was Ezra himself; and he was about the age to be

[069-053]expected in Mirah’s brother, who was grown up while she was still a

[069-054]little child. But Deronda’s first endeavor as he drove homeward was to

[069-055]convince himself that there was not the slightest warrantable

[069-056]presumption of this Ezra being Mirah’s brother; and next, that even if,

[069-057]in spite of good reasoning, he turned out to be that brother, while on

[069-058]inquiry the mother was found to be dead, it was not

[069-059]his—Deronda’s—duty to make known the discovery to Mirah. In

[069-060]inconvenient disturbance of this conclusion there came his

[069-061]lately-acquired knowledge that Mirah would have a religious desire to

[069-062]know of her mother’s death, and also to learn whether her brother were

[069-063]living. How far was he justified in determining another life by his own

[069-064]notions? Was it not his secret complaint against the way in which

[069-065]others had ordered his own life, that he had not open daylight on all

[069-066]its relations, so that he had not, like other men, the full guidance of

[069-067]primary duties?

[069-068]The immediate relief from this inward debate was the reflection that he

[069-069]had not yet made any real discovery, and that by looking into the facts

[069-070]more closely he should be certified that there was no demand on him for

[069-071]any decision whatever. He intended to return to that shop as soon as he

[069-072]could conveniently, and buy the clasps for Lady Mallinger. But he was

[069-073]hindered for several days by [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], who, about to make an

[069-074]after-dinner speech on a burning topic, wanted Deronda to forage for

[069-075]him on the legal part of the question, besides wasting time every day

[069-076]on argument which always ended in a drawn battle. As on many other

[069-077]questions, they held different sides, but Sir Hugo did not mind this,

[069-078]and when Deronda put his point well, said, with a mixture of

[069-079]satisfaction and regret,

[069-080]“Confound it, Dan! why don’t you make an opportunity of saying these

[069-081]things in public? You’re wrong, you know. You won’t succeed. You’ve got

[069-082]the massive sentiment—the heavy artillery of the country against you.

[069-083]But it’s all the better ground for a young man to display himself on.

[069-084]When I was your age, I should have taken it. And it would be quite as

[069-085]well for you to be in opposition to me here and there. It would throw

[069-086]you more into relief. If you would seize an occasion of this sort to

[069-087]make an impression, you might be in Parliament in no time. And you know

[069-088]that would gratify me.”

[069-089]“I am sorry not to do what would gratify you, sir,” said Deronda. “But

[069-090]I cannot persuade myself to look at politics as a profession.”

[069-091]“Why not? if a man is not born into public life by his position in the

[069-092]country, there’s no way for him but to embrace it by his own efforts.

[069-093]The business of the country must be done—her Majesty’s Government

[069-094]carried on, as the old Duke said. And it never could be, my boy, if

[069-095]everybody looked at politics as if they were prophecy, and demanded an

[069-096]inspired vocation. If you are to get into Parliament, it won’t do to

[069-097]sit still and wait for a call either from heaven or constituents.”

[069-098]“I don’t want to make a living out of opinions,” said Deronda;

[069-099]“especially out of borrowed opinions. Not that I mean to blame other

[069-100]men. I dare say many better fellows than I don’t mind getting on to a

[069-101]platform to praise themselves, and giving their word of honor for a

[069-102]party.”

[069-103]“I’ll tell you what, Dan,” said Sir Hugo, “a man who sets his face

[069-104]against every sort of humbug is simply a three-cornered, impracticable

[069-105]fellow. There’s a bad style of humbug, but there is also a good

[069-106]style—one that oils the wheels and makes progress possible. If you are

[069-107]to rule men, you must rule them through their own ideas; and I agree

[069-108]with the Archbishop at Naples who had a St. Januarius procession

[069-109]against the plague. It’s no use having an Order in Council against

[069-110]popular shallowness. There is no action possible without a little

[069-111]acting.”

[069-112]“One may be obliged to give way to an occasional necessity,” said

[069-113]Deronda. “But it is one thing to say, ‘In this particular case I am

[069-114]forced to put on this foolscap and grin,’ and another to buy a pocket

[069-115]foolscap and practice myself in grinning. I can’t see any real public

[069-116]expediency that does not keep an ideal before it which makes a limit of

[069-117]deviation from the direct path. But if I were to set up for a public

[069-118]man I might mistake my success for public expediency.”

[069-119]It was after this dialogue, which was rather jarring to him, that

[069-120]Deronda set out on his meditated second visit to Ezra Cohen’s. He

[069-121]entered the street at the end opposite to the Holborn entrance, and an

[069-122]inward reluctance slackened his pace while his thoughts were

[069-123]transferring what he had just been saying about public expediency to

[069-124]the entirely private difficulty which brought him back again into this

[069-125]unattractive thoroughfare. It might soon become an immediate practical

[069-126]question with him how far he could call it a wise expediency to conceal

[069-127]the fact of close kindred. Such questions turning up constantly in life

[069-128]are often decided in a rough-and-ready way; and to many it will appear

[069-129]an over-refinement in Deronda that he should make any great point of a

[069-130]matter confined to his own knowledge. But we have seen the reasons why

[069-131]he had come to regard [[secrecy|concealment]] as a bane of life, and the necessity

[069-132]of concealment as a mark by which lines of action were to be avoided.

[069-133]The prospect of being urged against the confirmed habit of his mind was

[069-134]naturally grating. He even paused here and there before the most

[069-135]plausible shop-windows for a gentleman to look into, half inclined to

[069-136]decide that he would not increase his knowledge about that modern Ezra,

[069-137]who was certainly not a leader among his people—a hesitation which

[069-138]proved how, in a man much given to reasoning, a bare possibility may

[069-139]weigh more than the best-clad likelihood; for Deronda’s reasoning had

[069-140]decided that all likelihood was against this man’s being Mirah’s

[069-141]brother.

[069-142]One of the shop-windows he paused before was that of a second-hand

[069-143]book-shop, where, on a narrow table outside, the literature of the ages

[069-144]was represented in judicious mixture, from the immortal verse of Homer

[069-145]to the mortal prose of the railway novel. That the mixture was

[069-146]judicious was apparent from Deronda’s finding in it something that he

[069-147]wanted—namely, that wonderful bit of autobiography, the life of the

[069-148]Polish Jew, Salomon Maimon; which, as he could easily slip it into his

[069-149]pocket, he took from its place, and entered the shop to pay for,

[069-150]expecting to see behind the counter a grimy personage showing that

[069-151]_nonchalance_ about sales which seems to belong universally to the

[069-152]second-hand book-business. In most other trades you find generous men

[069-153]who are anxious to sell you their wares for your own welfare; but even

[069-154]a Jew will not urge Simson’s Euclid on you with an affectionate

[069-155]assurance that you will have pleasure in reading it, and that he wishes

[069-156]he had twenty more of the article, so much is it in request. One is led

[069-157]to fear that a second-hand bookseller may belong to that unhappy class

[069-158]of men who have no belief in the good of what they get their living by,

[069-159]yet keep conscience enough to be morose rather than unctuous in their

[069-160]vocation.

[069-161]But instead of the ordinary tradesman, he saw, on the dark background

[069-162]of books in the long narrow shop, a figure that was somewhat startling

[069-163]in its unusualness. A man in threadbare clothing, whose age was

[069-164]difficult to guess—from the dead yellowish flatness of the flesh,

[069-165]something like an old ivory carving—was seated on a stool against some

[069-166]bookshelves that projected beyond the short counter, doing nothing more

[069-167]remarkable than reading yesterday’s _Times_; but when he let the paper

[069-168]rest on his lap and looked at the incoming customer, the thought

[069-169]glanced through Deronda that precisely such a physiognomy as that might

[069-170]possibly have been seen in a prophet of the [[exile|Exile]], or in some New

[069-171]Hebrew poet of the mediæval time. It was a fine typical Jewish face,

[069-172]wrought into intensity of expression apparently by a strenuous eager

[069-173]experience in which all the satisfaction had been indirect and far off,

[069-174]and perhaps by some bodily suffering also, which involved that absence

[069-175]of ease in the present. The features were clear-cut, not large; the

[069-176]brow not high but broad, and fully defined by the crisp black hair. It

[069-177]might never have been a particularly handsome face, but it must always

[069-178]have been forcible; and now with its dark, far-off gaze, and yellow

[069-179]pallor in relief on the gloom of the backward shop, one might have

[069-180]imagined one’s self coming upon it in some past prison of the

[069-181]Inquisition, which a mob had suddenly burst upon; while the look fixed

[069-182]on an incidental customer seemed eager and questioning enough to have

[069-183]been turned on one who might have been a messenger either of delivery

[069-184]or of death. The figure was probably familiar and unexciting enough to

[069-185]the inhabitants of this street; but to Deronda’s mind it brought so

[069-186]strange a blending of the unwonted with the common, that there was a

[069-187]perceptible interval of mutual observation before he asked his

[069-188]question; “What is the price of this book?”
