---
id: ch066
label: "Section 66"
type: chapter
description: "Something like this was the common under-current in Deronda’s mind"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[066-001]Something like this was the common under-current in [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]’s mind

[066-002]while he was reading law or imperfectly attending to polite

[066-003]conversation. Meanwhile he had not set about one function in particular

[066-004]with zeal and steadiness. Not an admirable experience, to be proposed

[066-005]as an ideal; but a form of struggle before break of day which some

[066-006]young men since the patriarch have had to pass through, with more or

[066-007]less of bruising if not laming.

[066-008]I have said that under his calm exterior he had a fervor which made him

[066-009]easily feel the presence of poetry in everyday events; and the forms of

[066-010]the Juden-gasse, rousing the sense of union with what is remote, set

[066-011]him musing on two elements of our historic life which that sense raises

[066-012]into the same region of poetry;—the faint beginnings of faiths and

[066-013]institutions, and their obscure lingering decay; the dust and withered

[066-014]remnants with which they are apt to be covered, only enhancing for the

[066-015]awakened perception the impressiveness either of a sublimely

[066-016]penetrating life, as in the twin green leaves that will become the

[066-017]sheltering tree, or of a pathetic inheritance in which all the grandeur

[066-018]and the glory have become a sorrowing memory.

[066-019]This imaginative stirring, as he turned out of the Juden-gasse, and

[066-020]continued to saunter in the warm evening air, meaning to find his way

[066-021]to the [[the-synagogue|synagogue]], neutralized the repellent effect of certain ugly

[066-022]little incidents on his way. Turning into an old book-shop to ask the

[066-023]exact time of service at the synagogue, he was affectionately directed

[066-024]by a precocious Jewish youth, who entered cordially into his wanting,

[066-025]not the fine new building of the Reformed but the old Rabbinical school

[066-026]of the orthodox; and then cheated him like a pure Teuton, only with

[066-027]more amenity, in his charge for a book quite out of request as one

[066-028]“nicht so leicht zu bekommen.” Meanwhile at the opposite counter a deaf

[066-029]and grisly tradesman was casting a flinty look at certain cards,

[066-030]apparently combining advantages of business with religion, and

[066-031]shoutingly proposed to him in Jew-dialect by a dingy man in a tall coat

[066-032]hanging from neck to heel, a bag in hand, and a broad low hat

[066-033]surmounting his chosen nose—who had no sooner disappeared than another

[066-034]dingy man of the same pattern issued from the background glooms of the

[066-035]shop and also shouted in the same dialect. In fact, Deronda saw various

[066-036]queer-looking Israelites not altogether without guile, and just

[066-037]distinguishable from queer-looking Christians of the same mixed

[066-038]_morale_. In his anxiety about [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s relatives, he had lately been

[066-039]thinking of vulgar Jews with a sort of personal alarm. But a little

[066-040]comparison will often diminish our surprise and disgust at the

[066-041]aberrations of Jews and other dissidents whose lives do not offer a

[066-042]consistent or lovely pattern of their creed; and this evening Deronda,

[066-043]becoming more conscious that he was falling into unfairness and

[066-044]ridiculous exaggeration, began to use that corrective comparison: he

[066-045]paid his thaler too much, without prejudice to his interests in the

[066-046]Hebrew destiny, or his wish to find the _Rabbinische Schule_, which he

[066-047]arrived at by sunset, and entered with a good congregation of men.

[066-048]He happened to take his seat in a line with an elderly man from whom he

[066-049]was distant enough to glance at him more than once as rather a

[066-050]noticeable figure—his ample white beard and felt hat framing a profile

[066-051]of that fine contour which may as easily be Italian as Hebrew. He

[066-052]returned Deronda’s notice till at last their eyes met; an undesirable

[066-053]chance with unknown persons, and a reason to Deronda for not looking

[066-054]again; but he immediately found an open prayer-book pushed toward him

[066-055]and had to bow his thanks. However, the congregation had mustered, the

[066-056]reader had mounted to the _almemor_ or platform, and the service began.

[066-057]Deronda, having looked enough at the German translation of the Hebrew

[066-058]in the book before him to know that he was chiefly hearing Psalms and

[066-059]Old Testament passages or phrases, gave himself up to that strongest

[066-060]effect of chanted liturgies which is independent of detailed verbal

[066-061]meaning—like the effect of an Allegri’s _Miserere_ or a Palestrina’s

[066-062]_Magnificat_. The most powerful movement of feeling with a liturgy is

[066-063]the prayer which seeks for nothing special, but is a yearning to escape

[066-064]from the limitations of our own weakness and an invocation of all Good

[066-065]to enter and abide with us; or else a self-oblivious lifting up of

[066-066]Gladness, a _Gloria in excelsis_ that such Good exists; both the

[066-067]yearning and the exaltation gathering their utmost force from the sense

[066-068]of communion in a form which has expressed them both, for long

[066-069]generations of struggling fellow-men. The Hebrew liturgy, like others,

[066-070]has its transitions of litany, lyric, proclamation, dry statement and

[066-071]blessing; but this evening, all were one for Deronda: the chant of the

[066-072]_Chazaris_ or Reader’s grand wide-ranging voice with its passage from

[066-073]monotony to sudden cries, the outburst of sweet boys’ voices from the

[066-074]little choir, the devotional swaying of men’s bodies backward and

[066-075]forward, the very commonness of the building and shabbiness of the

[066-076]scene where a national [[religion|faith]], which had penetrated the thinking of half

[066-077]the world, and moulded the splendid forms of that world’s religion, was

[066-078]finding a remote, obscure echo—all were blent for him as one

[066-079]expression of a binding history, tragic and yet glorious. He wondered

[066-080]at the strength of his own feeling; it seemed beyond the occasion—what

[066-081]one might imagine to be a divine influx in the darkness, before there

[066-082]was any vision to interpret. The whole scene was a coherent strain, its

[066-083]burden a passionate regret, which, if he had known the liturgy for the

[066-084]Day of Reconciliation, he might have clad in its antithetic burden;

[066-085]“Happy the eye which saw all these things; but verily to hear only of

[066-086]them afflicts our soul. Happy the eye that saw our temple and the joy

[066-087]of our congregation; but verily to hear only of them afflicts our soul.

[066-088]Happy the eye that saw the fingers when tuning every kind of song; but

[066-089]verily to hear only of them afflicts our soul.”

[066-090]But with the cessation of the devotional sounds and the movement of

[066-091]many indifferent faces and vulgar figures before him there darted into

[066-092]his mind the frigid idea that he had probably been alone in his

[066-093]feeling, and perhaps the only person in the congregation for whom the

[066-094]service was more than a dull routine. There was just time for this

[066-095]chilling thought before he had bowed to his civil neighbor and was

[066-096]moving away with the rest—when he felt a hand on his arm, and turning

[066-097]with the rather unpleasant sensation which this abrupt sort of claim is

[066-098]apt to bring, he saw close to him the white-bearded face of that

[066-099]neighbor, who said to him in German, “Excuse me, young gentleman—allow

[066-100]me—what is your parentage—your mother’s family—her maiden name?”

[066-101]Deronda had a strongly resistant feeling: he was inclined to shake off

[066-102]hastily the touch on his arm; but he managed to slip it away and said

[066-103]coldly, “I am an Englishman.”

[066-104]The questioner looked at him dubiously still for an instant, then just

[066-105]lifted his hat and turned away; whether under a sense of having made a

[066-106]mistake or of having been repulsed, Deronda was uncertain. In his walk

[066-107]back to the hotel he tried to still any uneasiness on the subject by

[066-108]reflecting that he could not have acted differently. How could he say

[066-109]that he did not know the name of his mother’s family to that total

[066-110]stranger?—who indeed had taken an unwarrantable [[freedom|liberty]] in the

[066-111]abruptness of his question, dictated probably by some fancy of likeness

[066-112]such as often occurs without real significance. The incident, he said

[066-113]to himself, was trivial; but whatever import it might have, his inward

[066-114]shrinking on the occasion was too strong for him to be sorry that he

[066-115]had cut it short. It was a reason, however, for his not mentioning the

[066-116]synagogue to the Mallingers—in addition to his usual inclination to

[066-117]reticence on anything that the baronet would have been likely to call

[066-118]Quixotic enthusiasm. Hardly any man could be more good-natured than Sir

[066-119]Hugo; indeed in his kindliness especially to women, he did actions

[066-120]which others would have called romantic; but he never took a romantic

[066-121]view of them, and in general smiled at the introduction of motives on a

[066-122]grand scale, or of reasons that lay very far off. This was the point of

[066-123]strongest difference between him and Deronda, who rarely ate at

[066-124]breakfast without some silent discursive flight after grounds for

[066-125]filling up his day according to the practice of his contemporaries.

[066-126]This halt at Frankfort was taken on their way home, and its impressions

[066-127]were kept the more actively vibrating in him by the duty of caring for

[066-128]Mirah’s welfare. That question about his parentage, which if he had not

[066-129]both inwardly and outwardly shaken it off as trivial, would have seemed

[066-130]a threat rather than a promise of revelation, and reinforced his

[066-131]anxiety as to the effect of finding Mirah’s relatives and his resolve

[066-132]to proceed with caution. If he made any unpleasant discovery, was he

[066-133]bound to a disclosure that might cast a new net of trouble around her?

[066-134]He had written to Mrs. Meyrick to announce his visit at four o’clock,

[066-135]and he found Mirah seated at work with only Mrs. Meyrick and Mab, the

[066-136]open piano, and all the glorious company of engravings. The dainty

[066-137]neatness of her hair and dress, the glow of tranquil happiness in a

[066-138]face where a painter need have changed nothing if he had wanted to put

[066-139]it in front of the host [[music|singing]] “peace on earth and good will to men,”

[066-140]made a contrast to his first vision of her that was delightful to

[066-141]Deronda’s eyes. Mirah herself was thinking of it, and immediately on

[066-142]their greeting said,

[066-143]“See how different I am from the miserable creature by the river! all

[066-144]because you found me and brought me to the very best.”

[066-145]“It was my good chance to find you,” said Deronda. “Any other man would

[066-146]have been glad to do what I did.”

[066-147]“That is not the right way to be thinking about it,” said Mirah,

[066-148]shaking her head with decisive gravity, “I think of what really was. It

[066-149]was you, and not another, who found me and were good to me.”

[066-150]“I agree with Mirah,” said Mrs. Meyrick. “Saint Anybody is a bad saint

[066-151]to pray to.”

[066-152]“Besides, Anybody could not have brought me to you,” said Mirah,

[066-153]smiling at Mrs. Meyrick. “And I would rather be with you than with any

[066-154]one else in the world except my mother. I wonder if ever a poor little

[066-155]bird, that was lost and could not fly, was taken and put into a warm

[066-156]nest where was a mother and sisters who took to it so that everything

[066-157]came naturally, as if it had been always there. I hardly thought before

[066-158]that the world could ever be as happy and without fear as it is to me

[066-159]now.” She looked meditative a moment, and then said, “sometimes I am a

[066-160]_little_ afraid.”

[066-161]“What is it you are afraid of?” said Deronda with anxiety.

[066-162]“That when I am turning at the corner of a street I may meet my father.

[066-163]It seems dreadful that I should be afraid of meeting him. That is my

[066-164]only sorrow,” said Mirah, plaintively.

[066-165]“It is surely not very probable,” said Deronda, wishing that it were

[066-166]less so; then, not to let the opportunity escape—“Would it be a great

[066-167]grief to you now if you were never to meet your mother?”

[066-168]She did not answer immediately, but meditated again, with her eyes

[066-169]fixed on the opposite wall. Then she turned them on Deronda and said

[066-170]firmly, as if she had arrived at the exact truth, “I want her to know

[066-171]that I have always loved her, and if she is alive I want to comfort

[066-172]her. She may be dead. If she were I should long to know where she was

[066-173]buried; and to know whether my brother lives, to say Kaddish in memory

[066-174]of her. But I will try not to grieve. I have thought much for so

[066-175]many years of her being dead. And I shall have her with me in my mind,

[066-176]as I have always had. We can never be really parted. I think I have

[066-177]never sinned against her. I have always tried not to do what would hurt

[066-178]her. Only, she might be sorry that I was not a good Jewess.”
