---
id: ch068
label: "Section 68"
type: chapter
description: "“But I could not make myself not a Jewess,” said Mirah, insistently,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[068-001]“But I could not make myself not a Jewess,” said [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]], insistently,

[068-002]“even if I changed my belief.”

[068-003]“No, my dear. But if Jews and Jewesses went on changing their religion,

[068-004]and making no difference between themselves and Christians, there would

[068-005]come a time when there would be no Jews to be seen,” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[068-006]taking that consummation very cheerfully.

[068-007]“Oh, please not to say that,” said Mirah, the tears gathering. “It is

[068-008]the first unkind thing you ever said. I will not begin that. I will

[068-009]never separate myself from my mother’s people. I was forced to fly from

[068-010]my father; but if he came back in age and weakness and want, and needed

[068-011]me, should I say, ‘This is not my father’? If he had shame, I must

[068-012]share it. It was he who was given to me for my father, and not another.

[068-013]And so it is with my people. I will always be a Jewess. I will love

[068-014]Christians when they are good, like you. But I will always cling to my

[068-015]people. I will always worship with them.”

[068-016]As Mirah had gone on speaking she had become possessed with a sorrowful

[068-017]passion—fervent, not violent. Holding her little hands tightly clasped

[068-018]and looking at Mrs. Meyrick with beseeching, she seemed to [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] a

[068-019]personification of that spirit which impelled men after a long

[068-020]inheritance of professed Catholicism to leave wealth and high place and

[068-021]risk their lives in flight, that they might join their own people and

[068-022]say, “I am a Jew.”

[068-023]“Mirah, Mirah, my dear child, you mistake me!” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[068-024]alarmed. “God forbid I should want you to do anything against your

[068-025]conscience. I was only saying what might be if the world went on. But I

[068-026]had better have left the world alone, and not wanted to be over-wise.

[068-027]Forgive me, come! we will not try to take you from anybody you feel has

[068-028]more right to you.”

[068-029]“I would do anything else for you. I owe you my life,” said Mirah, not

[068-030]yet quite calm.

[068-031]“Hush, hush, now,” said Mrs. Meyrick. “I have been punished enough for

[068-032]wagging my tongue foolishly—making an almanac for the Millennium, as

[068-033]my husband used to say.”

[068-034]“But everything in the world must come to an end some time. We must

[068-035]bear to think of that,” said Mab, unable to hold her peace on this

[068-036]point. She had already suffered from a bondage of tongue which

[068-037]threatened to become severe if Mirah were to be too much indulged in

[068-038]this inconvenient susceptibility to innocent remarks.

[068-039]Deronda smiled at the irregular, blonde face, brought into strange

[068-040]contrast by the side of Mirah’s—smiled, Mab thought, rather

[068-041]sarcastically as he said, “That prospect of everything coming to an

[068-042]end will not guide us far in practice. Mirah’s feelings, she tells us,

[068-043]are concerned with what is.”

[068-044]Mab was confused and wished she had not spoken, since Mr. Deronda

[068-045]seemed to think that she had found fault with Mirah; but to have spoken

[068-046]once is a tyrannous reason for speaking again, and she said,

[068-047]“I only meant that we must have courage to hear things, else there is

[068-048]hardly anything we can talk about.” Mab felt herself unanswerable here,

[068-049]inclining to the opinion of Socrates: “What motive has a man to live,

[068-050]if not for the pleasure of discourse?”

[068-051]Deronda took his leave soon after, and when Mrs. Meyrick went outside

[068-052]with him to exchange a few words about Mirah, he said, “[[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]] is to

[068-053]share my chambers when he comes at Christmas.”

[068-054]“You have written to Rome about that?” said Mrs. Meyrick, her face

[068-055]lighting up. “How very good and thoughtful of you! You mentioned Mirah,

[068-056]then?”

[068-057]“Yes, I referred to her. I concluded he knew everything from you.”

[068-058]“I must confess my folly. I have not yet written a word about her. I

[068-059]have always been meaning to do it, and yet have ended my letter without

[068-060]saying a word. And I told the girls to leave it to me. However!—Thank

[068-061]you a thousand times.”

[068-062]Deronda divined something of what was in the mother’s mind, and his

[068-063]divination reinforced a certain anxiety already present in him. His

[068-064]inward colloquy was not soothing. He said to himself that no man could

[068-065]see this exquisite creature without feeling it possible to fall in love

[068-066]with her; but all the fervor of his nature was engaged on the side of

[068-067]precaution. There are personages who feel themselves tragic because

[068-068]they march into a palpable morass, dragging another with them, and then

[068-069]cry out against all the gods. Deronda’s mind was strongly set against

[068-070]imitating them.

[068-071]“I have my hands on the reins now,” he thought, “and I will not drop

[068-072]them. I shall go there as little as possible.”

[068-073]He saw the reasons acting themselves out before him. How could he be

[068-074]Mirah’s guardian and claim to unite with Mrs. Meyrick, to whose charge

[068-075]he had committed her, if he showed himself as a lover—whom she did not

[068-076]love—whom she would not marry? And if he encouraged any germ of

[068-077]lover’s feeling in himself it would lead up to that issue. Mirah’s was

[068-078]not a nature that would bear dividing against itself; and even if love

[068-079]won her consent to marry a man who was not of her race and religion,

[068-080]she would never be happy in acting against that strong native bias

[068-081]which would still reign in her conscience as [[conscience|remorse]].

[068-082]Deronda saw these consequences as we see any danger of marring our own

[068-083]work well begun. It was a delight to have rescued this child acquainted

[068-084]with sorrow, and to think of having placed her little feet in protected

[068-085]paths. The creature we help to save, though only a half-reared linnet,

[068-086]bruised and lost by the wayside—how we watch and fence it, and dote on

[068-087]its signs of recovery! Our pride becomes loving, our self is a not-self

[068-088]for whose sake we become virtuous, when we set to some hidden work of

[068-089]reclaiming a life from misery and look for our triumph in the secret

[068-090]joy—“This one is the better for me.”

[068-091]“I would as soon hold out my finger to be bitten off as set about

[068-092]spoiling her peace,” said Deronda. “It was one of the rarest bits of

[068-093]fortune that I should have had friends like the Meyricks to place her

[068-094]with—generous, delicate friends without any loftiness in their ways,

[068-095]so that her dependence on them is not only safety but happiness. There

[068-096]could be no refuge to replace that, if it were broken up. But what is

[068-097]the use of my taking the vows and settling everything as it should be,

[068-098]if that marplot Hans comes and upsets it all?”

[068-099]Few things were more likely. Hans was made for mishaps: his very limbs

[068-100]seemed more breakable than other people’s—his eyes more of a resort

[068-101]for uninvited flies and other irritating guests. But it was impossible

[068-102]to forbid Hans’s coming to [[london|London]]. He was intending to get a studio

[068-103]there and make it his chief home; and to propose that he should defer

[068-104]coming on some ostensible ground, concealing the real motive of winning

[068-105]time for Mirah’s position to become more confirmed and independent, was

[068-106]impracticable. Having no other resource Deronda tried to believe that

[068-107]both he and Mrs. Meyrick were foolishly troubling themselves about one

[068-108]of those endless things called probabilities, which never occur; but he

[068-109]did not quite succeed in his trying; on the contrary, he found himself

[068-110]going inwardly through a scene where on the first discovery of Hans’s

[068-111]inclination he gave him a very energetic warning—suddenly checked,

[068-112]however, by the suspicion of personal feeling that his warmth might be

[068-113]creating in Hans. He could come to no result, but that the position was

[068-114]peculiar, and that he could make no further provision against dangers

[068-115]until they came nearer. To save an unhappy Jewess from drowning

[068-116]herself, would not have seemed a startling variation among police

[068-117]reports; but to discover in her so rare a creature as Mirah, was an

[068-118]exceptional event which might well bring exceptional consequences.

[068-119]Deronda would not let himself for a moment dwell on any supposition

[068-120]that the consequences might enter deeply into his own life. The image

[068-121]of Mirah had never yet had that penetrating radiation which would have

[068-122]been given to it by the idea of her loving him. When this sort of

[068-123]effluence is absent from the fancy (whether from the fact or not) a man

[068-124]may go far in devotedness without perturbation.

[068-125]As to the search for Mirah’s mother and brother, Deronda took what she

[068-126]had said to-day as a warrant for deferring any immediate measures. His

[068-127]conscience was not quite easy in this desire for delay, any more than

[068-128]it was quite easy in his not attempting to learn the truth about his

[068-129]own mother: in both cases he felt that there might be an unfulfilled

[068-130]duty to a parent, but in both cases there was an overpowering

[068-131]repugnance to the possible truth, which threw a turning weight into the

[068-132]scale of argument.

[068-133]“At least, I will look about,” was his final determination. “I may find

[068-134]some special Jewish machinery. I will wait till after Christmas.”

[068-135]What should we all do without the calendar, when we want to put off a

[068-136]disagreeable duty? The admirable arrangements of the solar system, by

[068-137]which our time is measured, always supply us with a term before which

[068-138]it is hardly worth while to set about anything we are disinclined to.

[068-139]CHAPTER XXXIII.

[068-140]“No man,” says a Rabbi, by way of indisputable instance, “may turn the

[068-141]bones of his father and mother into spoons”—sure that his hearers

[068-142]felt the checks against that form of economy. The market for spoons

[068-143]has never expanded enough for any one to say, “Why not?” and to argue

[068-144]that human progress lies in such an application of material. The only

[068-145]check to be alleged is a sentiment, which will coerce none who do not

[068-146]hold that sentiments are the better part of the world’s wealth.

[068-147]Deronda meanwhile took to a less fashionable form of exercise than

[068-148]riding in Rotten Row. He went often rambling in those parts of London

[068-149]which are most inhabited by common Jews. He walked to the synagogues at

[068-150]times of service, he looked into shops, he observed faces:—a process

[068-151]not very promising of particular discovery. Why did he not address

[068-152]himself to an influential Rabbi or other member of a Jewish community,

[068-153]to consult on the chances of finding a mother named Cohen, with a son

[068-154]named [[Mordecai|Ezra]], and a lost daughter named Mirah? He thought of doing

[068-155]so—after Christmas. The fact was, notwithstanding all his sense of

[068-156]poetry in common things, Deronda, where a keen personal interest was

[068-157]aroused, could not, more than the rest of us, continuously escape

[068-158]suffering from the pressure of that hard unaccommodating Actual, which

[068-159]has never consulted our taste and is entirely unselect. Enthusiasm, we

[068-160]know, dwells at ease among ideas, tolerates garlic breathed in the

[068-161]middle ages, and sees no shabbiness in the official trappings of

[068-162]classic processions: it gets squeamish when ideals press upon it as

[068-163]something warmly incarnate, and can hardly face them without fainting.

[068-164]Lying dreamily in a boat, imagining one’s self in quest of a beautiful

[068-165]maiden’s relatives in Cordova elbowed by Jews in the time of

[068-166]Ibn-Gebirol, all the physical incidents can be borne without shock. Or

[068-167]if the scenery of St. Mary Axe and Whitechapel were imaginatively

[068-168]transported to the borders of the Rhine at the end of the eleventh

[068-169]century, when in the ears listening for the signals of the Messiah, the

[068-170]Hep! Hep! Hep! of the Crusaders came like the bay of blood-hounds; and

[068-171]in the presence of those devilish missionaries with sword and firebrand

[068-172]the crouching figure of the reviled Jew turned round erect, heroic,

[068-173]flashing with sublime constancy in the face of torture and death—what

[068-174]would the dingy shops and unbeautiful faces signify to the thrill of

[068-175]contemplative emotion? But the fervor of sympathy with which we

[068-176]contemplate a grandiose martyrdom is feeble compared with the

[068-177]enthusiasm that keeps unslacked where there is no danger, no

[068-178]challenge—nothing but impartial midday falling on commonplace, perhaps

[068-179]half-repulsive, objects which are really the beloved ideas made flesh.

[068-180]Here undoubtedly lies the chief poetic energy: in the force of

[068-181]imagination that pierces or exalts the solid fact, instead of floating

[068-182]among cloud-pictures. To glory in a prophetic vision of knowledge

[068-183]covering the earth, is an easier exercise of believing imagination than

[068-184]to see its beginning in newspaper placards, staring at you from the

[068-185]bridge beyond the corn-fields; and it might well happen to most of us

[068-186]dainty people that we were in the thick of the battle of Armageddon

[068-187]without being aware of anything more than the annoyance of a little

[068-188]explosive smoke and struggling on the ground immediately about us.
