---
id: ch060
label: "Section 60"
type: chapter
description: "In the morning there was a double excitement for her. She was going to"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[060-001]In the morning there was a double excitement for her. She was going to

[060-002]hunt, from which scruples about propriety had threatened to hinder her,

[060-003]until it was found that Mrs. Torrington was horsewoman enough to

[060-004]accompany her—going to hunt for the first time since her escapade with

[060-005][[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]]; and she was going again to see [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], in whom, since last night,

[060-006]her interest had so gathered that she expected, as people do about

[060-007]revealed celebrities, to see something in his appearance which she had

[060-008]missed before.

[060-009]What was he going to be? What sort of life had he before him—he being

[060-010]nothing of any consequence? And with only a little difference in events

[060-011]he might have been as important as [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]], nay—her imagination

[060-012]inevitably went into that direction—might have held the very estates

[060-013]which Grandcourt was to have. But now, Deronda would probably some day

[060-014]see her mistress of the Abbey at Topping, see her bearing the title

[060-015]which would have been his own wife’s. These obvious, futile thoughts of

[060-016]what might have been, made a new epoch for [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]. She, whose

[060-017]unquestionable habit it had been to take the best that came to her for

[060-018]less than her own claim, had now to see the position which tempted her

[060-019]in a new light, as a hard, unfair exclusion of others. What she had now

[060-020]heard about Deronda seemed to her imagination to throw him into one

[060-021]group with [[Lydia-Glasher|Mrs. Glasher]] and her children; before whom she felt herself

[060-022]in an attitude of apology—she who had hitherto been surrounded by a

[060-023]group that in her opinion had need be apologetic to her. Perhaps

[060-024]Deronda himself was thinking of these things. Could he know of Mrs.

[060-025]Glasher? If he knew that she knew, he would despise her; but he could

[060-026]have no such knowledge. Would he, without that, despise her for

[060-027]marrying Grandcourt? His possible judgment of her actions was telling

[060-028]on her as importunately as [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]]’s judgment of her powers; but she

[060-029]found larger room for resistance to a disapproval of her marriage,

[060-030]because it is easier to make our conduct seem justifiable to ourselves

[060-031]than to make our ability strike others. “How can I help it?” is not our

[060-032]favorite apology for incompetency. But Gwendolen felt some strength in

[060-033]saying,

[060-034]“How can I help what other people have done? Things would not come

[060-035]right if I were to turn round now and declare that I would not marry

[060-036]Mr. Grandcourt.” And such turning round was out of the question. The

[060-037]horses in the chariot she had mounted were going at full speed.

[060-038]This mood of youthful, elated desperation had a tidal recurrence. She

[060-039]could dare anything that lay before her sooner than she could choose to

[060-040]go backward, into [[shame|humiliation]]; and it was even soothing to think that

[060-041]there would now be as much ill-doing in the one as in the other. But

[060-042]the immediate delightful fact was the hunt, where she would see

[060-043]Deronda, and where he would see her; for always lurking ready to

[060-044]obtrude before other thoughts about him was the impression that he was

[060-045]very much interested in her. But to-day she was resolved not to repeat

[060-046]her folly of yesterday, as if she were anxious to say anything to him.

[060-047]Indeed, the hunt would be too absorbing.

[060-048]And so it was for a long while. Deronda was there, and within her sight

[060-049]very often; but this only added to the stimulus of a pleasure which

[060-050]Gwendolen had only once before tasted, and which seemed likely always

[060-051]to give a delight independent of any crosses, except such as took away

[060-052]the chance of riding. No accident happened to throw them together; the

[060-053]run took them within convenient reach of home, and the agreeable

[060-054]sombreness of the gray November afternoon, with a long stratum of

[060-055]yellow light in the west, Gwendolen was returning with the company from

[060-056][[diplow-hall|Diplow]], who were attending her on the way to [[Offendene]]. Now the sense

[060-057]of glorious excitement was over and gone, she was getting irritably

[060-058]disappointed that she had had no opportunity of speaking to Deronda,

[060-059]whom she would not see again, since he was to go away in a couple of

[060-060]days. What was she going to say? That was not quite certain. She wanted

[060-061]to speak to him. Grandcourt was by her side; Mrs. Torrington, her

[060-062]husband, and another gentleman in advance; and Deronda’s horse she

[060-063]could hear behind. The wish to speak to him and have him speaking to

[060-064]her was becoming imperious; and there was no chance of it unless she

[060-065]simply asserted her will and defied everything. Where the order of

[060-066]things could give way to Miss Gwendolen, it must be made to do so. They

[060-067]had lately emerged from a wood of pines and beeches, where the twilight

[060-068]stillness had a repressing effect, which increased her impatience. The

[060-069]horse-hoofs again heard behind at some little distance were a growing

[060-070]irritation. She reined in her horse and looked behind her; Grandcourt

[060-071]after a few paces, also paused; but she, waving her whip and nodding

[060-072]sideways with playful imperiousness, said, “Go on! I want to speak to

[060-073]Mr. Deronda.”

[060-074]Grandcourt hesitated; but that he would have done after any

[060-075]proposition. It was an awkward situation for him. No gentleman, before

[060-076]marriage, could give the emphasis of refusal to a command delivered in

[060-077]this playful way. He rode on slowly, and she waited till Deronda came

[060-078]up. He looked at her with tacit inquiry, and she said at once, letting

[060-079]her horse go alongside of his,

[060-080]“Mr. Deronda, you must enlighten my ignorance. I want to know why you

[060-081]thought it wrong for me to gamble. Is it because I am a woman?”

[060-082]“Not altogether; but I regretted it the more because you were a woman,”

[060-083]said Deronda, with an irrepressible smile. Apparently it must be

[060-084]understood between them now that it was he who sent the necklace. “I

[060-085]think it would be better for men not to gamble. It is a besotting kind

[060-086]of taste, likely to turn into a disease. And, besides, there is

[060-087]something revolting to me in raking a heap of money together, and

[060-088]internally chuckling over it, when others are feeling the loss of it. I

[060-089]should even call it base, if it were more than an exceptional lapse.

[060-090]There are enough inevitable turns of fortune which force us to see that

[060-091]our gain is another’s loss:—that is one of the ugly aspects of life.

[060-092]One would like to reduce it as much as one could, not get amusement out

[060-093]of exaggerating it.” Deronda’s voice had gathered some indignation

[060-094]while he was speaking.

[060-095]“But you do admit that we can’t help things,” said Gwendolen, with a

[060-096]drop in her tone. The answer had not been anything like what she had

[060-097]expected. “I mean that things are so in spite of us; we can’t always

[060-098]help it that our gain is another’s loss.”

[060-099]“Clearly. Because of that, we should help it where we can.”

[060-100]Gwendolen, biting her lip inside, paused a moment, and then forcing

[060-101]herself to speak with an air of playfulness again, said,

[060-102]“But why should you regret it more because I am a woman?”

[060-103]“Perhaps because we need that you should be better than we are.”

[060-104]“But suppose _we_ need that men should be better than we are,” said

[060-105]Gwendolen with a little air of “check!”

[060-106]“That is rather a difficulty,” said Deronda, smiling. “I suppose I

[060-107]should have said, we each of us think it would be better for the other

[060-108]to be good.”

[060-109]“You see, I needed you to be better than I was—and you thought so,”

[060-110]said Gwendolen, nodding and laughing, while she put her horse forward

[060-111]and joined Grandcourt, who made no observation.

[060-112]“Don’t you want to know what I had to say to Mr. Deronda?” said

[060-113]Gwendolen, whose own pride required her to account for her conduct.

[060-114]“A—no,” said Grandcourt, coldly.

[060-115]“Now that is the first impolite word you have spoken—that you don’t

[060-116]wish to hear what I had to say,” said Gwendolen, playing at a pout.

[060-117]“I wish to hear what you say to me—not to other men,” said Grandcourt.

[060-118]“Then you wish to hear this. I wanted to make him tell me why he

[060-119]objected to my gambling, and he gave me a little sermon.”

[060-120]“Yes—but excuse me the sermon.” If Gwendolen imagined that Grandcourt

[060-121]cared about her speaking to Deronda, he wished her to understand that

[060-122]she was mistaken. But he was not fond of being told to ride on. She saw

[060-123]he was piqued, but did not mind. She had accomplished her object of

[060-124]speaking again to Deronda before he raised his hat and turned with the

[060-125]rest toward Diplow, while her lover attended her to Offendene, where he

[060-126]was to bid farewell before a whole day’s absence on the unspecified

[060-127]journey. Grandcourt had spoken truth in calling the journey a bore: he

[060-128]was going by train to [[gadsmere|Gadsmere]].

[060-129]CHAPTER XXX.

[060-130]No penitence and no confessional,

[060-131]No priest ordains it, yet they’re forced to sit

[060-132]Amid deep ashes of their vanished years.

[060-133]Imagine a rambling, patchy house, the best part built of gray stone,

[060-134]and red-tiled, a round tower jutting at one of the corners, the mellow

[060-135]darkness of its conical roof surmounted by a weather-cock making an

[060-136]agreeable object either amidst the gleams and greenth of summer or the

[060-137]low-hanging clouds and snowy branches of winter: the ground shady with

[060-138]spreading trees: a great tree flourishing on one side, backward some

[060-139]Scotch firs on a broken bank where the roots hung naked, and beyond, a

[060-140]rookery: on the other side a pool overhung with bushes, where the

[060-141]water-fowl fluttered and screamed: all around, a vast meadow which

[060-142]might be called a park, bordered by an old plantation and guarded by

[060-143]stone lodges which looked like little prisons. Outside the gate the

[060-144]country, once entirely rural and lovely, now black with coal mines, was

[060-145]chiefly peopled by men and brethren with candles stuck in their hats,

[060-146]and with a diabolic complexion which laid them peculiarly open to

[060-147]suspicion in the eyes of the children at Gadsmere—Mrs. Glasher’s four

[060-148]beautiful children, who had dwelt there for about three years. Now, in

[060-149]November, when the flower-beds were empty, the trees leafless, and the

[060-150]pool blackly shivering, one might have said that the place was sombrely

[060-151]in keeping with the black roads and black mounds which seemed to put

[060-152]the district in mourning;—except when the children were playing on the

[060-153]gravel with the dogs for their companions. But Mrs. Glasher, under her

[060-154]present circumstances, liked Gadsmere as well as she would have liked

[060-155]any other abode. The complete seclusion of the place, which the

[060-156]unattractiveness of the country secured, was exactly to her taste. When

[060-157]she drove her two ponies with a waggonet full of children, there were

[060-158]no gentry in carriages to be met, only men of business in gigs; at

[060-159]church there were no eyes she cared to avoid, for the curate’s wife and

[060-160]the curate himself were either ignorant of anything to her

[060-161]disadvantage, or ignored it: to them she was simply a widow lady, the

[060-162]tenant of Gadsmere; and the name of Grandcourt was of little interest

[060-163]in that district compared with the names of Fletcher and Gawcome, the

[060-164]lessees of the collieries.

[060-165]It was full ten years since the elopement of an Irish officer’s

[060-166]beautiful wife with young Grandcourt, and a consequent duel where the

[060-167]bullets wounded the air only, had made some little noise. Most of those

[060-168]who remembered the affair now wondered what had become of that Mrs.

[060-169]Glasher, whose beauty and brilliancy had made her rather conspicuous to

[060-170]them in foreign places, where she was known to be living with young

[060-171]Grandcourt.

[060-172]That he should have disentangled himself from that connection seemed

[060-173]only natural and desirable. As to her, it was thought that a woman who

[060-174]was understood to have forsaken her child along with her husband had

[060-175]probably sunk lower. Grandcourt had of course got weary of her. He was

[060-176]much given to the pursuit of women: but a man in his position would by

[060-177]this time desire to make a suitable marriage with the fair young

[060-178]daughter of a noble house. No one talked of Mrs. Glasher now, any more

[060-179]than they talked of the victim in a trial for manslaughter ten years

[060-180]before: she was a lost vessel after whom nobody would send out an

[060-181]expedition of search; but Grandcourt was seen in harbor with his colors

[060-182]flying, registered as seaworthy as ever.
