---
id: ch075
label: "Section 75"
type: chapter
description: "And now he would not look round and find out that she was there! The"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[075-001]And now he would not look round and find out that she was there! The

[075-002]paper crackled in his hand, his head rose and sank, exploring those

[075-003]stupid columns, and he was evidently stroking his beard; as if this

[075-004]world were a very easy affair to her. Of course all the rest of the

[075-005]company would soon be down, and the opportunity of her saying something

[075-006]to efface her flippancy of the evening before, would be quite gone. She

[075-007]felt sick with irritation—so fast do young creatures like her absorb

[075-008]misery through invisible suckers of their own fancies—and her face had

[075-009]gathered that peculiar expression which comes with a [[shame|mortification]] to

[075-010]which tears are forbidden.

[075-011]At last he threw down the paper and turned round.

[075-012]“Oh, you are there already,” he said, coming forward a step or two: “I

[075-013]must go and put on my coat.”

[075-014]He turned aside and walked out of the room. This was behaving quite

[075-015]badly. Mere politeness would have made him stay to exchange some words

[075-016]before leaving her alone. It was true that [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] came in with Sir

[075-017]Hugo immediately after, so that the words must have been too few to be

[075-018]worth anything. As it was, they saw him walking from the library door.

[075-019]“A—you look rather ill,” said Grandcourt, going straight up to her,

[075-020]standing in front of her, and looking into her eyes. “Do you feel equal

[075-021]to the walk?”

[075-022]“Yes, I shall like it,” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], without the slightest movement

[075-023]except this of the lips.

[075-024]“We could put off going over the house, you know, and only go out of

[075-025]doors,” said [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], kindly, while Grandcourt turned aside.

[075-026]“Oh, dear no!” said Gwendolen, speaking with determination; “let us put

[075-027]off nothing. I want a long walk.”

[075-028]The rest of the walking party—two ladies and two gentlemen besides

[075-029][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]—had now assembled; and Gwendolen rallying, went with due

[075-030]cheerfulness by the side of Sir Hugo, paying apparently an equal

[075-031]attention to the commentaries Deronda was called upon to give on the

[075-032]various architectural fragments, to Sir Hugo’s reasons for not

[075-033]attempting to remedy the mixture of the undisguised modern with the

[075-034]antique—which in his opinion only made the place the more truly

[075-035]historical. On their way to the buttery and kitchen they took the

[075-036]outside of the house and paused before a beautiful pointed doorway,

[075-037]which was the only old remnant in the east front.

[075-038]“Well, now, to my mind,” said Sir Hugo, “that is more interesting

[075-039]standing as it is in the middle of what is frankly four centuries

[075-040]later, than if the whole front had been dressed up in a pretense of the

[075-041]thirteenth century. Additions ought to smack of the time when they are

[075-042]made and carry the stamp of their period. I wouldn’t destroy any old

[075-043]bits, but that notion of reproducing the old is a mistake, I think. At

[075-044]least, if a man likes to do it he must pay for his whistle. Besides,

[075-045]where are you to stop along that road—making loopholes where you don’t

[075-046]want to peep, and so on? You may as well ask me to wear out the stones

[075-047]with kneeling; eh, Grandcourt?”

[075-048]“A confounded nuisance,” drawled Grandcourt. “I hate fellows wanting to

[075-049]howl litanies—acting the greatest bores that have ever existed.”

[075-050]“Well, yes, that’s what their romanticism must come to,” said Sir Hugo,

[075-051]in a tone of confidential assent—“that is if they carry it out

[075-052]logically.”

[075-053]“I think that way of arguing against a course because it may be ridden

[075-054]down to an absurdity would soon bring life to a standstill,” said

[075-055]Deronda. “It is not the logic of human action, but of a roasting-jack,

[075-056]that must go on to the last turn when it has been once wound up. We can

[075-057]do nothing safely without some judgment as to where we are to stop.”

[075-058]“I find the rule of the pocket the best guide,” said Sir Hugo,

[075-059]laughingly. “And as for most of your new-old building, you had need to

[075-060]hire men to scratch and chip it all over artistically to give it an

[075-061]elderly-looking surface; which at the present rate of labor would not

[075-062]answer.”

[075-063]“Do you want to keep up the old fashions, then, Mr. Deronda?” said

[075-064]Gwendolen, taking advantage of the freedom of grouping to fall back a

[075-065]little, while Sir Hugo and Grandcourt went on.

[075-066]“Some of them. I don’t see why we should not use our choice there as we

[075-067]do elsewhere—or why either age or novelty by itself is an argument for

[075-068]or against. To delight in doing things because our fathers did them is

[075-069]good if it shuts out nothing better; it enlarges the range of

[075-070]affection—and affection is the broadest basis of good in life.”

[075-071]“Do you think so?” said Gwendolen with a little surprise. “I should

[075-072]have thought you cared most about ideas, knowledge, wisdom, and all

[075-073]that.”

[075-074]“But to care about _them_ is a sort of affection,” said Deronda,

[075-075]smiling at her sudden _naïveté_. “Call it attachment; interest, willing

[075-076]to bear a great deal for the sake of being with them and saving them

[075-077]from injury. Of course, it makes a difference if the objects of

[075-078]interest are human beings; but generally in all deep affections the

[075-079]objects are a mixture—half persons and half ideas—sentiments and

[075-080]affections flow in together.”

[075-081]“I wonder whether I understand that,” said Gwendolen, putting up her

[075-082]chin in her old saucy manner. “I believe I am not very affectionate;

[075-083]perhaps you mean to tell me, that is the reason why I don’t see much

[075-084]good in life.”

[075-085]“No, I did _not_ mean to tell you that; but I admit that I should think

[075-086]it true if I believed what you say of yourself,” said Deronda, gravely.

[075-087]Here Sir Hugo and Grandcourt turned round and paused.

[075-088]“I never can get Mr. Deronda to pay me a compliment,” said Gwendolen.

[075-089]“I have quite a curiosity to see whether a little flattery can be

[075-090]extracted from him.”

[075-091]“Ah!” said Sir Hugo, glancing at Deronda, “the fact is, it is useless

[075-092]to flatter a bride. We give it up in despair. She has been so fed on

[075-093]sweet speeches that every thing we say seems tasteless.”

[075-094]“Quite true,” said Gwendolen, bending her head and smiling. “Mr.

[075-095]Grandcourt won me by neatly-turned compliments. If there had been one

[075-096]word out of place it would have been fatal.”

[075-097]“Do you hear that?” said Sir Hugo, looking at the husband.

[075-098]“Yes,” said Grandcourt, without change of countenance. “It’s a deucedly

[075-099]hard thing to keep up, though.”

[075-100]All this seemed to Sir Hugo a natural playfulness between such a

[075-101]husband and wife; but Deronda wondered at the misleading alternations

[075-102]in Gwendolen’s manner, which at one moment seemed to excite sympathy by

[075-103]childlike indiscretion, at another to repel it by proud [[secrecy|concealment]]. He

[075-104]tried to keep out of her way by devoting himself to Miss Juliet Fenn, a

[075-105]young lady whose profile had been so unfavorably decided by

[075-106]circumstances over which she had no control, that Gwendolen some months

[075-107]ago had felt it impossible to be jealous of her. Nevertheless, when

[075-108]they were seeing the kitchen—a part of the original building in

[075-109]perfect preservation—the depth of shadow in the niches of the

[075-110]stone-walls and groined vault, the play of light from the huge glowing

[075-111]fire on polished tin, brass, and copper, the fine resonance that came

[075-112]with every sound of voice or metal, were all spoiled for Gwendolen, and

[075-113]Sir Hugo’s speech about them was made rather importunate, because

[075-114]Deronda was discoursing to the other ladies and kept at a distance from

[075-115]her. It did not signify that the other gentlemen took the opportunity

[075-116]of being near her: of what use in the world was their admiration while

[075-117]she had an uneasy sense that there was some standard in Deronda’s mind

[075-118]which measured her into littleness? Mr. Vandernoodt, who had the mania

[075-119]of always describing one thing while you were looking at another, was

[075-120]quite intolerable with his insistence on Lord Blough’s kitchen, which

[075-121]he had seen in the north.

[075-122]“Pray don’t ask us to see two kitchens at once. It makes the heat

[075-123]double. I must really go out of it,” she cried at last, marching

[075-124]resolutely into the open air, and leaving the others in the rear.

[075-125]Grandcourt was already out, and as she joined him, he said,

[075-126]“I wondered how long you meant to stay in that damned place”—one of

[075-127]the freedoms he had assumed as a husband being the use of his strongest

[075-128]epithets. Gwendolen, turning to see the rest of the party approach,

[075-129]said,

[075-130]“It was certainly rather too warm in one’s wraps.”

[075-131]They walked on the gravel across a green court, where the snow still

[075-132]lay in islets on the grass, and in masses on the boughs of the great

[075-133]cedar and the crenelated coping of the stone walls, and then into a

[075-134]larger court, where there was another cedar, to find the beautiful

[075-135]choir long ago turned into stables, in the first instance perhaps after

[075-136]an impromptu fashion by troopers, who had a pious satisfaction in

[075-137]insulting the priests of Baal and the images of Ashtoreth, the queen of

[075-138]heaven. The exterior—its west end, save for the stable door, walled in

[075-139]with brick and covered with ivy—was much defaced, maimed of finial and

[075-140]gargoyle, the friable limestone broken and fretted, and lending its

[075-141]soft gray to a powdery dark lichen; the long windows, too, were filled

[075-142]in with brick as far as the springing of the arches, the broad

[075-143]clerestory windows with wire or ventilating blinds. With the low wintry

[075-144]afternoon sun upon it, sending shadows from the cedar boughs, and

[075-145]lighting up the touches of snow remaining on every ledge, it had still

[075-146]a scarcely disturbed aspect of antique solemnity, which gave the scene

[075-147]in the interior rather a startling effect; though, ecclesiastical or

[075-148]reverential indignation apart, the eyes could hardly help dwelling with

[075-149]pleasure on its piquant picturesqueness. Each finely-arched chapel was

[075-150]turned into a stall, where in the dusty glazing of the windows there

[075-151]still gleamed patches of crimson, orange, blue, and palest violet; for

[075-152]the rest, the choir had been gutted, the floor leveled, paved, and

[075-153]drained according to the most approved fashion, and a line of loose

[075-154]boxes erected in the middle: a soft light fell from the upper windows

[075-155]on sleek brown or gray flanks and haunches; on mild equine faces

[075-156]looking out with active nostrils over the varnished brown boarding; on

[075-157]the hay hanging from racks where the saints once looked down from the

[075-158]altar-pieces, and on the pale golden straw scattered or in heaps; on a

[075-159]little white-and-liver-colored spaniel making his bed on the back of an

[075-160]elderly hackney, and on four ancient angels, still showing signs of

[075-161]devotion like mutilated martyrs—while over all, the grand pointed

[075-162]roof, untouched by reforming wash, showed its lines and colors

[075-163]mysteriously through veiling shadow and cobweb, and a hoof now and then

[075-164]striking against the boards seemed to fill the vault with thunder,

[075-165]while outside there was the answering bay of the blood-hounds.

[075-166]“Oh, this is glorious!” Gwendolen burst forth, in forgetfulness of

[075-167]everything but the immediate impression: there had been a little

[075-168]intoxication for her in the grand spaces of courts and building, and

[075-169]the fact of her being an important person among them. “This _is_

[075-170]glorious! Only I wish there were a horse in every one of the boxes. I

[075-171]would ten times rather have these stables than those at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]].”

[075-172]But she had no sooner said this than some consciousness arrested her,

[075-173]and involuntarily she turned her eyes toward Deronda, who oddly enough

[075-174]had taken off his felt hat and stood holding it before him as if they

[075-175]had entered a room or an actual church. He, like others, happened to be

[075-176]looking at her, and their eyes met—to her intense vexation, for it

[075-177]seemed to her that by looking at him she had betrayed the reference of

[075-178]her thoughts, and she felt herself blushing: she exaggerated the

[075-179]impression that even Sir Hugo as well as Deronda would have of her bad

[075-180]taste in referring to the possession of anything at the Abbey: as for

[075-181]Deronda, she had probably made him despise her. Her annoyance at what

[075-182]she imagined to be the obviousness of her confusion robbed her of her

[075-183]usual facility in carrying it off by playful speech, and turning up her

[075-184]face to look at the roof, she wheeled away in that attitude. If any had

[075-185]noticed her blush as significant, they had certainly not interpreted it

[075-186]by the secret windings and recesses of her feeling. A blush is no

[075-187]language: only a dubious flag-signal which may mean either of two

[075-188]contradictories. Deronda alone had a faint guess at some part of her

[075-189]feeling; but while he was observing her he was himself under

[075-190]observation.
