---
id: ch070
label: "Section 70"
type: chapter
description: "After taking the book and examining the fly-leaves without rising, the"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[070-001]After taking the book and examining the fly-leaves without rising, the

[070-002]supposed bookseller said, “There is no mark, and Mr. Ram is not in now.

[070-003]I am keeping the shop while he is gone to dinner. What are you disposed

[070-004]to give for it?” He held the book close on his lap with his hand on it

[070-005]and looked examiningly at [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], over whom there came the

[070-006]disagreeable idea, that possibly this striking personage wanted to see

[070-007]how much could be got out of a customer’s ignorance of prices. But

[070-008]without further reflection he said, “Don’t you know how much it is

[070-009]worth?”

[070-010]“Not its market-price. May I ask have you read it?”

[070-011]“No. I have read an account of it, which makes me want to buy it.”

[070-012]“You are a man of learning—you are interested in Jewish history?” This

[070-013]was said in a deepened tone of eager inquiry.

[070-014]“I am certainly interested in Jewish history,” said Deronda, quietly,

[070-015]curiosity overcoming his dislike to the sort of inspection as well as

[070-016]questioning he was under.

[070-017]But immediately the strange Jew rose from his sitting posture, and

[070-018]Deronda felt a thin hand pressing his arm tightly, while a hoarse,

[070-019]excited voice, not much above a loud whisper, said,

[070-020]“You are perhaps of our race?”

[070-021]Deronda colored deeply, not liking the grasp, and then answered with a

[070-022]slight shake of the head, “No.” The grasp was relaxed, the hand

[070-023]withdrawn, the eagerness of the face collapsed into uninterested

[070-024]melancholy, as if some possessing spirit which had leaped into the eyes

[070-025]and gestures had sunk back again to the inmost recesses of the frame;

[070-026]and moving further off as he held out the little book, the stranger

[070-027]said in a tone of distant civility, “I believe Mr. Ram will be

[070-028]satisfied with half-a-crown, sir.”

[070-029]The effect of this change on Deronda—he afterward smiled when he

[070-030]recalled it—was oddly embarrassing and humiliating, as if some high

[070-031]dignitary had found him deficient and given him his _congé_. There was

[070-032]nothing further to be said, however: he paid his half-crown and carried

[070-033]off his _Salomon Maimon’s Lebensgeschichte_ with a mere “good-morning.”

[070-034]He felt some vexation at the sudden arrest of the interview, and the

[070-035]apparent prohibition that he should know more of this man, who was

[070-036]certainly something out of the common way—as different probably as a

[070-037]Jew could well be from [[Mordecai|Ezra]] Cohen, through whose door Deronda was

[070-038]presently entering, and whose flourishing face glistening on the way to

[070-039]fatness was hanging over the counter in negotiation with some one on

[070-040]the other side of the partition, concerning two plated stoppers and

[070-041]three teaspoons, which lay spread before him. Seeing Deronda enter, he

[070-042]called out “Mother! Mother!” and then with a familiar nod and smile,

[070-043]said, “Coming, sir—coming directly.”

[070-044]Deronda could not help looking toward the door from the back with some

[070-045]anxiety, which was not soothed when he saw a vigorous woman beyond

[070-046]fifty enter and approach to serve him. Not that there was anything very

[070-047]repulsive about her: the worst that could be said was that she had that

[070-048]look of having made her toilet with little water, and by twilight,

[070-049]which is common to unyouthful people of her class, and of having

[070-050]presumably slept in her large earrings, if not in her rings and

[070-051]necklace. In fact, what caused a sinking of heart in Deronda was her

[070-052]not being so coarse and ugly as to exclude the idea of her being

[070-053][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s mother. Any one who has looked at a face to try and discern

[070-054]signs of known kinship in it will understand his process of

[070-055]conjecture—how he tried to think away the fat which had gradually

[070-056]disguised the outlines of youth, and to discern what one may call the

[070-057]elementary expressions of the face. He was sorry to see no absolute

[070-058]negative to his fears. Just as it was conceivable that this Ezra,

[070-059]brought up to trade, might resemble the scapegrace father in everything

[070-060]but his knowledge and talent, so it was not impossible that this mother

[070-061]might have had a lovely refined daughter whose type of feature and

[070-062]expression was like Mirah’s. The eyebrows had a vexatious similarity of

[070-063]line; and who shall decide how far a face may be masked when the

[070-064]uncherishing years have thrust it far onward in the ever-new procession

[070-065]of youth and age? The good-humor of the glance remained and shone out

[070-066]in a motherly way at Deronda, as she said, in a mild guttural tone,

[070-067]“How can I serve you, sir?”

[070-068]“I should like to look at the silver clasps in the window,” said

[070-069]Deronda; “the larger ones, please, in the corner there.”

[070-070]They were not quite easy to get at from the mother’s station, and the

[070-071]son seeing this called out, “I’ll reach ’em, mother; I’ll reach ’em,”

[070-072]running forward with alacrity, and then handing the clasps to Deronda

[070-073]with the smiling remark,

[070-074]“Mother’s too proud: she wants to do everything herself. That’s why I

[070-075]called her to wait on you, sir. When there’s a particular gentleman

[070-076]customer, sir, I daren’t do any other than call her. But I can’t let

[070-077]her do herself mischief with stretching.”

[070-078]Here Mr. Cohen made way again for his parent, who gave a little

[070-079]guttural, amiable laugh while she looked at Deronda, as much as to say,

[070-080]“This boy will be at his jokes, but you see he’s the best son in the

[070-081]world,” and evidently the son enjoyed pleasing her, though he also

[070-082]wished to convey an apology to his distinguished customer for not

[070-083]giving him the advantage of his own exclusive attention.

[070-084]Deronda began to examine the clasps as if he had many points to observe

[070-085]before he could come to a decision.

[070-086]“They are only three guineas, sir,” said the mother, encouragingly.

[070-087]“First-rate workmanship, sir—worth twice the money; only I get ’em a

[070-088]bargain from Cologne,” said the son, parenthetically, from a distance.

[070-089]Meanwhile two new customers entered, and the repeated call, “Addy!”

[070-090]brought from the back of the shop a group that Deronda turned frankly

[070-091]to stare at, feeling sure that the stare would be held complimentary.

[070-092]The group consisted of a black-eyed young woman who carried a

[070-093]black-eyed little one, its head already covered with black curls, and

[070-094]deposited it on the counter, from which station it looked round with

[070-095]even more than the usual intelligence of babies: also a robust boy of

[070-096]six and a younger girl, both with black eyes and black-ringed

[070-097]hair—looking more Semitic than their parents, as the puppy lions show

[070-098]the spots of far-off progenitors. The young woman answering to

[070-099]“Addy”—a sort of paroquet in a bright blue dress, with coral necklace

[070-100]and earrings, her hair set up in a huge bush—looked as complacently

[070-101]lively and unrefined as her husband; and by a certain difference from

[070-102]the mother deepened in Deronda the unwelcome impression that the latter

[070-103]was not so utterly common a Jewess as to exclude her being the mother

[070-104]of Mirah. While that thought was glancing through his mind, the boy had

[070-105]run forward into the shop with an energetic stamp, and setting himself

[070-106]about four feet from Deronda, with his hands in the pockets of his

[070-107]miniature knickerbockers, looked at him with a precocious air of

[070-108]survey. Perhaps it was chiefly with a diplomatic design to linger and

[070-109]ingratiate himself that Deronda patted the boy’s head, saying,

[070-110]“What is your name, sirrah?”

[070-111]“Jacob Alexander Cohen,” said the small man, with much ease and

[070-112]distinctness.

[070-113]“You are not named after your father, then?”

[070-114]“No, after my grandfather; he sells knives and razors and scissors—my

[070-115]grandfather does,” said Jacob, wishing to impress the stranger with

[070-116]that high connection. “He gave me this knife.” Here a pocket-knife was

[070-117]drawn forth, and the small fingers, both naturally and artificially

[070-118]dark, opened two blades and a cork-screw with much quickness.

[070-119]“Is not that a dangerous plaything?” said Deronda, turning to the

[070-120]grandmother.

[070-121]“_He_’ll never hurt himself, bless you!” said she, contemplating her

[070-122]grandson with placid rapture.

[070-123]“Have _you_ got a knife?” says Jacob, coming closer. His small voice

[070-124]was hoarse in its glibness, as if it belonged to an aged commercial

[070-125]soul, fatigued with bargaining through many generations.

[070-126]“Yes. Do you want to see it?” said Deronda, taking a small penknife

[070-127]from his waistcoat-pocket.

[070-128]Jacob seized it immediately and retreated a little, holding the two

[070-129]knives in his palms and bending over them in meditative comparison. By

[070-130]this time the other clients were gone, and the whole family had

[070-131]gathered to the spot, centering their attention on the marvelous Jacob:

[070-132]the father, mother, and grandmother behind the counter, with baby held

[070-133]staggering thereon, and the little girl in front leaning at her

[070-134]brother’s elbow to assist him in looking at the knives.

[070-135]“Mine’s the best,” said Jacob, at last, returning Deronda’s knife as if

[070-136]he had been entertaining the idea of exchange and had rejected it.

[070-137]Father and mother laughed aloud with delight. “You won’t find Jacob

[070-138]choosing the worst,” said Mr. Cohen, winking, with much confidence in

[070-139]the customer’s admiration. Deronda, looking at the grandmother, who had

[070-140]only an inward silent laugh, said,

[070-141]“Are these the only grandchildren you have?”

[070-142]“All. This is my only son,” she answered in a communicative tone,

[070-143]Deronda’s glance and manner as usual conveying the impression of

[070-144]sympathetic interest—which on this occasion answered his purpose well.

[070-145]It seemed to come naturally enough that he should say,

[070-146]“And you have no daughter?”

[070-147]There was an instantaneous change in the mother’s face. Her lips closed

[070-148]more firmly, she looked down, swept her hands outward on the counter,

[070-149]and finally turned her back on Deronda to examine some Indian

[070-150]handkerchiefs that hung in pawn behind her. Her son gave a significant

[070-151]glance, set up his shoulders an instant and just put his fingers to his

[070-152]lips,—then said quickly, “I think you’re a first-rate gentleman in the

[070-153]city, sir, if I may be allowed to guess.”

[070-154]“No,” said Deronda, with a preoccupied air, “I have nothing to do with

[070-155]the city.”

[070-156]“That’s a bad job. I thought you might be the young principal of a

[070-157]first-rate firm,” said Mr. Cohen, wishing to make amends for the check

[070-158]on his customer’s natural desire to know more of him and his. “But you

[070-159]understand silver-work, I see.”

[070-160]“A little,” said Deronda, taking up the clasps a moment and laying them

[070-161]down again. That unwelcome bit of circumstantial evidence had made his

[070-162]mind busy with a plan which was certainly more like acting than

[070-163]anything he had been aware of in his own conduct before. But the bare

[070-164]possibility that more knowledge might nullify the evidence now

[070-165]overpowered the inclination to rest in uncertainty.

[070-166]“To tell you the truth,” he went on, “my errand is not so much to buy

[070-167]as to borrow. I dare say you go into rather heavy transactions

[070-168]occasionally.”

[070-169]“Well, sir, I’ve accommodated gentlemen of distinction—I’m proud to

[070-170]say it. I wouldn’t exchange my business with any in the world. There’s

[070-171]none more honorable, nor more charitable, nor more necessary for all

[070-172]classes, from the good lady who wants a little of the ready for the

[070-173]baker, to a gentleman like yourself, sir, who may want it for

[070-174]amusement. I like my business, I like my street, and I like my shop. I

[070-175]wouldn’t have it a door further down. And I wouldn’t be without a

[070-176]pawn-shop, sir, to be the Lord Mayor. It puts you in connection with

[070-177]the world at large. I say it’s like the government revenue—it embraces

[070-178]the brass as well as the gold of the country. And a man who doesn’t get

[070-179]money, sir, can’t accommodate. Now, what can I do for _you_, sir?”

[070-180]If an amiable self-satisfaction is the mark of earthly bliss, Solomon

[070-181]in all his glory was a pitiable mortal compared with Mr. Cohen—clearly

[070-182]one of those persons, who, being in excellent spirits about themselves,

[070-183]are willing to cheer strangers by letting them know it. While he was

[070-184]delivering himself with lively rapidity, he took the baby from his wife

[070-185]and holding it on his arm presented his features to be explored by its

[070-186]small fists. Deronda, not in a cheerful mood, was rashly pronouncing

[070-187]this Ezra Cohen to be the most unpoetic Jew he had ever met with in

[070-188]books or life: his phraseology was as little as possible like that of

[070-189]the Old Testament: and no shadow of a suffering race distinguished his

[070-190]vulgarity of soul from that of a prosperous, pink-and-white huckster of

[070-191]the purest English lineage. It is naturally a Christian feeling that a

[070-192]Jew ought not to be conceited. However, this was no reason for not

[070-193]persevering in his project, and he answered at once in adventurous

[070-194]ignorance of technicalities,
