---
id: ch072
label: "Section 72"
type: chapter
description: "Mr. Cohen kept up the conversation with much liveliness, introducing as"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[072-001]Mr. Cohen kept up the conversation with much liveliness, introducing as

[072-002]subjects always in taste (the Jew is proud of his loyalty) the Queen

[072-003]and the Royal Family, the Emperor and Empress of the French—into which

[072-004]both grandmother and wife entered with zest. Mrs. Cohen the younger

[072-005]showed an accurate memory of distinguished birthdays; and the elder

[072-006]assisted her son in informing the guest of what occurred when the

[072-007]Emperor and Empress were in England and visited the city ten years

[072-008]before.

[072-009]“I dare say you know all about it better than we do, sir,” said Cohen,

[072-010]repeatedly, by way of preface to full information; and the interesting

[072-011]statements were kept up in a trio.

[072-012]“Our baby is named _Eu_genie Esther,” said young Mrs. Cohen,

[072-013]vivaciously.

[072-014]“It’s wonderful how the Emperor’s like a cousin of mine in the face,”

[072-015]said the grandmother; “it struck me like lightning when I caught sight

[072-016]of him. I couldn’t have thought it.”

[072-017]“Mother and me went to see the Emperor and Empress at the Crystal

[072-018]Palace,” said Mr. Cohen. “I had a fine piece of work to take care of,

[072-019]mother; she might have been squeezed flat—though she was pretty near

[072-020]as lusty then as she is now. I said if I had a hundred mothers I’d

[072-021]never take one of ’em to see the Emperor and Empress at the Crystal

[072-022]Palace again; and you may think a man can’t afford it when he’s got but

[072-023]one mother—not if he’d ever so big an insurance on her.” He stroked

[072-024]his mother’s shoulder affectionately, and chuckled a little at his own

[072-025]humor.

[072-026]“Your mother has been a widow a long while, perhaps,” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]],

[072-027]seizing his opportunity. “That has made your care for her the more

[072-028]needful.”

[072-029]“Ay, ay, it’s a good many _yore-zeit_ since I had to manage for her and

[072-030]myself,” said Cohen quickly. “I went early to it. It’s that makes you a

[072-031]sharp knife.”

[072-032]“What does—what makes a sharp knife, father?” said Jacob, his cheek

[072-033]very much swollen with sweet-cake.

[072-034]The father winked at his guest and said, “Having your nose put on the

[072-035]grindstone.”

[072-036]Jacob slipped from his chair with the piece of sweet-cake in his hand,

[072-037]and going close up to [[Mordecai]], who had been totally silent hitherto,

[072-038]said, “What does that mean—putting my nose to the grindstone?”

[072-039]“It means that you are to bear being hurt without making a noise,” said

[072-040]Mordecai, turning his eyes benignantly on the small face close to his.

[072-041]Jacob put the corner of the cake into Mordecai’s mouth as an invitation

[072-042]to bite, saying meanwhile, “I shan’t though,” and keeping his eyes on

[072-043]the cake to observe how much of it went in this act of generosity.

[072-044]Mordecai took a bite and smiled, evidently meaning to please the lad,

[072-045]and the little incident made them both look more lovable. Deronda,

[072-046]however, felt with some vexation that he had taken little by his

[072-047]question.

[072-048]“I fancy that is the right quarter for learning,” said he, carrying on

[072-049]the subject that he might have an excuse for addressing Mordecai, to

[072-050]whom he turned and said, “You have been a great student, I imagine?”

[072-051]“I have studied,” was the quiet answer. “And you?—You know German by

[072-052]the book you were buying.”

[072-053]“Yes, I have studied in Germany. Are you generally engaged in

[072-054]bookselling?” said Deronda.

[072-055]“No; I only go to Mr. Ram’s shop every day to keep it while he goes to

[072-056]meals,” said Mordecai, who was now looking at Deronda with what seemed

[072-057]a revival of his original interest: it seemed as if the face had some

[072-058]attractive indication for him which now neutralized the former

[072-059]disappointment. After a slight pause, he said, “Perhaps you know

[072-060]Hebrew?”

[072-061]“I am sorry to say, not at all.”

[072-062]Mordecai’s countenance fell: he cast down his eyelids, looking at his

[072-063]hands, which lay crossed before him, and said no more. Deronda had now

[072-064]noticed more decisively than in their former interview a difficulty in

[072-065]breathing, which he thought must be a sign of consumption.

[072-066]“I’ve had something else to do than to get book-learning,” said Mr.

[072-067]Cohen,—“I’ve had to make myself knowing about useful things. I know

[072-068]stones well,”—here he pointed to Deronda’s ring. “I’m not afraid of

[072-069]taking that ring of yours at my own valuation. But now,” he added, with

[072-070]a certain drop in his voice to a lower, more familiar nasal, “what do

[072-071]you want for it?”

[072-072]“Fifty or sixty pounds,” Deronda answered, rather too carelessly.

[072-073]Cohen paused a little, thrust his hands into his pockets, fixed on

[072-074]Deronda a pair of glistening eyes that suggested a miraculous

[072-075]guinea-pig, and said, “Couldn’t do you that. Happy to oblige, but

[072-076]couldn’t go that lengths. Forty pound—say forty—I’ll let you have

[072-077]forty on it.”

[072-078]Deronda was aware that Mordecai had looked up again at the words

[072-079]implying a monetary affair, and was now examining him again, while he

[072-080]said, “Very well, I shall redeem it in a month or so.”

[072-081]“Good. I’ll make you out the ticket by-and-by,” said Cohen,

[072-082]indifferently. Then he held up his finger as a sign that conversation

[072-083]must be deferred. He, Mordecai and Jacob put on their hats, and Cohen

[072-084]opened a thanksgiving, which was carried on by responses, till Mordecai

[072-085]delivered himself alone at some length, in a solemn chanting tone, with

[072-086]his chin slightly uplifted and his thin hands clasped easily before

[072-087]him. Not only in his accent and tone, but in his freedom from the

[072-088]self-consciousness which has reference to others’ approbation, there

[072-089]could hardly have been a stronger contrast to the Jew at the other end

[072-090]of the table. It was an unaccountable conjunction—the presence among

[072-091]these common, prosperous, shopkeeping types, of a man who, in an

[072-092]emaciated threadbare condition, imposed a certain awe on Deronda, and

[072-093]an embarrassment at not meeting his expectations.

[072-094]No sooner had Mordecai finished his devotional strain, than rising,

[072-095]with a slight bend of his head to the stranger, he walked back into his

[072-096]room, and shut the door behind him.

[072-097]“That seems to be rather a remarkable man,” said Deronda, turning to

[072-098]Cohen, who immediately set up his shoulders, put out his tongue

[072-099]slightly, and tapped his own brow. It was clearly to be understood that

[072-100]Mordecai did not come up to the standard of sanity which was set by Mr.

[072-101]Cohen’s view of men and things.

[072-102]“Does he belong to your family?” said Deronda.

[072-103]This idea appeared to be rather ludicrous to the ladies as well as to

[072-104]Cohen, and the family interchanged looks of amusement.

[072-105]“No, no,” said Cohen. “Charity! charity! he worked for me, and when he

[072-106]got weaker and weaker I took him in. He’s an incumbrance; but he brings

[072-107]a blessing down, and he teaches the boy. Besides, he does the repairing

[072-108]at the watches and jewelry.”

[072-109]Deronda hardly abstained from smiling at this mixture of kindliness and

[072-110]the desire to justify it in the light of a calculation; but his

[072-111]willingness to speak further of Mordecai, whose character was made the

[072-112]more enigmatically striking by these new details, was baffled. Mr.

[072-113]Cohen immediately dismissed the subject by reverting to the

[072-114]“accommodation,” which was also an act of charity, and proceeded to

[072-115]make out the ticket, get the forty pounds, and present them both in

[072-116]exchange for the diamond ring. Deronda, feeling that it would be hardly

[072-117]delicate to protract his visit beyond the settlement of the business

[072-118]which was its pretext, had to take his leave, with no more decided

[072-119]result than the advance of forty pounds and the pawn-ticket in his

[072-120]breast-pocket, to make a reason for returning when he came up to town

[072-121]after Christmas. He was resolved that he would then endeavor to gain a

[072-122]little more insight into the character and history of Mordecai; from

[072-123]whom also he might gather something decisive about the Cohens—for

[072-124]example, the reason why it was forbidden to ask Mrs. Cohen the elder

[072-125]whether she had a daughter.

[072-126]BOOK V.—MORDECAI.

[072-127]CHAPTER XXXV.

[072-128]Were uneasiness of conscience measured by extent of crime, human

[072-129]history had been different, and one should look to see the contrivers

[072-130]of greedy wars and the mighty marauders of the money-market in one

[072-131]troop of self-lacerating penitents with the meaner robber and

[072-132]cut-purse and the murderer that doth his butchery in small with his own

[072-133]hand. No doubt wickedness hath its rewards to distribute; but who so

[072-134]wins in this devil’s game must needs be baser, more cruel, more brutal

[072-135]than the order of this planet will allow for the multitude born of

[072-136]woman, the most of these carrying a form of conscience—a fear which

[072-137]is the shadow of justice, a pity which is the shadow of love—that

[072-138]hindereth from the prize of serene wickedness, itself difficult of

[072-139]maintenance in our composite flesh.

[072-140]On the twenty-ninth of December Deronda knew that the Grandcourts had

[072-141]arrived at the Abbey, but he had had no glimpse of them before he went

[072-142]to dress for dinner. There had been a splendid fall of snow, allowing

[072-143]the party of children the rare pleasures of snow-balling and

[072-144]snow-building, and in the Christmas holidays the Mallinger girls were

[072-145]content with no amusement unless it were joined in and managed by

[072-146]“cousin,” as they had always called Deronda. After that outdoor

[072-147]exertion he had been playing billiards, and thus the hours had passed

[072-148]without his dwelling at all on the prospect of meeting [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] at

[072-149]dinner. Nevertheless that prospect was interesting to him; and when, a

[072-150]little tired and heated with working at amusement, he went to his room

[072-151]before the half-hour bell had rung, he began to think of it with some

[072-152]speculation on the sort of influence her marriage with [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] would

[072-153]have on her, and on the probability that there would be some

[072-154]discernible shades of change in her manner since he saw her at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]],

[072-155]just as there had been since his first vision of her at [[Leubronn]].

[072-156]“I fancy there are some natures one could see growing or degenerating

[072-157]every day, if one watched them,” was his thought. “I suppose some of us

[072-158]go on faster than others: and I am sure she is a creature who keeps

[072-159]strong traces of anything that has once impressed her. That little

[072-160]affair of the necklace, and the idea that somebody thought her gambling

[072-161]wrong, had evidently bitten into her. But such impressibility leads

[072-162]both ways: it may [[ambition|drive]] one to desperation as soon as to anything

[072-163]better. And whatever fascinations Grandcourt may have for capricious

[072-164]tastes—good heavens! who can believe that he would call out the tender

[072-165]affections in daily companionship? One might be tempted to horsewhip

[072-166]him for the sake of getting some show of passion into his face and

[072-167]speech. I’m afraid she married him out of ambition—to escape poverty.

[072-168]But why did she run out of his way at first? The poverty came after,

[072-169]though. Poor thing! she may have been urged into it. How can one feel

[072-170]anything else than pity for a young creature like that—full of unused

[072-171]life—ignorantly rash—hanging all her blind expectations on that

[072-172]remnant of a human being.”

[072-173]Doubtless the phrases which Deronda’s meditation applied to the

[072-174]bridegroom were the less complimentary for the excuses and pity in

[072-175]which it clad the bride. His notion of Grandcourt as a “remnant” was

[072-176]founded on no particular knowledge, but simply on the impression which

[072-177]ordinary polite intercourse had given him that Grandcourt had worn out

[072-178]all his natural healthy interest in things.

[072-179]In general, one may be sure that whenever a marriage of any mark takes

[072-180]place, male acquaintances are likely to pity the bride, female

[072-181]acquaintances the bridegroom: each, it is thought, might have done

[072-182]better; and especially where the bride is charming, young gentlemen on

[072-183]the scene are apt to conclude that she can have no real attachment to a

[072-184]fellow so uninteresting to themselves as her husband, but has married

[072-185]him on other grounds. Who, under such circumstances, pities the

[072-186]husband? Even his female friends are apt to think his position

[072-187]retributive: he should have chosen some one else. But perhaps Deronda

[072-188]may be excused that he did not prepare any pity for Grandcourt, who had

[072-189]never struck acquaintances as likely to come out of his experiences

[072-190]with more suffering than he inflicted; whereas, for Gwendolen, young,

[072-191]headlong, eager for pleasure, fed with the flattery which makes a

[072-192]lovely girl believe in her divine right to rule—how quickly might life

[072-193]turn from expectancy to a bitter sense of the irremediable! After what

[072-194]he had seen of her he must have had rather dull feelings not to have

[072-195]looked forward with some interest to her entrance into the room. Still,

[072-196]since the honeymoon was already three weeks in the distance, and

[072-197]Gwendolen had been enthroned, not only at [[ryelands|Ryelands]], but at Diplow, she

[072-198]was likely to have composed her countenance with suitable manifestation

[072-199]or [[secrecy|concealment]], not being one who would indulge the curious by a

[072-200]helpless exposure of her feelings.
