---
id: ch074
label: "Section 74"
type: chapter
description: "“Not particularly,” said Gwendolen, with indifference. One would have"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[074-001]“Not particularly,” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], with indifference. One would have

[074-002]thought that the young lady had all her life had more family seats than

[074-003]she cared to go to.

[074-004]“Ah! it will not do after [[ryelands|Ryelands]],” said [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], well pleased.

[074-005]“[[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]], I know, took it for the sake of the hunting. But he found

[074-006]something so much better there,” added the baronet, lowering his voice,

[074-007]“that he might well prefer it to any other place in the world.”

[074-008]“It has one attraction for me,” said Gwendolen, passing over this

[074-009]compliment with a chill smile, “that it is within reach of [[Offendene]].”

[074-010]“I understand that,” said Sir Hugo, and then let the subject drop.

[074-011]What amiable baronet can escape the effect of a strong desire for a

[074-012]particular possession? Sir Hugo would have been glad that Grandcourt,

[074-013]with or without reason, should prefer any other place to [[diplow-hall|Diplow]]; but

[074-014]inasmuch as in the pure process of wishing we can always make the

[074-015]conditions of our gratification benevolent, he did wish that

[074-016]Grandcourt’s convenient disgust for Diplow should not be associated

[074-017]with his marriage with this very charming bride. Gwendolen was much to

[074-018]the baronet’s taste, but, as he observed afterward to Lady Mallinger,

[074-019]he should never have taken her for a young girl who had married beyond

[074-020]her expectations.

[074-021][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] had not heard much of this conversation, having given his

[074-022]attention elsewhere, but the glimpses he had of Gwendolen’s manner

[074-023]deepened the impression that it had something newly artificial.

[074-024]Later, in the drawing-room, Deronda, at somebody’s request, sat down to

[074-025]the piano and sang. Afterward, Mrs. Raymond took his place; and on

[074-026]rising he observed that Gwendolen had left her seat, and had come to

[074-027]this end of the room, as if to listen more fully, but was now standing

[074-028]with her back to every one, apparently contemplating a fine cowled head

[074-029]carved in ivory which hung over a small table. He longed to go to her

[074-030]and speak. Why should he not obey such an impulse, as he would have

[074-031]done toward any other lady in the room? Yet he hesitated some moments,

[074-032]observing the graceful lines of her back, but not moving.

[074-033]If you have any reason for not indulging a wish to speak to a fair

[074-034]woman, it is a bad plan to look long at her back: the wish to see what

[074-035]it screens becomes the stronger. There may be a very sweet smile on the

[074-036]other side. Deronda ended by going to the end of the small table, at

[074-037]right angles to Gwendolen’s position, but before he could speak she had

[074-038]turned on him no smile, but such an appealing look of sadness, so

[074-039]utterly different from the chill effort of her recognition at table,

[074-040]that his speech was checked. For what was an appreciative space of time

[074-041]to both, though the observation of others could not have measured it,

[074-042]they looked at each other—she seeming to take the deep rest of

[074-043]confession, he with an answering depth of sympathy that neutralized all

[074-044]other feelings.

[074-045]“Will you not join in the [[art|music]]?” he said, by way of meeting the

[074-046]necessity for speech.

[074-047]That her look of confession had been involuntary was shown by that just

[074-048]perceptible shake and change of countenance with which she roused

[074-049]herself to reply calmly, “I join in it by listening. I am fond of

[074-050]music.”

[074-051]“Are you not a musician?”

[074-052]“I have given a great deal of time to music. But I have not talent

[074-053]enough to make it worth while. I shall never sing again.”

[074-054]“But if you are fond of music, it will always be worth while in

[074-055]private, for your own delight. I make it a virtue to be content with my

[074-056]middlingness,” said Deronda, smiling; “it is always pardonable, so that

[074-057]one does not ask others to take it for superiority.”

[074-058]“I cannot imitate you,” said Gwendolen, recovering her tone of

[074-059]artificial vivacity. “To be middling with me is another phrase for

[074-060]being dull. And the worst fault I have to find with the world is that

[074-061]it is dull. Do you know, I am going to justify gambling in spite of

[074-062]you. It is a refuge from dullness.”

[074-063]“I don’t admit the justification,” said Deronda. “I think what we call

[074-064]the dullness of things is a disease in ourselves. Else how can any one

[074-065]find an intense interest in life? And many do.”

[074-066]“Ah, I see! The fault I find in the world is my own fault,” said

[074-067]Gwendolen, smiling at him. Then after a moment, looking up at the ivory

[074-068]again, she said, “Do _you_ never find fault with the world or with

[074-069]others?”

[074-070]“Oh, yes. When I am in a grumbling mood.”

[074-071]“And hate people? Confess you hate them when they stand in your

[074-072]way—when their gain is your loss? That is your own phrase, you know.”

[074-073]“We are often standing in each other’s way when we can’t help it. I

[074-074]think it is stupid to hate people on that ground.”

[074-075]“But if they injure you and could have helped it?” said Gwendolen with

[074-076]a hard intensity unaccountable in incidental talk like this.

[074-077]Deronda wondered at her choice of subjects. A painful impression

[074-078]arrested his answer a moment, but at last he said, with a graver,

[074-079]deeper intonation, “Why, then, after all, I prefer my place to theirs.”

[074-080]“There I believe you are right,” said Gwendolen, with a sudden little

[074-081]laugh, and turned to join the group at the piano.

[074-082]Deronda looked around for Grandcourt, wondering whether he followed his

[074-083]bride’s movements with any attention; but it was rather undiscerning to

[074-084]him to suppose that he could find out the fact. Grandcourt had a

[074-085]delusive mood of observing whatever had an interest for him, which

[074-086]could be surpassed by no sleepy-eyed animal on the watch for prey. At

[074-087]that moment he was plunged in the depth of an easy chair, being talked

[074-088]to by Mr. Vandernoodt, who apparently thought the acquaintance of such

[074-089]a bridegroom worth cultivating; and an incautious person might have

[074-090]supposed it safe to telegraph secrets in front of him, the common

[074-091]prejudice being that your quick observer is one whose eyes have quick

[074-092]movements. Not at all. If you want a respectable witness who will see

[074-093]nothing inconvenient, choose a vivacious gentleman, very much on the

[074-094]alert, with two eyes wide open, a glass in one of them, and an entire

[074-095]impartiality as to the purpose of looking. If Grandcourt cared to keep

[074-096]any one under his power he saw them out of the corners of his long

[074-097]narrow eyes, and if they went behind him he had a constructive process

[074-098]by which he knew what they were doing there. He knew perfectly well

[074-099]where his wife was, and how she was behaving. Was he going to be a

[074-100]jealous husband? Deronda imagined that to be likely; but his

[074-101]imagination was as much astray about Grandcourt as it would have been

[074-102]about an unexplored continent where all the species were peculiar. He

[074-103]did not conceive that he himself was a likely subject of jealousy, or

[074-104]that he should give any pretext for it; but the suspicion that a wife

[074-105]is not happy naturally leads one to speculate on the husband’s private

[074-106]deportment; and Deronda found himself after one o’clock in the morning

[074-107]in the rather ludicrous position of sitting up severely holding a

[074-108]Hebrew grammar in his hands (for somehow, in deference to [[Mordecai]], he

[074-109]had begun to study Hebrew), with the consciousness that he had been in

[074-110]that attitude nearly an hour, and had thought of nothing but Gwendolen

[074-111]and her husband. To be an unusual young man means for the most part to

[074-112]get a difficult mastery over the usual, which is often like the sprite

[074-113]of ill-luck you pack up your goods to escape from, and see grinning at

[074-114]you from the top of your luggage van. The peculiarities of Deronda’s

[074-115]nature had been acutely touched by the brief incident and words which

[074-116]made the history of his intercourse with Gwendolen; and this evening’s

[074-117]slight addition had given them an importunate recurrence. It was not

[074-118][[pride|vanity]]—it was ready sympathy that had made him alive to a certain

[074-119]appealingness in her behavior toward him; and the difficulty with which

[074-120]she had seemed to raise her eyes to bow to him, in the first instance,

[074-121]was to be interpreted now by that unmistakable look of involuntary

[074-122]confidence which she had afterward turned on him under the

[074-123]consciousness of his approach.

[074-124]“What is the use of it all?” thought Deronda, as he threw down his

[074-125]grammar, and began to undress. “I can’t do anything to help her—nobody

[074-126]can, if she has found out her mistake already. And it seems to me that

[074-127]she has a dreary lack of the ideas that might help her. Strange and

[074-128]piteous to think what a center of wretchedness a delicate piece of

[074-129]human flesh like that might be, wrapped round with fine

[074-130]raiment, her ears pierced for gems, her head held loftily, her mouth

[074-131]all smiling pretense, the poor soul within her sitting in sick distaste

[074-132]of all things! But what do I know of her? There may be a demon in her

[074-133]to match the worst husband, for what I can tell. She was clearly an

[074-134]ill-educated, worldly girl: perhaps she is a coquette.”

[074-135]This last reflection, not much believed in, was a self-administered

[074-136]dose of caution, prompted partly by Sir Hugo’s much-contemned joking on

[074-137]the subject of flirtation. Deronda resolved not to volunteer any

[074-138]_tête-à-tête_ with Gwendolen during the days of her stay at the Abbey;

[074-139]and he was capable of keeping a resolve in spite of much inclination to

[074-140]the contrary.

[074-141]But a man cannot resolve about a woman’s actions, least of all about

[074-142]those of a woman like Gwendolen, in whose nature there was a

[074-143]combination of proud reserve with rashness, of perilously poised terror

[074-144]with defiance, which might alternately flatter and disappoint control.

[074-145]Few words could less represent her than “coquette.” She had native love

[074-146]of homage, and belief in her own power; but no cold artifice for the

[074-147]sake of enslaving. And the poor thing’s belief in her power, with her

[074-148]other dreams before marriage, had often to be thrust aside now like the

[074-149]toys of a sick child, which it looks at with dull eyes, and has no

[074-150]heart to play with, however it may try.

[074-151]The next day at lunch Sir Hugo said to her, “The thaw has gone on like

[074-152]magic, and it’s so pleasant out of doors just now—shall we go and see

[074-153]the stables and the other odd bits about the place?”

[074-154]“Yes, pray,” said Gwendolen. “You will like to see the stables,

[074-155]Henleigh?” she added, looking at her husband.

[074-156]“Uncommonly,” said Grandcourt, with an indifference which seemed to

[074-157]give irony to the word, as he returned her look. It was the first time

[074-158]Deronda had seen them speak to each other since their arrival, and he

[074-159]thought their exchange of looks as cold or official as if it had been a

[074-160]ceremony to keep up a charter. Still, the English fondness for reserve

[074-161]will account for much negation; and Grandcourt’s manners with an extra

[074-162]veil of reserve over them might be expected to present the extreme type

[074-163]of the national taste.

[074-164]“Who else is inclined to make the tour of the house and premises?” said

[074-165]Sir Hugo. “The ladies must muffle themselves; there is only just about

[074-166]time to do it well before sunset. You will go, Dan, won’t you?”

[074-167]“Oh, yes,” said Deronda, carelessly, knowing that Sir Hugo would think

[074-168]any excuse disobliging.

[074-169]“All meet in the library, then, when they are ready—say in half an

[074-170]hour,” said the baronet. Gwendolen made herself ready with wonderful

[074-171]quickness, and in ten minutes came down into the library in her sables,

[074-172]plume, and little thick boots. As soon as she entered the room she was

[074-173]aware that some one else was there: it was precisely what she had hoped

[074-174]for. Deronda was standing with his back toward her at the far end of

[074-175]the room, and was looking over a newspaper. How could little thick

[074-176]boots make any noise on an Axminster carpet? And to cough would have

[074-177]seemed an intended signaling which her pride could not condescend to;

[074-178]also, she felt bashful about walking up to him and letting him know

[074-179]that she was there, though it was her hunger to speak to him which had

[074-180]set her imagination on constructing this chance of finding him, and had

[074-181]made her hurry down, as birds hover near the water which they dare not

[074-182]drink. Always uneasily dubious about his opinion of her, she felt a

[074-183]peculiar anxiety to-day, lest he might think of her with contempt, as

[074-184]one triumphantly conscious of being Grandcourt’s wife, the future lady

[074-185]of this domain. It was her habitual effort now to magnify the

[074-186]satisfactions of her pride, on which she nourished her strength; but

[074-187]somehow Deronda’s being there disturbed them all. There was not the

[074-188]faintest touch of coquetry in the attitude of her mind toward him: he

[074-189]was unique to her among men, because he had impressed her as being not

[074-190]her admirer but her superior: in some mysterious way he was becoming a

[074-191]part of her conscience, as one woman whose nature is an object of

[074-192]reverential belief may become a new conscience to a man.
