---
id: ch085
label: "Section 85"
type: chapter
description: "“He is peculiar, but I have not had experience enough of him to know"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[085-001]“He is peculiar, but I have not had experience enough of him to know

[085-002]whether he would be what you would call severe.”

[085-003]“I know he is kind-hearted—kind in action, if not in speech.”

[085-004]“I have been used to be frowned at and not praised,” said [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]].

[085-005]“By the by, [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] frowns a good deal,” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], “but there is

[085-006]often a sort of smile in his eyes all the while. Unhappily he wears

[085-007]spectacles, so you must catch him in the right light to see the smile.”

[085-008]“I shall not be frightened,” said Mirah. “If he were like a roaring

[085-009]lion, he only wants me to sing. I shall do what I can.”

[085-010]“Then I feel sure you will not mind being invited to sing in Lady

[085-011]Mallinger’s drawing-room,” said Deronda. “She intends to ask you next

[085-012]month, and will invite many ladies to hear you, who are likely to want

[085-013]lessons from you for their daughters.”

[085-014]“How fast we are mounting!” said Mrs. Meyrick, with delight. “You never

[085-015]thought of getting grand so quickly, Mirah.”

[085-016]“I am a little frightened at being called Miss [[Lapidoth]],” said Mirah,

[085-017]coloring with a new uneasiness. “Might I be called Cohen?”

[085-018]“I understand you,” said Deronda, promptly. “But I assure you, you must

[085-019]not be called Cohen. The name is inadmissible for a singer. This is one

[085-020]of the trifles in which we must conform to vulgar prejudice. We could

[085-021]choose some other name, however—such as singers ordinarily choose—an

[085-022]Italian or Spanish name, which would suit your _physique_.” To Deronda

[085-023]just now the name Cohen was equivalent to the ugliest of yellow badges.

[085-024]Mirah reflected a little, anxiously, then said, “No. If Cohen will not

[085-025]do, I will keep the name I have been called by. I will not hide myself.

[085-026]I have friends to protect me. And now—if my father were very miserable

[085-027]and wanted help—no,” she said, looking at Mrs. Meyrick, “I should

[085-028]think, then, that he was perhaps crying as I used to see him, and had

[085-029]nobody to pity him, and I had hidden myself from him. He had none

[085-030]belonging to him but me. Others that made friends with him always left

[085-031]him.”

[085-032]“Keep to what you feel right, my dear child,” said Mrs. Meyrick. “_I_

[085-033]would not persuade you to the contrary.” For her own part she had no

[085-034]patience or pity for that father, and would have left him to his crying.

[085-035]Deronda was saying to himself, “I am rather base to be angry with [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]].

[085-036]How can he help being in love with her? But it is too absurdly

[085-037]presumptuous for him even to frame the idea of appropriating her, and a

[085-038]sort of blasphemy to suppose that she could possibly give herself to

[085-039]him.”

[085-040]What would it be for Daniel Deronda to entertain such thoughts? He was

[085-041]not one who could quite naively introduce himself where he had just

[085-042]excluded his friend, yet it was undeniable that what had just happened

[085-043]made a new stage in his feeling toward Mirah. But apart from other

[085-044]grounds for self-repression, reasons both definite and vague made him

[085-045]shut away that question as he might have shut up a half-opened writing

[085-046]that would have carried his imagination too far, and given too much

[085-047]shape to presentiments. Might there not come a disclosure which would

[085-048]hold the missing determination of his course? What did he really know

[085-049]about his origin? Strangely in these latter months when it seemed right

[085-050]that he should exert his will in the choice of a destination, the

[085-051]passion of his nature had got more and more locked by this uncertainty.

[085-052]The disclosure might bring its pain, indeed the likelihood seemed to

[085-053]him to be all on that side; but if it helped him to make his life a

[085-054]sequence which would take the form of duty—if it saved him from having

[085-055]to make an arbitrary selection where he felt no preponderance of

[085-056]desire? Still more, he wanted to escape standing as a critic outside

[085-057]the activities of men, stiffened into the ridiculous attitude of

[085-058]self-assigned superiority. His chief tether was his early inwrought

[085-059]affection for [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], making him gratefully deferential to wishes

[085-060]with which he had little agreement: but gratitude had been sometimes

[085-061]disturbed by doubts which were near reducing it to a fear of being

[085-062]ungrateful. Many of us complain that half our [[inheritance|birthright]] is sharp duty:

[085-063]Deronda was more inclined to complain that he was robbed of this half;

[085-064]yet he accused himself, as he would have accused another, of being

[085-065]weakly self-conscious and wanting in resolve. He was the reverse of

[085-066]that type painted for us in Faulconbridge and Edmund of Gloster, whose

[085-067]coarse ambition for personal success is inflamed by a defiance of

[085-068]accidental disadvantages. To Daniel the words Father and Mother had the

[085-069]altar-fire in them; and the thought of all closest relations of our

[085-070]nature held still something of the mystic power which had made his neck

[085-071]and ears burn in boyhood. The average man may regard this sensibility

[085-072]on the question of birth as preposterous and hardly credible; but with

[085-073]the utmost respect for his knowledge as the rock from which all other

[085-074]knowledge is hewn, it must be admitted that many well-proved facts are

[085-075]dark to the average man, even concerning the action of his own heart

[085-076]and the structure of his own retina. A century ago he and all his

[085-077]forefathers had not had the slightest notion of that electric discharge

[085-078]by means of which they had all wagged their tongues mistakenly; any

[085-079]more than they were awake to the secluded anguish of exceptional

[085-080]sensitiveness into which many a carelessly-begotten child of man is

[085-081]born.

[085-082]Perhaps the ferment was all the stronger in Deronda’s mind because he

[085-083]had never had a confidant to whom he could open himself on these

[085-084]delicate subjects. He had always been leaned on instead of being

[085-085]invited to lean. Sometimes he had longed for the sort of friend to whom

[085-086]he might possibly unfold his experience: a young man like himself who

[085-087]sustained a private grief and was not too confident about his own

[085-088]career; speculative enough to understand every moral difficulty, yet

[085-089]socially susceptible, as he himself was, and having every outward sign

[085-090]of equality either in bodily or spiritual wrestling—for he had found

[085-091]it impossible to reciprocate confidences with one who looked up to him.

[085-092]But he had no expectation of meeting the friend he imagined. Deronda’s

[085-093]was not one of those quiveringly-poised natures that lend themselves to

[085-094]second-sight.

[085-095]CHAPTER XXXVIII.

[085-096]There be who hold that the deeper tragedy were a Prometheus Bound

[085-097]not _after_ but _before_ he had well got the celestial fire into

[085-098]the νάρθηξ whereby it might be conveyed to mortals: thrust by the

[085-099]Kratos and Bia of instituted methods into a solitude of despised

[085-100]ideas, fastened in throbbing helplessness by the fatal pressure of

[085-101]poverty and disease—a solitude where many pass by, but none

[085-102]regard.

[085-103]“Second-sight” is a flag over disputed ground. But it is matter of

[085-104]knowledge that there are persons whose yearnings, conceptions—nay,

[085-105]traveled conclusions—continually take the form of images which have a

[085-106]foreshadowing power; the deed they would do starts up before them in

[085-107]complete shape, making a coercive type; the event they hunger for or

[085-108]dread rises into vision with a seed-like growth, feeding itself fast on

[085-109]unnumbered impressions. They are not always the less capable of the

[085-110]argumentative process, nor less sane than the commonplace calculators

[085-111]of the market: sometimes it may be that their natures have manifold

[085-112]openings, like the hundred-gated Thebes, where there may naturally be a

[085-113]greater and more miscellaneous inrush than through a narrow

[085-114]beadle-watched portal. No doubt there are abject specimens of the

[085-115]visionary, as there is a minim mammal which you might imprison in the

[085-116]finger of your glove. That small relative of the elephant has no harm

[085-117]in him; but what great mental or social type is free from specimens

[085-118]whose insignificance is both ugly and noxious? One is afraid to think

[085-119]of all that the genus “patriot” embraces; or of the elbowing there

[085-120]might be at the day of judgment for those who ranked as authors, and

[085-121]brought volumes either in their hands or on trucks.

[085-122]This apology for inevitable kinship is meant to usher in some facts

[085-123]about [[Mordecai]], whose figure had bitten itself into Deronda’s mind as a

[085-124]new question which he felt an interest in getting answered. But the

[085-125]interest was no more than a vaguely-expectant suspense: the

[085-126]consumptive-looking Jew, apparently a fervid student of some kind,

[085-127]getting his crust by a quiet handicraft, like Spinoza, fitted into none

[085-128]of Deronda’s anticipations.

[085-129]It was otherwise with the effect of their meeting on Mordecai. For many

[085-130]winters, while he had been conscious of an ebbing physical life, and as

[085-131]widening spiritual loneliness, all his passionate desire had

[085-132]concentrated itself in the yearning for some young ear into which he

[085-133]could pour his mind as a testament, some soul kindred enough to accept

[085-134]the spiritual product of his own brief, painful life, as a mission to

[085-135]be executed. It was remarkable that the hopefulness which is often the

[085-136]beneficent illusion of consumptive patients, was in Mordecai wholly

[085-137]diverted from the prospect of bodily recovery and carried into the

[085-138]current of this yearning for transmission. The yearning, which had

[085-139]panted upward from out of over-whelming discouragements, had grown into

[085-140]a hope—the hope into a confident belief, which, instead of being

[085-141]checked by the clear conception he had of his hastening decline, took

[085-142]rather the intensity of expectant [[religion|faith]] in a prophecy which has only

[085-143]brief space to get fulfilled in.

[085-144]Some years had now gone since he had first begun to measure men with a

[085-145]keen glance, searching for a possibility which became more and more a

[085-146]distinct conception. Such distinctness as it had at first was reached

[085-147]chiefly by a method of contrast: he wanted to find a man who differed

[085-148]from himself. Tracing reasons in that self for the rebuffs he had met

[085-149]with and the hindrances that beset him, he imagined a man who would

[085-150]have all the elements necessary for sympathy with him, but in an

[085-151]embodiment unlike his own: he must be a Jew, intellectually cultured,

[085-152]morally fervid—in all this a nature ready to be plenished from

[085-153]Mordecai’s; but his face and frame must be beautiful and strong, he

[085-154]must have been used to all the refinements of social life, his voice

[085-155]must flow with a full and easy current, his circumstances be free from

[085-156]sordid need: he must glorify the possibilities of the Jew, not sit and

[085-157]wonder as Mordecai did, bearing the stamp of his people amid the sign

[085-158]of poverty and waning breath. Sensitive to physical characteristics, he

[085-159]had, both abroad and in England, looked at pictures as well as men, and

[085-160]in a vacant hour he had sometimes lingered in the National Gallery in

[085-161]search of paintings which might feed his hopefulness with grave and

[085-162]noble types of the human form, such as might well belong to men of his

[085-163]own race. But he returned in disappointment. The instances are

[085-164]scattered but thinly over the galleries of Europe, in which the fortune

[085-165]or selection even of the chief masters has given to art a face at once

[085-166]young, grand, and beautiful, where, if there is any melancholy, it is

[085-167]no feeble passivity, but enters into the foreshadowed capability of

[085-168]heroism.

[085-169]Some observant persons may perhaps remember his emaciated figure, and

[085-170]dark eyes deep in their sockets, as he stood in front of a picture that

[085-171]had touched him either to new or habitual meditation: he commonly wore

[085-172]a cloth cap with black fur round it, which no painter would have asked

[085-173]him to take off. But spectators would be likely to think of him as an

[085-174]odd-looking Jew who probably got money out of pictures; and Mordecai,

[085-175]when he looked at them, was perfectly aware of the impression he made.

[085-176]Experience had rendered him morbidly alive to the effect of a man’s

[085-177]poverty and other physical disadvantages in cheapening his ideas,

[085-178]unless they are those of a Peter the Hermit who has a tocsin for the

[085-179]rabble. But he was too sane and generous to attribute his spiritual

[085-180][[exile|banishment]] solely to the excusable prejudices of others; certain

[085-181]incapacities of his own had made the sentence of exclusion; and hence

[085-182]it was that his imagination had constructed another man who would be

[085-183]something more ample than the second soul bestowed, according to the

[085-184]notion of the Cabalists, to help out the insufficient first—who would

[085-185]be a blooming human life, ready to incorporate all that was worthiest

[085-186]in an existence whose visible, palpable part was burning itself fast

[085-187]away. His inward need for the conception of this expanded, prolonged

[085-188]self was reflected as an outward necessity. The thoughts of his heart

[085-189](that ancient phrase best shadows the truth) seemed to him too

[085-190]precious, too closely interwoven with the growth of things not to have

[085-191]a further destiny. And as the more beautiful, the stronger, the more

[085-192]executive self took shape in his mind, he loved it beforehand with an

[085-193]affection half identifying, half contemplative and grateful.
