---
id: ch086
label: "Section 86"
type: chapter
description: "Mordecai’s mind wrought so constantly in images, that his coherent"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[086-001][[Mordecai]]’s mind wrought so constantly in images, that his coherent

[086-002]trains of thought often resembled the significant dreams attributed to

[086-003]sleepers by waking persons in their most inventive moments: nay, they

[086-004]often resembled genuine dreams in their way of breaking off the passage

[086-005]from the known to the unknown. Thus, for a long while, he habitually

[086-006]thought of the Being answering to his need as one distantly approaching

[086-007]or turning his back toward him, darkly painted against a golden sky.

[086-008]The reason of the golden sky lay in one of Mordecai’s habits. He was

[086-009]keenly alive to some poetic aspects of [[london|London]]; and a favorite resort of

[086-010]his, when strength and leisure allowed, was to some of the bridges,

[086-011]especially about sunrise or sunset. Even when he was bending over

[086-012]watch-wheels and trinkets, or seated in a small upper room looking out

[086-013]on dingy bricks and dingy cracked windows, his imagination

[086-014]spontaneously planted him on some spot where he had a far-stretching

[086-015]scene; his thoughts went on in wide spaces; and whenever he could, he

[086-016]tried to have in reality the influences of a large sky. Leaning on the

[086-017]parapet of Blackfriar’s Bridge, and gazing meditatively, the breadth

[086-018]and calm of the river, with its long vista half hazy, half luminous,

[086-019]the grand dim masses of tall forms of buildings which were the signs of

[086-020]world-commerce, the oncoming of boats and barges from the still

[086-021]distance into sound and color, entered into his mood and blent

[086-022]themselves indistinguishably with his thinking, as a fine symphony to

[086-023]which we can hardly be said to listen, makes a medium that bears up our

[086-024]spiritual wings. Thus it happened that the figure representative of

[086-025]Mordecai’s longing was mentally seen darkened by the excess of light in

[086-026]the aerial background. But in the inevitable progress of his

[086-027]imagination toward fuller detail, he ceased to see the figure with its

[086-028]back toward him. It began to advance, and a face became discernible;

[086-029]the words youth, beauty, refinement, Jewish birth, noble gravity,

[086-030]turned into hardly individual but typical form and color: gathered from

[086-031]his memory of faces seen among the Jews of Holland and Bohemia, and

[086-032]from the paintings which revived that memory. Reverently let it be said

[086-033]of this mature spiritual need that it was akin to the boy’s and girl’s

[086-034]picturing of the future beloved; but the stirrings of such young desire

[086-035]are feeble compared with the passionate current of an ideal life

[086-036]straining to embody itself, made intense by resistance to imminent

[086-037]dissolution. The visionary form became a companion and auditor; keeping

[086-038]a place not only in the waking imagination, but in those dreams of

[086-039]lighter slumber of which it is truest to say, “I sleep, but my heart

[086-040]waketh”—when the disturbing trivial story of yesterday is charged with

[086-041]the impassioned purpose of years.

[086-042]Of late the urgency of irremediable time, measured by the gradual

[086-043]choking of life, had turned Mordecai’s trust into an agitated watch for

[086-044]the fulfillment that must be at hand. Was the bell on the verge of

[086-045]tolling, the sentence about to be executed? The deliverer’s footstep

[086-046]must be near—the deliverer who was to rescue Mordecai’s spiritual

[086-047]travail from oblivion, and give it an abiding-place in the best

[086-048][[inheritance|heritage]] of his people. An insane exaggeration of his own value, even

[086-049]if his ideas had been as true and precious as those of Columbus or

[086-050]Newton, many would have counted this yearning, taking it as the

[086-051]sublimer part for a man to say, “If not I, then another,” and to hold

[086-052]cheap the meaning of his own life. But the fuller nature desires to be

[086-053]an agent, to create, and not merely to look on: strong love hungers to

[086-054]bless, and not merely to behold blessing. And while there is warmth

[086-055]enough in the sun to feed an energetic life, there will still be men to

[086-056]feel, “I am lord of this moment’s change, and will charge it with my

[086-057]soul.”

[086-058]But with that mingling of inconsequence which belongs to us all, and

[086-059]not unhappily, since it saves us from many effects of mistake,

[086-060]Mordecai’s confidence in the friend to come did not suffice to make him

[086-061]passive, and he tried expedients, pathetically humble, such as happened

[086-062]to be within his reach, for communicating something of himself. It was

[086-063]now two years since he had taken up his abode under Ezra Cohen’s roof,

[086-064]where he was regarded with much good-will as a compound of workman,

[086-065]dominie, vessel of charity, inspired idiot, man of piety, and (if he

[086-066]were inquired into) dangerous heretic. During that time little Jacob

[086-067]had advanced into knickerbockers, and into that quickness of

[086-068]apprehension which has been already made manifest in relation to

[086-069]hardware and exchange. He had also advanced in attachment to Mordecai,

[086-070]regarding him as an inferior, but liking him none the worse, and taking

[086-071]his helpful cleverness as he might have taken the services of an

[086-072]enslaved Djinn. As for Mordecai, he had given Jacob his first lessons,

[086-073]and his habitual tenderness easily turned into the teacher’s

[086-074]fatherhood. Though he was fully conscious of the spiritual distance

[086-075]between the parents and himself, and would never have attempted any

[086-076]communication to them from his peculiar world, the boy moved him with

[086-077]that idealizing affection which merges the qualities of the individual

[086-078]child in the glory of childhood and the possibilities of a long future.

[086-079]And this feeling had drawn him on, at first without premeditation, and

[086-080]afterward with conscious purpose, to a sort of outpouring in the ear of

[086-081]the boy which might have seemed wild enough to any excellent man of

[086-082]business who overheard it. But none overheard when Jacob went up to

[086-083]Mordecai’s room one day, for example, in which there was little work to

[086-084]be done, or at an hour when the work was ended, and after a brief

[086-085]lesson in English reading or in numeration, was induced to remain

[086-086]standing at his teacher’s knees, or chose to jump astride them, often

[086-087]to the patient fatigue of the wasted limbs. The inducement was perhaps

[086-088]the mending of a toy, or some little mechanical device in which

[086-089]Mordecai’s well-practiced finger-tips had an exceptional skill; and

[086-090]with the boy thus tethered, he would begin to repeat a Hebrew poem of

[086-091]his own, into which years before he had poured his first youthful

[086-092]ardors for that conception of a blended past and future which was the

[086-093]mistress of his soul, telling Jacob to say the words after him.

[086-094]“The boy will get them engraved within him,” thought Mordecai; “it is a

[086-095]way of printing.”

[086-096]None readier than Jacob at this fascinating game of imitating

[086-097]unintelligible words; and if no opposing diversion occurred he would

[086-098]sometimes carry on his share in it as long as the teacher’s breath

[086-099]would last out. For Mordecai threw into each repetition the fervor

[086-100]befitting a sacred occasion. In such instances, Jacob would show no

[086-101]other distraction than reaching out and surveying the contents of his

[086-102]pockets; or drawing down the skin of his cheeks to make his eyes look

[086-103]awful, and rolling his head to complete the effect; or alternately

[086-104]handling his own nose and Mordecai’s as if to test the relation of

[086-105]their masses. Under all this the fervid reciter would not pause,

[086-106]satisfied if the young organs of speech would submit themselves. But

[086-107]most commonly a sudden impulse sent Jacob leaping away into some antic

[086-108]or active amusement, when, instead of following the recitation he would

[086-109]return upon the foregoing words most ready to his tongue, and mouth or

[086-110]gabble, with a see-saw suited to the action of his limbs, a verse on

[086-111]which Mordecai had spent some of his too scanty heart’s blood. Yet he

[086-112]waited with such patience as a prophet needs, and began his strange

[086-113]printing again undiscouraged on the morrow, saying inwardly,

[086-114]“My words may rule him some day. Their meaning may flash out on him. It

[086-115]is so with a nation—after many days.”

[086-116]Meanwhile Jacob’s sense of power was increased and his time enlivened

[086-117]by a store of magical articulation with which he made the baby crow, or

[086-118]drove the large cat into a dark corner, or promised himself to frighten

[086-119]any incidental Christian of his own years. One week he had

[086-120]unfortunately seen a street mountebank, and this carried off his

[086-121]muscular imitativeness in sad divergence from New Hebrew poetry, after

[086-122]the model of Jehuda ha-Levi. Mordecai had arrived at a fresh passage in

[086-123]his poem; for as soon as Jacob had got well used to one portion, he was

[086-124]led on to another, and a fresh combination of sounds generally answered

[086-125]better in keeping him fast for a few minutes. The consumptive voice,

[086-126]generally a strong high baritone, with its variously mingling

[086-127]hoarseness, like a haze amidst illuminations, and its occasional

[086-128]incipient gasp had more than the usual excitement, while it gave forth

[086-129]Hebrew verses with a meaning something like this:

[086-130]“Away from me the garment of forgetfulness.

[086-131]Withering the heart;

[086-132]The oil and wine from presses of the Goyim,

[086-133]Poisoned with scorn.

[086-134]Solitude is on the sides of Mount Nebo,

[086-135]In its heart a tomb:

[086-136]There the buried ark and golden cherubim

[086-137]Make hidden light:

[086-138]There the solemn gaze unchanged,

[086-139]The wings are spread unbroken:

[086-140]Shut beneath in silent awful speech

[086-141]The Law lies graven.

[086-142]Solitude and darkness are my covering,

[086-143]And my heart a tomb;

[086-144]Smite and shatter it, O Gabriel!

[086-145]Shatter it as the clay of the founder

[086-146]Around the golden image.”

[086-147]In the absorbing enthusiasm with which Mordecai had intoned rather than

[086-148]spoken this last invocation, he was unconscious that Jacob had ceased

[086-149]to follow him and had started away from his knees; but pausing he saw,

[086-150]as by a sudden flash, that the lad had thrown himself on his hands with

[086-151]his feet in the air, mountebank fashion, and was picking up with his

[086-152]lips a bright farthing which was a favorite among his pocket treasures.

[086-153]This might have been reckoned among the tricks Mordecai was used to,

[086-154]but at this moment it jarred him horribly, as if it had been a Satanic

[086-155]grin upon his prayer.

[086-156]“Child! child!” he called out with a strange cry that startled Jacob to

[086-157]his feet, and then he sank backward with a shudder, closing his eyes.

[086-158]“What?” said Jacob, quickly. Then, not getting an immediate answer, he

[086-159]pressed Mordecai’s knees with a shaking movement, in order to rouse

[086-160]him. Mordecai opened his eyes with a fierce expression in them, leaned

[086-161]forward, grasped the little shoulders, and said in a quick, hoarse

[086-162]whisper,

[086-163]“A curse is on your generation, child. They will open the mountain and

[086-164]drag forth the golden wings and coin them into money, and the solemn

[086-165]faces they will break up into earrings for wanton women! And they

[086-166]shall get themselves a new name, but the angel of ignominy, with the

[086-167]fiery brand, shall know them, and their heart shall be the tomb of dead

[086-168]desires that turn their life to rottenness.”

[086-169]The aspect and action of Mordecai were so new and mysterious to

[086-170]Jacob—they carried such a burden of obscure threat—it was as if the

[086-171]patient, indulgent companion had turned into something unknown and

[086-172]terrific: the sunken dark eyes and hoarse accents close to him, the

[086-173]thin grappling fingers, shook Jacob’s little frame into awe, and while

[086-174]Mordecai was speaking he stood trembling with a sense that the house

[086-175]was tumbling in and they were not going to have dinner any more. But

[086-176]when the terrible speech had ended and the pinch was relaxed, the shock

[086-177]resolved itself into tears; Jacob lifted up his small patriarchal

[086-178]countenance and wept aloud. This sign of childish grief at once

[086-179]recalled Mordecai to his usual gentle self: he was not able to speak

[086-180]again at present, but with a maternal action he drew the curly head

[086-181]toward him and pressed it tenderly against his breast. On this Jacob,

[086-182]feeling the danger well-nigh over, howled at ease, beginning to imitate

[086-183]his own [[art|performance]] and improve upon it—a sort of transition from

[086-184]impulse into art often observable. Indeed, the next day he undertook to

[086-185]terrify Adelaide Rebekah in like manner, and succeeded very well.
