---
id: ch089
label: "Section 89"
type: chapter
description: "“Shouldn’t you like to make a study of Klesmer’s head, Hans?” said"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[089-001]“Shouldn’t you like to make a study of [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]]’s head, [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]]?” said

[089-002]Kate. “I suppose you have often seen him?”

[089-003]“Seen him!” exclaimed Hans, immediately throwing back his head and

[089-004]mane, seating himself at the piano and looking round him as if he were

[089-005]surveying an amphitheatre, while he held his fingers down

[089-006]perpendicularly toward the keys. But then in another instant he wheeled

[089-007]round on the stool, looked at [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] and said, half timidly—“Perhaps

[089-008]you don’t like this mimicry; you must always stop my nonsense when you

[089-009]don’t like it.”

[089-010]Mirah had been smiling at the swiftly-made image, and she smiled still,

[089-011]but with a touch of something else than amusement, as she said—“Thank

[089-012]you. But you have never done anything I did not like. I hardly think he

[089-013]could, belonging to you,” she added, looking at Mrs. Meyrick.

[089-014]In this way Hans got food for his hope. How could the rose help it when

[089-015]several bees in succession took its sweet odor as a sign of personal

[089-016]attachment?

[089-017]CHAPTER XL.

[089-018]“Within the soul a faculty abides,

[089-019]That with interpositions, which would hide

[089-020]And darken, so can deal, that they become

[089-021]Contingencies of pomp; and serve to exalt

[089-022]Her native brightness, as the ample moon,

[089-023]In the deep stillness of a summer even,

[089-024]Rising behind a thick and lofty grove,

[089-025]Burns, like an unconsuming fire of light,

[089-026]In the green trees; and, kindling on all sides

[089-027]Their leafy umbrage, turns the dusky veil

[089-028]Into a substance glorious as her own,

[089-029]Yea, with her own incorporated, by power

[089-030]Capacious and serene.”

[089-031]—WORDSWORTH: _Excursion_, B. IV.

[089-032][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] came out of the narrow house at Chelsea in a frame of mind that

[089-033]made him long for some good bodily exercise to carry off what he was

[089-034]himself inclined to call the fumes of his temper. He was going toward

[089-035]the city, and the sight of the Chelsea Stairs with the waiting boats at

[089-036]once determined him to avoid the irritating inaction of being driven in

[089-037]a cab, by calling a wherry and taking an oar.

[089-038]His errand was to go to Ram’s book-shop, where he had yesterday arrived

[089-039]too late for [[Mordecai]]’s midday watch, and had been told that he

[089-040]invariably came there again between five and six. Some further

[089-041]acquaintance with this remarkable inmate of the Cohens was particularly

[089-042]desired by Deronda as a preliminary to redeeming his ring: he wished

[089-043]that their conversation should not again end speedily with that drop of

[089-044]Mordecai’s interest which was like the removal of a drawbridge, and

[089-045]threatened to shut out any easy communication in future. As he got

[089-046]warmed with the use of the oar, fixing his mind on the errand before

[089-047]him and the ends he wanted to achieve on Mirah’s account, he

[089-048]experienced, as was wont with him, a quick change of mental light,

[089-049]shifting his point of view to that of the person whom he had been

[089-050]thinking of hitherto chiefly as serviceable to his own purposes, and

[089-051]was inclined to taunt himself with being not much better than an

[089-052]enlisting sergeant, who never troubles himself with the drama that

[089-053]brings him the needful recruits.

[089-054]“I suppose if I got from this man the information I am most anxious

[089-055]about,” thought Deronda, “I should be contented enough if he felt no

[089-056]disposition to tell me more of himself, or why he seemed to have some

[089-057]expectation from me which was disappointed. The sort of curiosity he

[089-058]stirs would die out; and yet it might be that he had neared and parted

[089-059]as one can imagine two ships doing, each freighted with an exile who

[089-060]would have recognized the other if the two could have looked out face

[089-061]to face. Not that there is any likelihood of a peculiar tie between me

[089-062]and this poor fellow, whose voyage, I fancy, must soon be over. But I

[089-063]wonder whether there is much of that momentous mutual missing between

[089-064]people who interchange blank looks, or even long for one another’s

[089-065]absence in a crowded place. However, one makes one’s self chances of

[089-066]missing by going on the recruiting sergeant’s plan.”

[089-067]When the wherry was approaching Blackfriars Bridge, where Deronda meant

[089-068]to land, it was half-past four, and the gray day was dying gloriously,

[089-069]its western clouds all broken into narrowing purple strata before a

[089-070]wide-spreading saffron clearness, which in the sky had a monumental

[089-071]calm, but on the river, with its changing objects, was reflected as a

[089-072]luminous movement, the alternate flash of ripples or currents, the

[089-073]sudden glow of the brown sail, the passage of laden barges from

[089-074]blackness into color, making an active response to that brooding glory.

[089-075]Feeling well heated by this time, Deronda gave up the oar and drew over

[089-076]him again his Inverness cape. As he lifted up his head while fastening

[089-077]the topmost button his eyes caught a well-remembered face looking

[089-078]toward him over the parapet of the bridge—brought out by the western

[089-079]light into startling distinctness and brilliancy—an illuminated type

[089-080]of bodily emaciation and spiritual eagerness. It was the face of

[089-081]Mordecai, who also, in his watch toward the west, had caught sight of

[089-082]the advancing boat, and had kept it fast within his gaze, at first

[089-083]simply because it was advancing, then with a recovery of impressions

[089-084]that made him quiver as with a presentiment, till at last the nearing

[089-085]figure lifted up its face toward him—the face of his visions—and then

[089-086]immediately, with white uplifted hand, beckoned again and again.

[089-087]For Deronda, anxious that Mordecai should recognize and await him, had

[089-088]lost no time before signaling, and the answer came straightway.

[089-089]Mordecai lifted his cap and waved it—feeling in that moment that his

[089-090]inward prophecy was fulfilled. Obstacles, incongruities, all melted

[089-091]into the sense of completion with which his soul was flooded by this

[089-092]outward satisfaction of his longing. His exultation was not widely

[089-093]different from that of the experimenter, bending over the first

[089-094]stirrings of change that correspond to what in the fervor of

[089-095]concentrated prevision his thought has foreshadowed. The prefigured

[089-096]friend had come from the golden background, and had signaled to him:

[089-097]this actually was: the rest was to be.

[089-098]In three minutes Deronda had landed, had paid his boatman, and was

[089-099]joining Mordecai, whose instinct it was to stand perfectly still and

[089-100]wait for him.

[089-101]“I was very glad to see you standing here,” said Deronda, “for I was

[089-102]intending to go on to the book-shop and look for you again. I was there

[089-103]yesterday—perhaps they mentioned it to you?”

[089-104]“Yes,” said Mordecai; “that was the reason I came to the bridge.”

[089-105]This answer, made with simple gravity, was startlingly mysterious to

[089-106]Deronda. Were the peculiarities of this man really associated with any

[089-107]sort of mental [[exile|alienation]], according to Cohen’s hint?

[089-108]“You knew nothing of my being at Chelsea?” he said, after a moment.

[089-109]“No; but I expected you to come down the river. I have been waiting for

[089-110]you these five years.” Mordecai’s deep-sunk eyes were fixed on those of

[089-111]the friend who had at last arrived with a look of affectionate

[089-112]dependence, at once pathetic and solemn. Deronda’s sensitiveness was

[089-113]not the less responsive because he could not but believe that this

[089-114]strangely-disclosed relation was founded on an illusion.

[089-115]“It will be a satisfaction to me if I can be of any real use to you,”

[089-116]he answered, very earnestly. “Shall we get into a cab and [[ambition|drive]]

[089-117]to—wherever you wish to go? You have probably had walking enough with

[089-118]your short breath.”

[089-119]“Let us go to the book-shop. It will soon be time for me to be there.

[089-120]But now look up the river,” said Mordecai, turning again toward it and

[089-121]speaking in undertones of what may be called an excited calm—so

[089-122]absorbed by a sense of fulfillment that he was conscious of no barrier

[089-123]to a complete understanding between him and Deronda. “See the sky, how

[089-124]it is slowly fading. I have always loved this bridge: I stood on it

[089-125]when I was a little boy. It is a meeting-place for the spiritual

[089-126]messengers. It is true—what the Masters said—that each order of

[089-127]things has its angel: that means the full message of each from what is

[089-128]afar. Here I have listened to the messages of earth and sky; when I was

[089-129]stronger I used to stay and watch for the stars in the deep heavens.

[089-130]But this time just about sunset was always what I loved best. It has

[089-131]sunk into me and dwelt with me—fading, slowly fading: it was my own

[089-132]decline: it paused—it waited, till at last it brought me my new

[089-133]life—my new self—who will live when this breath is all breathed out.”

[089-134]Deronda did not speak. He felt himself strangely wrought upon. The

[089-135]first-prompted suspicion that Mordecai might be liable to

[089-136]hallucinations of thought—might have become a monomaniac on some

[089-137]subject which had given too severe a strain to his diseased

[089-138]organism—gave way to a more submissive expectancy. His nature was too

[089-139]large, too ready to conceive regions beyond his own experience, to rest

[089-140]at once in the easy explanation, “madness,” whenever a consciousness

[089-141]showed some fullness and conviction where his own was blank. It

[089-142]accorded with his habitual disposition that he should meet rather than

[089-143]resist any claim on him in the shape of another’s need; and this claim

[089-144]brought with it a sense of solemnity which seemed a radiation from

[089-145]Mordecai, as utterly nullifying his outward poverty and lifting him

[089-146]into authority as if he had been that preternatural guide seen in the

[089-147]universal legend, who suddenly drops his mean disguise and stands a

[089-148]manifest Power. That impression was the more sanctioned by a sort of

[089-149]resolved quietude which the persuasion of fulfillment had produced in

[089-150]Mordecai’s manner. After they had stood a moment in silence he said,

[089-151]“Let us go now,” and when they were riding he added, “We will get down

[089-152]at the end of the street and walk to the shop. You can look at the

[089-153]books, and Mr. Ram will be going away directly and leave us alone.”

[089-154]It seemed that this enthusiast was just as cautious, just as much alive

[089-155]to judgments in other minds as if he had been that antipode of all

[089-156]enthusiasm called “a man of the world.”

[089-157]While they were rattling along in the cab, Mirah was still present with

[089-158]Deronda in the midst of this strange experience, but he foresaw that

[089-159]the course of conversation would be determined by Mordecai, not by

[089-160]himself: he was no longer confident what questions he should be able to

[089-161]ask; and with a reaction on his own mood, he inwardly said, “I suppose

[089-162]I am in a state of complete superstition, just as if I were awaiting

[089-163]the destiny that could interpret the oracle. But some strong relation

[089-164]there must be between me and this man, since he feels it strongly.

[089-165]Great heaven! what relation has proved itself more potent in the world

[089-166]than [[religion|faith]] even when mistaken—than expectation even when perpetually

[089-167]disappointed? Is my side of the relation to be disappointing or

[089-168]fulfilling?—well, if it is ever possible for me to fulfill I will not

[089-169]disappoint.”

[089-170]In ten minutes the two men, with as intense a consciousness as if they

[089-171]had been two undeclared lovers, felt themselves alone in the small

[089-172]gas-lit book-shop and turned face to face, each baring his head from an

[089-173]instinctive feeling that they wished to see each other fully. Mordecai

[089-174]came forward to lean his back against the little counter, while Deronda

[089-175]stood against the opposite wall hardly more than four feet off. I wish

[089-176]I could perpetuate those two faces, as Titian’s “Tribute Money” has

[089-177]perpetuated two types presenting another sort of contrast. Imagine—we

[089-178]all of us can—the pathetic stamp of consumption with its brilliancy of

[089-179]glance to which the sharply-defined structure of features reminding one

[089-180]of a forsaken temple, give already a far-off look as of one getting

[089-181]unwillingly out of reach; and imagine it on a Jewish face naturally

[089-182]accentuated for the expression of an eager mind—the face of a man

[089-183]little above thirty, but with that age upon it which belongs to time

[089-184]lengthened by suffering, the hair and beard, still black, throwing out

[089-185]the yellow pallor of the skin, the difficult breathing giving more

[089-186]decided marking to the mobile nostril, the wasted yellow hands

[089-187]conspicuous on the folded arms: then give to the yearning consumptive

[089-188]glance something of the slowly dying mother’s look, when her one loved

[089-189]son visits her bedside, and the flickering power of gladness leaps out

[089-190]as she says, “My boy!”—for the sense of spiritual perpetuation in

[089-191]another resembles that maternal transference of self.
