---
id: ch091
label: "Section 91"
type: chapter
description: "“Do you forget what I told you when we first saw each other? Do you"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[091-001]“Do you forget what I told you when we first saw each other? Do you

[091-002]remember that I said I was not of your race?”

[091-003]“It can’t be true,” [[Mordecai]] whispered immediately, with no sign of

[091-004]shock. The sympathetic hand still upon him had fortified the feeling

[091-005]which was stronger than those words of denial. There was a perceptible

[091-006]pause, [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] feeling it impossible to answer, conscious indeed that

[091-007]the assertion “It can’t be true”—had the pressure of argument for him.

[091-008]Mordecai, too entirely possessed by the supreme importance of the

[091-009]relation between himself and Deronda to have any other care in his

[091-010]speech, followed up that assertion by a second, which came to his lips

[091-011]as a mere sequence of his long-cherished conviction—“You are not sure

[091-012]of your own origin.”

[091-013]“How do you know that?” said Daniel, with an habitual shrinking which

[091-014]made him remove his hands from Mordecai’s, who also relaxed his hold,

[091-015]and fell back into his former leaning position.

[091-016]“I know it—I know it; what is my life else?” said Mordecai, with a low

[091-017]cry of impatience. “Tell me everything: tell me why you deny.”

[091-018]He could have no conception what that demand was to the hearer—how

[091-019]probingly it touched the hidden sensibility, the vividly conscious

[091-020]reticence of years; how the uncertainty he was insisting on as part of

[091-021]his own hope had always for Daniel been a threatening possibility of

[091-022]painful revelation about his mother. But the moment had influences

[091-023]which were not only new but solemn to Deronda; any evasion here might

[091-024]turn out to be a hateful refusal of some task that belonged to him,

[091-025]some act of due fellowship; in any case it would be a cruel rebuff to a

[091-026]being who was appealing to him as a forlorn hope under the shadow of a

[091-027]coming doom. After a few moments, he said, with a great effort over

[091-028]himself—determined to tell all the truth briefly,

[091-029]“I have never known my mother. I have no knowledge about her. I have

[091-030]never called any man father. But I am convinced that my father is an

[091-031]Englishman.”

[091-032]Deronda’s deep tones had a tremor in them as he uttered this

[091-033]confession; and all the while there was an under-current of amazement in

[091-034]him at the strange circumstances under which he uttered it. It seemed

[091-035]as if Mordecai were hardly overrating his own power to determine the

[091-036]action of the friend whom he had mysteriously chosen.

[091-037]“It will be seen—it will be declared,” said Mordecai, triumphantly.

[091-038]“The world grows, and its frame is knit together by the growing soul;

[091-039]dim, dim at first, then clearer and more clear, the consciousness

[091-040]discerns remote stirrings. As thoughts move within us darkly, and shake

[091-041]us before they are fully discerned—so events—so beings: they are knit

[091-042]with us in the growth of the world. You have risen within me like a

[091-043]thought not fully spelled; my soul is shaken before the words are all

[091-044]there. The rest will come—it will come.”

[091-045]“We must not lose sight of the fact that the outward event has not

[091-046]always been a fulfillment of the firmest [[religion|faith]],” said Deronda, in a

[091-047]tone that was made hesitating by the painfully conflicting desires, not

[091-048]to give any severe blow to Mordecai, and not to give his confidence a

[091-049]sanction which might have the severest of blows in reserve.

[091-050]Mordecai’s face, which had been illuminated to the utmost in that last

[091-051]declaration of his confidence, changed under Deronda’s words, not only

[091-052]into any show of collapsed trust: the force did not disappear from the

[091-053]expression, but passed from the triumphant into the firmly resistant.

[091-054]“You would remind me that I may be under an illusion—that the history

[091-055]of our people’s trust has been full of illusion. I face it all.” Here

[091-056]Mordecai paused a moment. Then bending his head a little forward, he

[091-057]said, in his hoarse whisper, “_So it might be with my trust, if you

[091-058]would make it an illusion. But you will not._”

[091-059]The very sharpness with which these words penetrated Deronda made him

[091-060]feel the more that here was a crisis in which he must be firm.

[091-061]“What my birth was does not lie in my will,” he answered. “My sense of

[091-062]claims on me cannot be independent of my knowledge there. And I cannot

[091-063]promise you that I will try to hasten a disclosure. Feelings which have

[091-064]struck root through half my life may still hinder me from doing what I

[091-065]have never been able to do. Everything must be waited for. I must know

[091-066]more of the truth about my own life, and I must know more of what it

[091-067]would become if it were made a part of yours.”

[091-068]Mordecai had folded his arms again while Deronda was speaking, and now

[091-069]answered with equal firmness, though with difficult breathing,

[091-070]“You _shall_ know. What are we met for, but that you should know. Your

[091-071]doubts lie as light as dust on my belief. I know the philosophies of

[091-072]this time and of other times; if I chose I could answer a summons

[091-073]before their tribunals. I could silence the beliefs which are the

[091-074]mother-tongue of my soul and speak with the rote-learned language of a

[091-075]system, that gives you the spelling of all things, sure of its alphabet

[091-076]covering them all. I could silence them: may not a man silence his awe

[091-077]or his love, and take to finding reasons, which others demand? But if

[091-078]his love lies deeper than any reasons to be found? Man finds his

[091-079]pathways: at first they were foot tracks, as those of the beast in the

[091-080]wilderness: now they are swift and invisible: his thought dives through

[091-081]the ocean, and his wishes thread the air: has he found all the pathways

[091-082]yet? What reaches him, stays with him, rules him: he must accept it,

[091-083]not knowing its pathway. Say, my expectation of you has grown but as

[091-084]false hopes grow. That doubt is in your mind? Well, my expectation was

[091-085]there, and you are come. Men have died of thirst. But I was thirsty,

[091-086]and the water is on my lips! What are doubts to me? In the hour when

[091-087]you come to me and say, ‘I reject your soul: I know that I am not a

[091-088]Jew: we have no lot in common’—I shall not doubt. I shall be

[091-089]certain—certain that I have been deluded. That hour will never come!”

[091-090]Deronda felt a new chord sounding in his speech: it was rather

[091-091]imperious than appealing—had more of conscious power than of the

[091-092]yearning need which had acted as a beseeching grasp on him before. And

[091-093]usually, though he was the reverse of pugnacious, such a change of

[091-094]attitude toward him would have weakened his inclination to admit a

[091-095]claim. But here there was something that balanced his resistance and

[091-096]kept it aloof. This strong man whose gaze was sustainedly calm and his

[091-097]finger-nails pink with health, who was exercised in all questioning,

[091-098]and accused of excessive mental [[freedom|independence]], still felt a subduing

[091-099]influence over him in the tenacious certitude of the fragile creature

[091-100]before him, whose pallid yellow nostril was tense with effort as his

[091-101]breath labored under the burthen of eager speech. The influence seemed

[091-102]to strengthen the bond of sympathetic [[duty|obligation]]. In Deronda at this

[091-103]moment the desire to escape what might turn into a trying embarrassment

[091-104]was no more likely to determine action than the solicitations of

[091-105]indolence are likely to determine it in one with whom industry is a

[091-106]daily law. He answered simply,

[091-107]“It is my wish to meet and satisfy your wishes wherever that is

[091-108]possible to me. It is certain to me at least that I desire not to

[091-109]undervalue your toil and your suffering. Let me know your thoughts. But

[091-110]where can we meet?”

[091-111]“I have thought of that,” said Mordecai. “It is not hard for you to

[091-112]come into this neighborhood later in the evening? You did so once.”

[091-113]“I can manage it very well occasionally,” said Deronda. “You live under

[091-114]the same roof with the Cohens, I think?”

[091-115]Before Mordecai could answer, Mr. Ram re-entered to take his place

[091-116]behind the counter. He was an elderly son of Abraham, whose childhood

[091-117]had fallen on the evil times at the beginning of this century, and who

[091-118]remained amid this smart and instructed generation as a preserved

[091-119]specimen, soaked through and through with the effect of the poverty and

[091-120]contempt which were the common [[inheritance|heritage]] of most English Jews seventy

[091-121]years ago. He had none of the oily cheerfulness observable in Mr.

[091-122]Cohen’s aspect: his very features—broad and chubby—showed that

[091-123]tendency to look mongrel without due cause, which, in a miscellaneous

[091-124][[london|London]] neighborhood, may perhaps be compared with the marvels of

[091-125]imitation in insects, and may have been nature’s imperfect effort on

[091-126]behalf of the pure Caucasian to shield him from the shame and spitting

[091-127]to which purer features would have been exposed in the times of zeal.

[091-128]Mr. Ram dealt ably in books, in the same way that he would have dealt

[091-129]in tins of meat and other commodities—without knowledge or

[091-130]responsibility as to the proportion of rottenness or nourishment they

[091-131]might contain. But he believed in Mordecai’s learning as something

[091-132]marvellous, and was not sorry that his conversation should be sought by

[091-133]a bookish gentleman, whose visits had twice ended in a purchase. He

[091-134]greeted Deronda with a crabbed good-will, and, putting on large silver

[091-135]spectacles, appeared at once to abstract himself in the daily accounts.

[091-136]But Deronda and Mordecai were soon in the street together, and without

[091-137]any explicit agreement as to their direction, were walking toward Ezra

[091-138]Cohen’s.

[091-139]“We can’t meet there: my room is too narrow,” said Mordecai, taking up

[091-140]the thread of talk where they had dropped it. “But there is a tavern

[091-141]not far from here where I sometimes go to a club. It is the _Hand and

[091-142]Banner_, in the street at the next turning, five doors down. We can

[091-143]have the parlor there any evening.”

[091-144]“We can try that for once,” said Deronda. “But you will perhaps let me

[091-145]provide you with some lodging, which would give you more freedom and

[091-146]comfort than where you are.”

[091-147]“No; I need nothing. My outer life is as nought. I will take nothing

[091-148]less precious from you than your soul’s brotherhood. I will think of

[091-149]nothing else yet. But I am glad you are rich. You did not need money on

[091-150]that diamond ring. You had some other motive for bringing it.”

[091-151]Deronda was a little startled by this clear-sightedness; but before he

[091-152]could reply Mordecai added—“it is all one. Had you been in need of the

[091-153]money, the great end would have been that we should meet again. But you

[091-154]are rich?” he ended, in a tone of interrogation.

[091-155]“Not rich, except in the sense that every one is rich who has more than

[091-156]he needs for himself.”

[091-157]“I desired that your life should be free,” said Mordecai,

[091-158]dreamily—“mine has been a bondage.”

[091-159]It was clear that he had no interest in the fact of Deronda’s

[091-160]appearance at the Cohens’ beyond its relation to his own ideal purpose.

[091-161]Despairing of leading easily up to the question he wished to ask,

[091-162]Deronda determined to put it abruptly, and said,

[091-163]“Can you tell me why Mrs. Cohen, the mother, must not be spoken to

[091-164]about her daughter?”

[091-165]There was no immediate answer, and he thought that he should have to

[091-166]repeat the question. The fact was that Mordecai had heard the words,

[091-167]but had to drag his mind to a new subject away from his passionate

[091-168]preoccupation. After a few moments, he replied with a careful effort

[091-169]such as he would have used if he had been asked the road to Holborn:

[091-170]“I know the reason. But I will not speak even of trivial family affairs

[091-171]which I have heard in the privacy of the family. I dwell in their tent

[091-172]as in a sanctuary. Their history, so far as they injure none other, is

[091-173]their own possession.”
