---
id: ch090
label: "Section 90"
type: chapter
description: "Seeing such a portrait you would see Mordecai. And opposite to him was"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[090-001]Seeing such a portrait you would see [[Mordecai]]. And opposite to him was

[090-002]a face not more distinctively oriental than many a type seen among what

[090-003]we call the Latin races; rich in youthful health, and with a forcible

[090-004]masculine gravity in its repose, that gave the value of judgment to the

[090-005]reverence with which he met the gaze of this mysterious son of poverty

[090-006]who claimed him as a long-expected friend. The more exquisite quality

[090-007]of [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]’s nature—that keenly perceptive sympathetic emotiveness

[090-008]which ran along with his speculative tendency—was never more

[090-009]thoroughly tested. He felt nothing that could be called belief in the

[090-010]validity of Mordecai’s impressions concerning him or in the probability

[090-011]of any greatly effective issue: what he felt was a profound sensibility

[090-012]to a cry from the depths of another and accompanying that, the summons

[090-013]to be receptive instead of superciliously prejudging. Receptiveness is

[090-014]a rare and massive power, like fortitude; and this state of mind now

[090-015]gave Deronda’s face its utmost expression of calm benignant force—an

[090-016]expression which nourished Mordecai’s confidence and made an open way

[090-017]before him. He began to speak.

[090-018]“You cannot know what has guided me to you and brought us together at

[090-019]this moment. You are wondering.”

[090-020]“I am not impatient,” said Deronda. “I am ready to listen to whatever

[090-021]you may wish to disclose.”

[090-022]“You see some of the reasons why I needed you,” said Mordecai, speaking

[090-023]quietly, as if he wished to reserve his strength. “You see that I am

[090-024]dying. You see that I am as one shut up behind bars by the wayside, who

[090-025]if he spoke to any would be met only by head-shaking and pity. The day

[090-026]is closing—the light is fading—soon we should not have been able to

[090-027]discern each other. But you have come in time.”

[090-028]“I rejoice that I am come in time,” said Deronda, feelingly. He would

[090-029]not say, “I hope you are not mistaken in me,”—the very word

[090-030]“mistaken,” he thought, would be a cruelty at that moment.

[090-031]“But the hidden reasons why I need you began afar off,” said Mordecai;

[090-032]“began in my early years when I was studying in another land. Then

[090-033]ideas, beloved ideas, came to me, because I was a Jew. They were a

[090-034]trust to fulfill, because I was a Jew. They were an inspiration,

[090-035]because I was a Jew, and felt the heart of my race beating within me.

[090-036]They were my life; I was not fully born till then. I counted this

[090-037]heart, and this breath, and this right hand”—Mordecai had pathetically

[090-038]pressed his hand upon his breast, and then stretched its wasted fingers

[090-039]out before him—“I counted my sleep and my waking, and the work I fed

[090-040]my body with, and the sights that fed my eyes—I counted them but as

[090-041]fuel to the divine flame. But I had done as one who wanders and

[090-042]engraves his thought in rocky solitudes, and before I could change my

[090-043]course came care and labor and disease, and blocked the way before me,

[090-044]and bound me with the iron that eats itself into the soul. Then I said,

[090-045]‘How shall I save the life within me from being stifled with this

[090-046]stifled breath?’”

[090-047]Mordecai paused to rest that poor breath which had been taxed by the

[090-048]rising excitement of his speech. And also he wished to check that

[090-049]excitement. Deronda dared not speak: the very silence in the narrow

[090-050]space seemed alive with mingled awe and [[sympathy|compassion]] before this

[090-051]struggling fervor. And presently Mordecai went on:

[090-052]“But you may misunderstand me. I speak not as an ignorant dreamer—as

[090-053]one bred up in the inland valleys, thinking ancient thoughts anew, and

[090-054]not knowing them ancient, never having stood by the great waters where

[090-055]the world’s knowledge passes to and fro. English is my mother-tongue,

[090-056]England is the native land of this body, which is but as a breaking pot

[090-057]of earth around the fruit-bearing tree, whose seed might make the

[090-058]desert rejoice. But my true life was nourished in Holland at the feet

[090-059]of my mother’s brother, a Rabbi skilled in special learning: and when

[090-060]he died I went to Hamburg to study, and afterwards to Göttingen, that I

[090-061]might take a larger outlook on my people, and on the Gentile world, and

[090-062]drank knowledge at all sources. I was a youth; I felt free; I saw our

[090-063]chief seats in Germany; I was not then in utter poverty. And I had

[090-064]possessed myself of a handicraft. For I said, I care not if my lot be

[090-065]as that of Joshua ben Chananja: after the last destruction he earned

[090-066]his bread by making needles, but in his youth he had been a singer on

[090-067]the steps of the Temple, and had a memory of what was before the glory

[090-068]departed. I said, let my body dwell in poverty, and my hands be as the

[090-069]hands of the toiler: but let my soul be as a temple of remembrance

[090-070]where the treasures of knowledge enter and the inner sanctuary is hope.

[090-071]I knew what I chose. They said, ‘He feeds himself on visions,’ and I

[090-072]denied not; for visions are the creators and feeders of the world. I

[090-073]see, I measure the world as it is, which the vision will create anew.

[090-074]You are not listening to one who raves aloof from the lives of his

[090-075]fellows.”

[090-076]Mordecai paused, and Deronda, feeling that the pause was expectant,

[090-077]said, “Do me the justice to believe that I was not inclined to call

[090-078]your words raving. I listen that I may know, without prejudgment. I

[090-079]have had experience which gives me a keen interest in the story of a

[090-080]spiritual destiny embraced willingly, and embraced in youth.”

[090-081]“A spiritual destiny embraced willingly—in youth?” Mordecai repeated

[090-082]in a corrective tone. “It was the soul fully born within me, and it

[090-083]came in my boyhood. It brought its own world—a mediaeval world, where

[090-084]there are men who made the ancient language live again in new psalms of

[090-085]exile. They had absorbed the philosophy of the Gentile into the [[religion|faith]]

[090-086]of the Jew, and they still yearned toward a center for our race. One of

[090-087]their souls was born again within me, and awakened amid the memories of

[090-088]their world. It traveled into Spain and Provence; it debated with

[090-089]Aben-Ezra; it took ship with Jehuda ha-Levi; it heard the roar of the

[090-090]Crusaders and the shrieks of tortured Israel. And when its dumb tongue

[090-091]was loosed, it spoke the speech they had made alive with the new blood

[090-092]of their ardor, their sorrow, and their martyred trust: it sang with

[090-093]the cadence of their strain.”

[090-094]Mordecai paused again, and then said in a loud, hoarse whisper,

[090-095]“While it is imprisoned in me, it will never learn another.”

[090-096]“Have you written entirely in Hebrew, then?” said Deronda, remembering

[090-097]with some anxiety the former question as to his own knowledge of that

[090-098]tongue.

[090-099]“Yes—yes,” said Mordecai, in a tone of deep sadness: “in my youth I

[090-100]wandered toward that solitude, not feeling that it was a solitude. I

[090-101]had the ranks of the great dead around me; the martyrs gathered and

[090-102]listened. But soon I found that the living were deaf to me. At first I

[090-103]saw my life spread as a long future: I said part of my Jewish [[inheritance|heritage]]

[090-104]is an unbreaking patience; part is skill to seek divers methods and

[090-105]find a rooting-place where the planters despair. But there came new

[090-106]messengers from the Eternal. I had to bow under the yoke that presses

[090-107]on the great multitude born of woman: family troubles called me—I had

[090-108]to work, to care, not for myself alone. I was left solitary again; but

[090-109]already the angel of death had turned to me and beckoned, and I felt

[090-110]his skirts continually on my path. I loosed not my effort. I besought

[090-111]hearing and help. I spoke; I went to men of our people—to the rich in

[090-112]influence or knowledge, to the rich in other wealth. But I found none

[090-113]to listen with understanding. I was rebuked for error; I was offered a

[090-114]small sum in charity. No wonder. I looked poor; I carried a bundle of

[090-115]Hebrew manuscript with me; I said, our chief teachers are misleading

[090-116]the hope of our race. Scholar and merchant were both too busy to

[090-117]listen. Scorn stood as interpreter between me and them. One said, ‘The

[090-118]book of Mormon would never have answered in Hebrew; and if you mean to

[090-119]address our learned men, it is not likely you can teach them anything.’

[090-120]He touched a truth there.”

[090-121]The last words had a perceptible irony in their hoarsened tone.

[090-122]“But though you had accustomed yourself to write in Hebrew, few,

[090-123]surely, can use English better,” said Deronda, wanting to hint

[090-124]consolation in a new effort for which he could smooth the way.

[090-125]Mordecai shook his head slowly, and answered,

[090-126]“Too late—too late. I can write no more. My writing would be like this

[090-127]gasping breath. But the breath may wake the fount of pity—the writing

[090-128]not. If I could write now and used English, I should be as one who

[090-129]beats a board to summon those who have been used to no signal but a

[090-130]bell. My soul has an ear to hear the faults of its own speech. New

[090-131]writing of mine would be like this body”—Mordecai spread his

[090-132]arms—“within it there might be the Ruach-ha-kodesh—the breath of

[090-133]divine thought—but, men would smile at it and say, ‘A poor Jew!’ and

[090-134]the chief smilers would be of my own people.”

[090-135]Mordecai let his hands fall, and his head sink in melancholy: for the

[090-136]moment he had lost hold of his hope. Despondency, conjured up by his

[090-137]own words, had floated in and hovered above him with eclipsing wings.

[090-138]He had sunk into momentary darkness,

[090-139]“I feel with you—I feel strongly with you,” said Deronda, in a clear

[090-140]deep voice which was itself a cordial, apart from the words of

[090-141]sympathy. “But forgive me if I speak hastily—for what you have

[090-142]actually written there need be no utter burial. The means of

[090-143]publication are within reach. If you will rely on me, I can assure you

[090-144]of all that is necessary to that end.”

[090-145]“That is not enough,” said Mordecai, quickly, looking up again with the

[090-146]flash of recovered memory and confidence. “That is not all my trust in

[090-147]you. You must be not only a hand to me, but a soul—believing my

[090-148]belief—being moved by my reasons—hoping my hope—seeing the vision I

[090-149]point to—beholding a glory where I behold it!”—Mordecai had taken a

[090-150]step nearer as he spoke, and now laid his hand on Deronda’s arm with a

[090-151]tight grasp; his face little more than a foot off had something like a

[090-152]pale flame in it—an intensity of reliance that acted as a peremptory

[090-153]claim, while he went on—“You will be my life: it will be planted

[090-154]afresh; it will grow. You shall take the inheritance; it has been

[090-155]gathering for ages. The generations are crowding on my narrow life as a

[090-156]bridge: what has been and what is to be are meeting there; and the

[090-157]bridge is breaking. But I have found you. You have come in time. You

[090-158]will take the inheritance which the base son refuses because of the

[090-159]tombs which the plow and harrow may not pass over or the gold-seeker

[090-160]disturb: you will take the sacred inheritance of the Jew.”

[090-161]Deronda had become as pallid as Mordecai. Quick as an alarm of flood or

[090-162]fire, there spread within him not only a compassionate dread of

[090-163]discouraging this fellowman who urged a prayer as one in the last

[090-164]agony, but also the opposing dread of fatally feeding an illusion, and

[090-165]being hurried on to a self-committal which might turn into a falsity.

[090-166]The peculiar appeal to his tenderness overcame the repulsion that most

[090-167]of us experience under a grasp and speech which assumed to dominate.

[090-168]The difficulty to him was to inflict the accents of hesitation and

[090-169]doubt on this ardent suffering creature, who was crowding too much of

[090-170]his brief being into a moment of perhaps extravagant trust. With

[090-171]exquisite instinct, Deronda, before he opened his lips, placed his palm

[090-172]gently on Mordecai’s straining hand—an act just then equal to many

[090-173]speeches. And after that he said, without haste, as if conscious that

[090-174]he might be wrong,
