---
id: ch102
label: "Section 102"
type: chapter
description: "“If you think I could teach you, I shall be very glad. I am anxious to"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[102-001]“If you think I could teach you, I shall be very glad. I am anxious to

[102-002]teach, but I have only just begun. If I do it well, it must be by

[102-003]remembering how my master taught me.”

[102-004][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] was in reality too uncertain about herself to be prepared for

[102-005]this simple promptitude of [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s, and in her wish to change the

[102-006]subject, said, with some lapse from the good taste of her first

[102-007]address,

[102-008]“You have not been long in [[london|London]], I think?—but you were perhaps

[102-009]introduced to [[Daniel-Deronda|Mr. Deronda]] abroad?”

[102-010]“No,” said Mirah; “I never saw him before I came to England in the

[102-011]summer.”

[102-012]“But he has seen you often and heard you sing a great deal, has he

[102-013]not?” said Gwendolen, led on partly by the wish to hear anything about

[102-014]Deronda, and partly by the awkwardness which besets the readiest

[102-015]person, in carrying on a dialogue when empty of matter. “He spoke of

[102-016]you to me with the highest praise. He seemed to know you quite well.”

[102-017]“Oh, I was poor and needed help,” said Mirah, in a new tone of feeling,

[102-018]“and Mr. Deronda has given me the best friends in the world. That is

[102-019]the only way he came to know anything about me—because he was sorry

[102-020]for me. I had no friends when I came. I was in distress. I owe

[102-021]everything to him.”

[102-022]Poor Gwendolen, who had wanted to be a struggling artist herself, could

[102-023]nevertheless not escape the impression that a mode of inquiry which

[102-024]would have been rather rude toward herself was an amiable condescension

[102-025]to this Jewess who was ready to give her lessons. The only effect on

[102-026]Mirah, as always on any mention of Deronda, was to stir reverential

[102-027]gratitude and anxiety that she should be understood to have the deepest

[102-028][[duty|obligation]] to him.

[102-029]But both he and [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]], who were noticing the pair from a distance, would

[102-030]have felt rather indignant if they had known that the conversation had

[102-031]led up to Mirah’s representation of herself in this light of neediness.

[102-032]In the movement that prompted her, however, there was an exquisite

[102-033]delicacy, which perhaps she could not have stated explicitly—the

[102-034]feeling that she ought not to allow any one to assume in Deronda a

[102-035]relation of more equality or less generous interest toward her than

[102-036]actually existed. Her answer was delightful to Gwendolen: she thought

[102-037]of nothing but the ready [[sympathy|compassion]] which in another form she had

[102-038]trusted in and found herself; and on the signals that [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] was about

[102-039]to play she moved away in much content, entirely without presentiment

[102-040]that this Jewish _protégé_ would ever make a more important difference

[102-041]in her life than the possible improvement of her [[music|singing]]—if the

[102-042]leisure and spirits of a Mrs. [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] would allow of other lessons

[102-043]than such as the world was giving her at rather a high charge.

[102-044]With her wonted alternation from resolute care of appearances to some

[102-045]rash indulgence of an impulse, she chose, under the pretext of getting

[102-046]farther from the instrument, not to go again to her former seat, but

[102-047]placed herself on a settee where she could only have one neighbor. She

[102-048]was nearer to Deronda than before: was it surprising that he came up in

[102-049]time to shake hands before the [[art|music]] began—then, that after he had

[102-050]stood a little while by the elbow of the settee at the empty end, the

[102-051]torrent-like confluences of bass and treble seemed, like a convulsion

[102-052]of nature, to cast the conduct of petty mortals into insignificance,

[102-053]and to warrant his sitting down?

[102-054]But when at the end of Klesmer’s playing there came the outburst of

[102-055]talk under which Gwendolen had hoped to speak as she would to Deronda,

[102-056]she observed that [[Lush|Mr. Lush]] was within hearing, leaning against the wall

[102-057]close by them. She could not help her flush of anger, but she tried to

[102-058]have only an air of polite indifference in saying,

[102-059]“Miss [[Lapidoth]] is everything you described her to be.”

[102-060]“You have been very quick in discovering that,” said Deronda,

[102-061]ironically.

[102-062]“I have not found out all the excellencies you spoke of—I don’t mean

[102-063]that,” said Gwendolen; “but I think her singing is charming, and

[102-064]herself, too. Her face is lovely—not in the least common; and she is

[102-065]such a complete little person. I should think she will be a great

[102-066]success.”

[102-067]This speech was grating on Deronda, and he would not answer it, but

[102-068]looked gravely before him. She knew that he was displeased with her,

[102-069]and she was getting so impatient under the neighborhood of Mr. Lush,

[102-070]which prevented her from saying any word she wanted to say, that she

[102-071]meditated some desperate step to get rid of it, and remained silent,

[102-072]too. That constraint seemed to last a long while, neither Gwendolen nor

[102-073]Deronda looking at the other, till Lush slowly relieved the wall of his

[102-074]weight, and joined some one at a distance.

[102-075]Gwendolen immediately said, “You despise me for talking artificially.”

[102-076]“No,” said Deronda, looking at her coolly; “I think that is quite

[102-077]excusable sometimes. But I did not think what you were last saying was

[102-078]altogether artificial.”

[102-079]“There was something in it that displeased you,” said Gwendolen. “What

[102-080]was it?”

[102-081]“It is impossible to explain such things,” said Deronda. “One can never

[102-082]communicate niceties of feeling about words and manner.”

[102-083]“You think I am shut out from understanding them,” said Gwendolen, with

[102-084]a slight tremor in her voice, which she was trying to conquer. “Have I

[102-085]shown myself so very dense to everything you have said?” There was an

[102-086]indescribable look of suppressed tears in her eyes, which were turned

[102-087]on him.

[102-088]“Not at all,” said Deronda, with some softening of voice. “But

[102-089]experience differs for different people. We don’t all wince at the same

[102-090]things. I have had plenty of proof that you are not dense.” He smiled

[102-091]at her.

[102-092]“But one may feel things and are not able to do anything better for all

[102-093]that,” said Gwendolen, not smiling in return—the distance to which

[102-094]Deronda’s words seemed to throw her chilling her too much. “I begin to

[102-095]think we can only get better by having people about us who raise good

[102-096]feelings. You must not be surprised at anything in me. I think it is

[102-097]too late for me to alter. I don’t know how to set about being wise, as

[102-098]you told me to be.”

[102-099]“I seldom find I do any good by my preaching. I might as well have kept

[102-100]from meddling,” said Deronda, thinking rather sadly that his

[102-101]interference about that unfortunate necklace might end in nothing but

[102-102]an added pain to him in seeing her after all hardened to another sort

[102-103]of gambling than [[gambling|roulette]].

[102-104]“Don’t say that,” said Gwendolen, hurriedly, feeling that this might be

[102-105]her only chance of getting the words uttered, and dreading the increase

[102-106]of her own agitation. “If you despair of me, I shall despair. Your

[102-107]saying that I should not go on being selfish and ignorant has been some

[102-108]strength to me. If you say you wish you had not meddled—that means you

[102-109]despair of me and forsake me. And then you will decide for me that I

[102-110]shall not be good. It is you who will decide; because you might have

[102-111]made me different by keeping as near to me as you could, and believing

[102-112]in me.”

[102-113]She had not been looking at him as she spoke, but at the handle of the

[102-114]fan which she held closed. With the last words she rose and left him,

[102-115]returning to her former place, which had been left vacant; while every

[102-116]one was settling into quietude in expectation of Mirah’s voice, which

[102-117]presently, with that wonderful, searching quality of subdued song in

[102-118]which the melody seems simply an effect of the emotion, gave forth,

[102-119]_Per pietà non dirmi addio_.

[102-120]In Deronda’s ear the strain was for the moment a continuance of

[102-121]Gwendolen’s pleading—a painful urging of something vague and

[102-122]difficult, irreconcilable with pressing conditions, and yet cruel to

[102-123]resist. However strange the mixture in her of a resolute pride and a

[102-124]precocious air of knowing the world, with a precipitate, guileless

[102-125]indiscretion, he was quite sure now that the mixture existed. Sir

[102-126]Hugo’s hints had made him alive to dangers that his own disposition

[102-127]might have neglected; but that Gwendolen’s reliance on him was

[102-128]unvisited by any dream of his being a man who could misinterpret her

[102-129]was as manifest as morning, and made an appeal which wrestled with his

[102-130]sense of present dangers, and with his foreboding of a growing

[102-131]incompatible claim on him in her mind. There was a foreshadowing of

[102-132]some painful collision: on the one side the grasp of [[Mordecai]]’s dying

[102-133]hand on him, with all the ideals and prospects it aroused; on the other

[102-134]the fair creature in silk and gems, with her hidden wound and her

[102-135]self-dread, making a trustful effort to lean and find herself

[102-136]sustained. It was as if he had a vision of himself besought with

[102-137]outstretched arms and cries, while he was caught by the waves and

[102-138]compelled to mount the vessel bound for a far-off coast. That was the

[102-139]strain of excited feeling in him that went along with the notes of

[102-140]Mirah’s song; but when it ceased he moved from his seat with the

[102-141]reflection that he had been falling into an exaggeration of his own

[102-142]importance, and a ridiculous readiness to accept Gwendolen’s view of

[102-143]himself, as if he could really have any decisive power over her.

[102-144]“What an enviable fellow you are,” said Hans to him, “sitting on a sofa

[102-145]with that young duchess, and having an interesting quarrel with her!”

[102-146]“Quarrel with her?” repeated Deronda, rather uncomfortably.

[102-147]“Oh, about theology, of course; nothing personal. But she told you what

[102-148]you ought to think, and then left you with a grand air which was

[102-149]admirable. Is she an Antinomian—if so, tell her I am an Antinomian

[102-150]painter, and introduce me. I should like to paint her and her husband.

[102-151]He has the sort of handsome _physique_ that the Duke ought to have in

[102-152]_Lucrezia Borgia_—if it could go with a fine baritone, which it can’t.”

[102-153]Deronda devoutly hoped that Hans’s account of the impression his

[102-154]dialogue with Gwendolen had made on a distant beholder was no more than

[102-155]a bit of fantastic representation, such as was common with him.

[102-156]And Gwendolen was not without her after-thoughts that her husband’s

[102-157]eyes might have been on her, extracting something to reprove—some

[102-158]offence against her dignity as his wife; her consciousness telling her

[102-159]that she had not kept up the perfect air of equability in public which

[102-160]was her own ideal. But Grandcourt made no observation on her behavior.

[102-161]All he said as they were driving home was,

[102-162]“Lush will dine with us among the other people to-morrow. You will

[102-163]treat him civilly.”

[102-164]Gwendolen’s heart began to beat violently. The words that she wanted to

[102-165]utter, as one wants to return a blow, were. “You are breaking your

[102-166]promise to me—the first promise you made me.” But she dared not utter

[102-167]them. She was as frightened at a quarrel as if she had foreseen that it

[102-168]would end with throttling fingers on her neck. After a pause, she said

[102-169]in the tone rather of defeat than resentment,

[102-170]“I thought you did not intend him to frequent the house again.”

[102-171]“I want him just now. He is useful to me; and he must be treated

[102-172]civilly.”

[102-173]Silence. There may come a moment when even an excellent husband who has

[102-174]dropped smoking under more or less of a pledge during courtship, for

[102-175]the first time will introduce his cigar-smoke between himself and his

[102-176]wife, with the tacit understanding that she will have to put up with

[102-177]it. Mr. Lush was, so to speak, a very large cigar.

[102-178]If these are the sort of lovers’ vows at which Jove laughs, he must

[102-179]have a merry time of it.
