---
id: ch105
label: "Section 105"
type: chapter
description: "“Well,” said the grandmother, with a sigh of resignation, “I hope"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[105-001]“Well,” said the grandmother, with a sigh of resignation, “I hope

[105-002]there’ll be nothing in the way of your getting _kosher_ meat, [[Mordecai]].

[105-003]For you’ll have to trust to those you live with.”

[105-004]“That’s all right, that’s all right, you may be sure, mother,” said

[105-005]Cohen, as if anxious to cut off inquiry on matters in which he was

[105-006]uncertain of the guest’s position. “So, sir,” he added, turning with a

[105-007]look of amused enlightenment to [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], “it was better than learning

[105-008]you had to talk to Mordecai about! I wondered to myself at the time. I

[105-009]thought somehow there was a something.”

[105-010]“Mordecai will perhaps explain to you how it was that I was seeking

[105-011]him,” said Deronda, feeling that he had better go, and rising as he

[105-012]spoke.

[105-013]It was agreed that he should come again and the final move be made on

[105-014]the next day but one; but when he was going Mordecai begged to walk

[105-015]with him to the end of the street, and wrapped himself in coat and

[105-016]comforter. It was a March evening, and Deronda did not mean to let him

[105-017]go far, but he understood the wish to be outside the house with him in

[105-018]communicative silence, after the exciting speech that had been filling

[105-019]the last hour. No word was spoken until Deronda had proposed parting,

[105-020]when he said,

[105-021]“[[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] would wish to thank the Cohens for their goodness. You would

[105-022]wish her to do so—to come and see them, would you not?”

[105-023]Mordecai did not answer immediately, but at length said,

[105-024]“I cannot tell. I fear not. There is a family sorrow, and the sight of

[105-025]my sister might be to them as the fresh bleeding of wounds. There is a

[105-026]daughter and sister who will never be restored as Mirah is. But who

[105-027]knows the pathways? We are all of us denying or fulfilling prayers—and

[105-028]men in their careless deeds walk amidst invisible outstretched arms and

[105-029]pleadings made in vain. In my ears I have the prayers of generations

[105-030]past and to come. My life is as nothing to me but the beginning of

[105-031]fulfilment. And yet I am only another prayer—which you will fulfil.”

[105-032]Deronda pressed his hand, and they parted.

[105-033]CHAPTER XLVII.

[105-034]“And you must love him ere to you

[105-035]He will seem worthy of your love.”

[105-036]—WORDSWORTH.

[105-037]One might be tempted to envy Deronda providing new clothes for

[105-038]Mordecai, and pleasing himself as if he were sketching a picture in

[105-039]imagining the effect of the fine gray flannel shirts and a

[105-040]dressing-gown very much like a Franciscan’s brown frock, with

[105-041]Mordecai’s head and neck above them. Half his pleasure was the sense of

[105-042]seeing Mirah’s brother through her eyes, and securing her fervid joy

[105-043]from any perturbing impression. And yet, after he had made all things

[105-044]ready, he was visited with doubt whether he were not mistaking her, and

[105-045]putting the lower effect for the higher: was she not just as capable as

[105-046]he himself had been of feeling the impressive distinction in her

[105-047]brother all the more for that aspect of poverty which was among the

[105-048]memorials of his past? But there were the Meyricks to be propitiated

[105-049]toward this too Judaic brother; and Deronda detected himself piqued

[105-050]into getting out of sight everything that might feed the ready

[105-051]repugnance in minds unblessed with that precious “seeing,” that bathing

[105-052]of all objects in a solemnity as of sun-set glow, which is begotten of

[105-053]a loving reverential emotion.

[105-054]And his inclination would have been the more confirmed if he had heard

[105-055]the dialogue round Mrs. Meyrick’s fire late in the evening, after Mirah

[105-056]had gone to her room. [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]], settled now in his Chelsea rooms, had

[105-057]stayed late, and Mrs. Meyrick, poking the fire into a blaze, said,

[105-058]“Now, Kate, put out your candle, and all come round the fire cosily.

[105-059]Hans, dear, do leave off laughing at those poems for the ninety-ninth

[105-060]time, and come too. I have something wonderful to tell.”

[105-061]“As if I didn’t know that, ma. I have seen it in the corner of your eye

[105-062]ever so long, and in your pretense of errands,” said Kate, while the

[105-063]girls came up to put their feet on the fender, and Hans, pushing his

[105-064]chair near them, sat astride it, resting his fists and chin on the back.

[105-065]“Well, then, if you are so wise, perhaps you know that Mirah’s brother

[105-066]is found!” said Mrs. Meyrick, in her clearest accents.

[105-067]“Oh, confound it!” said Hans, in the same moment.

[105-068]“Hans, that is wicked,” said Mab. “Suppose we had lost you?”

[105-069]“I _cannot_ help being rather sorry,” said Kate. “And her

[105-070]mother?—where is she?”

[105-071]“Her mother is dead.”

[105-072]“I hope the brother is not a bad man,” said Amy.

[105-073]“Nor a fellow all smiles and jewelry—a Crystal Palace Assyrian with a

[105-074]hat on,” said Hans, in the worst humor.

[105-075]“Were there ever such unfeeling children?” said Mrs. Meyrick, a little

[105-076]strengthened by the need for opposition. “You don’t think the least bit

[105-077]of Mirah’s joy in the matter.”

[105-078]“You know, ma, Mirah hardly remembers her brother,” said Kate.

[105-079]“People who are lost for twelve years should never come back again,”

[105-080]said Hans. “They are always in the way.”

[105-081]“Hans!” said Mrs. Meyrick, reproachfully. “If you had lost me for

[105-082]_twenty_ years, I should have thought—”

[105-083]“I said twelve years,” Hans broke in. “Anywhere about twelve years is

[105-084]the time at which lost relations should keep out of the way.”

[105-085]“Well, but it’s nice finding people—there is something to tell,” said

[105-086]Mab, clasping her knees. “Did Prince Camaralzaman find him?”

[105-087]Then Mrs. Meyrick, in her neat, narrative way, told all she knew

[105-088]without interruption. “Mr. Deronda has the highest admiration for him,”

[105-089]she ended—“seems quite to look up to him. And he says Mirah is just

[105-090]the sister to understand this brother.”

[105-091]“Deronda is getting perfectly preposterous about those Jews,” said Hans

[105-092]with disgust, rising and setting his chair away with a bang. “He wants

[105-093]to do everything he can to encourage Mirah in her prejudices.”

[105-094]“Oh, for shame, Hans!—to speak in that way of Mr. Deronda,” said Mab.

[105-095]And Mrs. Meyrick’s face showed something like an under-current of

[105-096]expression not allowed to get to the surface.

[105-097]“And now we shall never be all together,” Hans went on, walking about

[105-098]with his hands thrust into the pockets of his brown velveteen coat,

[105-099]“but we must have this prophet Elijah to tea with us, and Mirah will

[105-100]think of nothing but sitting on the ruins of Jerusalem. She will be

[105-101]spoiled as an artist—mind that—she will get as narrow as a nun.

[105-102]Everything will be spoiled—our home and everything. I shall take to

[105-103]drinking.”

[105-104]“Oh, really, Hans,” said Kate, impatiently. “I do think men are the

[105-105]most contemptible animals in all creation. Every one of them must have

[105-106]everything to his mind, else he is unbearable.”

[105-107]“Oh, oh, oh, it’s very dreadful!” cried Mab. “I feel as if ancient

[105-108]Nineveh were come again.”

[105-109]“I should like to know what is the good of having gone to the

[105-110]university and knowing everything, if you are so childish, Hans,” said

[105-111]Amy. “You ought to put up with a man that Providence sends you to be

[105-112]kind to. _We_ shall have to put up with him.”

[105-113]“I hope you will all of you like the new Lamentations of Jeremiah—‘to

[105-114]be continued in our next’—that’s all,” said Hans, seizing his

[105-115]wide-awake. “It’s no use being one thing more than another if one has

[105-116]to endure the company of those men with a fixed idea, staring blankly

[105-117]at you, and requiring all your remarks to be small foot-notes to their

[105-118]text. If you’re to be under a petrifying wall, you’d better be an old

[105-119]boot. I don’t feel myself an old boot.” Then abruptly, “Good night,

[105-120]little mother,” bending to kiss her brow in a hasty, desperate manner,

[105-121]and condescendingly, on his way to the door, “Good-night, girls.”

[105-122]“Suppose Mirah knew how you are behaving,” said Kate. But her answer

[105-123]was a slam of the door. “I _should_ like to see Mirah when Mr. Deronda

[105-124]tells her,” she went on to her mother. “I know she will look so

[105-125]beautiful.”

[105-126]But Deronda, on second thoughts, had written a letter, which Mrs.

[105-127]Meyrick received the next morning, begging her to make the revelation

[105-128]instead of waiting for him, not giving the real reason—that he shrank

[105-129]from going again through a narrative in which he seemed to be making

[105-130]himself important and giving himself a character of general

[105-131]beneficence—but saying that he wished to remain with Mordecai while

[105-132]Mrs. Meyrick would bring Mirah on what was to be understood as a visit,

[105-133]so that there might be a little interval before that change of abode

[105-134]which he expected that Mirah herself would propose.

[105-135]Deronda secretly felt some wondering anxiety how far Mordecai, after

[105-136]years of solitary preoccupation with ideas likely to have become the

[105-137]more exclusive from continual diminution of bodily strength, would

[105-138]allow him to feel a tender interest in his sister over and above the

[105-139]rendering of pious duties. His feeling for the Cohens, and especially

[105-140]for little Jacob, showed a persistent activity of affection; but these

[105-141]objects had entered into his daily life for years; and Deronda felt it

[105-142]noticeable that Mordecai asked no new questions about Mirah,

[105-143]maintaining, indeed, an unusual silence on all subjects, and appearing

[105-144]simply to submit to the changes that were coming over his personal

[105-145]life. He donned the new clothes obediently, but said afterward to

[105-146]Deronda, with a faint smile, “I must keep my old garments by me for a

[105-147]remembrance.” And when they were seated, awaiting Mirah, he uttered no

[105-148]word, keeping his eyelids closed, but yet showing restless feeling in

[105-149]his face and hands. In fact, Mordecai was undergoing that peculiar

[105-150]nervous perturbation only known to those whose minds, long and

[105-151]habitually moving with strong impetus in one current, are suddenly

[105-152]compelled into a new or reopened channel. Susceptible people, whose

[105-153]strength has been long absorbed by dormant bias, dread an interview

[105-154]that imperiously revives the past, as they would dread a threatening

[105-155]illness. Joy may be there, but joy, too, is terrible.

[105-156]Deronda felt the infection of excitement, and when he heard the ring at

[105-157]the door, he went out, not knowing exactly why, that he might see and

[105-158]greet Mirah beforehand. He was startled to find that she had on the hat

[105-159]and cloak in which he had first seen her—the memorable cloak that had

[105-160]once been wetted for a winding-sheet. She had come down-stairs equipped

[105-161]in this way; and when Mrs. Meyrick said, in a tone of question, “You

[105-162]like to go in that dress, dear?” she answered, “My brother is poor, and

[105-163]I want to look as much like him as I can, else he may feel distant from

[105-164]me”—imagining that she should meet him in the workman’s dress. Deronda

[105-165]could not make any remark, but felt secretly rather ashamed of his own

[105-166]fastidious arrangements. They shook hands silently, for Mirah looked

[105-167]pale and awed.

[105-168]When Deronda opened the door for her, Mordecai had risen, and had his

[105-169]eyes turned toward it with an eager gaze. Mirah took only two or three

[105-170]steps, and then stood still. They looked at each other, motionless. It

[105-171]was less their own presence that they felt than another’s; they were

[105-172]meeting first in memories, compared with which touch was no union.

[105-173]Mirah was the first to break the silence, standing where she was.

[105-174]“Ezra,” she said, in exactly the same tone as when she was telling of

[105-175]her mother’s call to him.

[105-176]Mordecai with a sudden movement advanced and laid his hand on her

[105-177]shoulders. He was the head taller, and looked down at her tenderly

[105-178]while he said, “That was our mother’s voice. You remember her calling

[105-179]me?”

[105-180]“Yes, and how you answered her—‘Mother!’—and I knew you loved her.”

[105-181]Mirah threw her arms round her brother’s neck, clasped her little hands

[105-182]behind it, and drew down his face, kissing it with childlike

[105-183]lavishness. Her hat fell backward on the ground and disclosed all her

[105-184]curls.
