---
id: ch101
label: "Section 101"
type: chapter
description: "Something else, too, she thought of as more of a secret from her"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[101-001]Something else, too, she thought of as more of a secret from her

[101-002]husband than it really was—namely that suppressed struggle of

[101-003]desperate rebellion which she herself dreaded. [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] could not

[101-004]indeed fully imagine how things affected [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]: he had no

[101-005]imagination of anything in her but what affected the gratification of

[101-006]his own will; but on this point he had the sensibility which seems like

[101-007]divination. What we see exclusively we are apt to see with some mistake

[101-008]of proportions; and Grandcourt was not likely to be infallible in his

[101-009]judgments concerning this wife who was governed by many shadowy powers,

[101-010]to him nonexistent. He magnified her inward resistance, but that did

[101-011]not lessen his satisfaction in the mastery of it.

[101-012]CHAPTER XLV.

[101-013]Behold my lady’s carriage stop the way.

[101-014]With powdered lacquey and with charming bay;

[101-015]She sweeps the matting, treads the crimson stair.

[101-016]Her arduous function solely “to be there.”

[101-017]Like Sirius rising o’er the silent sea.

[101-018]She hides her heart in lustre loftily.

[101-019]So the Grandcourts were in Grosvenor Square in time to receive a card

[101-020]for the musical party at Lady Mallinger’s, there being reasons of

[101-021]business which made [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] know beforehand that his ill-beloved

[101-022]nephew was coming up. It was only the third evening after their

[101-023]arrival, and Gwendolen made rather an absent-minded acquaintance with

[101-024]her new ceilings and furniture, preoccupied with the certainty that she

[101-025]was going to speak to [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] again, and also to see the [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Miss Lapidoth]]

[101-026]who had gone through so much, and was “capable of submitting to

[101-027]anything in the form of duty.” For Gwendolen had remembered nearly

[101-028]every word that Deronda had said about Mirah, and especially that

[101-029]phrase, which she repeated to herself bitterly, having an ill-defined

[101-030]consciousness that her own submission was something very different. She

[101-031]would have been obliged to allow, if any one had said it to her, that

[101-032]what she submitted to could not take the shape of duty, but was

[101-033]submission to a yoke drawn on her by an action she was ashamed of, and

[101-034]worn with a strength of selfish motives that left no weight for duty to

[101-035]carry.

[101-036]The drawing-rooms in Park Lane, all white, gold, and pale crimson, were

[101-037]agreeably furnished, and not crowded with guests, before Mr. and Mrs.

[101-038]Grandcourt entered; and more than half an hour of instrumental [[art|music]]

[101-039]was being followed by an interval of movement and chat. [[Herr-Klesmer|Klesmer]] was

[101-040]there with his wife, and in his generous interest for Mirah he proposed

[101-041]to accompany her [[music|singing]] of Leo’s “_O patria mia_,” which he had before

[101-042]recommended her to choose, as more distinctive of her than better known

[101-043]music. He was already at the piano, and Mirah was standing there

[101-044]conspicuously, when Gwendolen, magnificent in her pale green velvet and

[101-045]poisoned diamonds, was ushered to a seat of honor well in view of them.

[101-046]With her long sight and self-command she had the rare power of quickly

[101-047]distinguishing persons and objects on entering a full room, and while

[101-048]turning her glance toward Mirah she did not neglect to exchange a bow

[101-049]with Klesmer as she passed. The smile seemed to each a lightning-flash

[101-050]back on that morning when it had been her ambition to stand as the

[101-051]“little Jewess” was standing, and survey a grand audience from the

[101-052]higher rank of her talent—instead of which she was one of the ordinary

[101-053]crowd in silk and gems, whose utmost performance it must be to admire

[101-054]or find fault. “He thinks I am in the right road now,” said the lurking

[101-055]resentment within her.

[101-056]Gwendolen had not caught sight of Deronda in her passage, and while she

[101-057]was seated acquitting herself in chat with Sir Hugo, she glanced round

[101-058]her with careful ease, bowing a recognition here and there, and fearful

[101-059]lest an anxious-looking exploration in search of Deronda might be

[101-060]observed by her husband, and afterward rebuked as something “damnably

[101-061]vulgar.” But all traveling, even that of a slow gradual glance round a

[101-062]room, brings a liability to undesired encounters, and amongst the eyes

[101-063]that met Gwendolen’s, forcing her into a slight bow, were those of the

[101-064]“amateur too fond of Meyerbeer,” [[Lush|Mr. Lush]], whom Sir Hugo continued to

[101-065]find useful as a half-caste among gentlemen. He was standing near her

[101-066]husband, who, however, turned a shoulder toward him, and was being

[101-067]understood to listen to Lord Pentreath. How was it that at this moment,

[101-068]for the first time, there darted through Gwendolen, like a disagreeable

[101-069]sensation, the idea that this man knew all about her husband’s life? He

[101-070]had been banished from her sight, according to her will, and she had

[101-071]been satisfied; he had sunk entirely into the background of her

[101-072]thoughts, screened away from her by the agitating figures that kept up

[101-073]an inward drama in which Lush had no place. Here suddenly he reappeared

[101-074]at her husband’s elbow, and there sprang up in her, like an

[101-075]instantaneously fabricated memory in a dream, the sense of his being

[101-076]connected with the secrets that made her wretched. She was conscious of

[101-077]effort in turning her head away from him, trying to continue her

[101-078]wandering survey as if she had seen nothing of more consequence than

[101-079]the picture on the wall, till she discovered Deronda. But he was not

[101-080]looking toward her, and she withdrew her eyes from him, without having

[101-081]got any recognition, consoling herself with the assurance that he must

[101-082]have seen her come in. In fact, he was not standing far from the door

[101-083]with [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans Meyrick]], whom he had been careful to bring into Lady

[101-084]Mallinger’s list. They were both a little more anxious than was

[101-085]comfortable lest Mirah should not be heard to advantage. Deronda even

[101-086]felt himself on the brink of betraying emotion, Mirah’s presence now

[101-087]being linked with crowding images of what had gone before and was to

[101-088]come after—all centering in the brother he was soon to reveal to her;

[101-089]and he had escaped as soon as he could from the side of Lady Pentreath,

[101-090]who had said in her violoncello voice,

[101-091]“Well, your Jewess is pretty—there’s no denying that. But where is her

[101-092]Jewish impudence? She looks as demure as a nun. I suppose she learned

[101-093]that on the stage.”

[101-094]He was beginning to feel on Mirah’s behalf something of what he had

[101-095]felt for himself in his seraphic boyish time, when Sir Hugo asked him

[101-096]if he would like to be a great singer—an indignant dislike to her

[101-097]being remarked on in a free and easy way, as if she were an imported

[101-098]commodity disdainfully paid for by the fashionable public, and he

[101-099]winced the more because [[Mordecai]], he knew, would feel that the name

[101-100]“Jewess” was taken as a sort of stamp like the lettering of Chinese

[101-101]silk. In this susceptible mood he saw the Grandcourts enter, and was

[101-102]immediately appealed to by Hans about “that Vandyke duchess of a

[101-103]beauty.” Pray excuse Deronda that in this moment he felt a transient

[101-104]renewal of his first repulsion from Gwendolen, as if she and her beauty

[101-105]and her failings were to blame for the undervaluing of Mirah as a

[101-106]woman—a feeling something like class animosity, which affection for

[101-107]what is not fully recognized by others, whether in persons or in

[101-108]poetry, rarely allows us to escape. To Hans admiring Gwendolen with his

[101-109]habitual hyperbole, he answered, with a sarcasm that was not quite

[101-110]good-natured,

[101-111]“I thought you could admire no style of woman but your Berenice.”

[101-112]“That is the style I worship—not admire,” said Hans. “Other styles of

[101-113]women I might make myself wicked for, but for Berenice I could make

[101-114]myself—well, pretty good, which is something much more difficult.”

[101-115]“Hush,” said Deronda, under the pretext that the singing was going to

[101-116]begin. He was not so delighted with the answer as might have been

[101-117]expected, and was relieved by Hans’s movement to a more advanced spot.

[101-118]Deronda had never before heard Mirah sing “_O patria mia_.” He knew

[101-119]well Leopardi’s fine Ode to Italy (when Italy sat like a disconsolate

[101-120]mother in chains, hiding her face on her knees and weeping), and the

[101-121]few selected words were filled for him with the grandeur of the whole,

[101-122]which seemed to breathe an inspiration through the music. Mirah singing

[101-123]this, made Mordecai more than ever one presence with her. Certain words

[101-124]not included in the song nevertheless rang within Deronda as harmonies

[101-125]from the invisible,

[101-126]“Non ti difende

[101-127]Nessun de’ tuoi! L’armi, qua l’armi: io solo

[101-128]Combatterò, procomberò sol io”—[*]

[101-129][* Do none of thy children defend thee? Arms! bring me arms!

[101-130]alone I will fight, alone I will fall.]

[101-131]they seemed the very voice of that heroic passion which is falsely said

[101-132]to devote itself in vain when it achieves the godlike end of

[101-133]manifesting unselfish love. And that passion was present to Deronda now

[101-134]as the vivid image of a man dying helplessly away from the possibility

[101-135]of battle.

[101-136]Mirah was equal to his wishes. While the general applause was sounding,

[101-137]Klesmer gave a more valued testimony, audible to her only—“Good,

[101-138]good—the crescendo better than before.” But her chief anxiety was to

[101-139]know that she had satisfied Mr. Deronda: any failure on her part this

[101-140]evening would have pained her as an especial injury to him. Of course

[101-141]all her prospects were due to what he had done for her; still, this

[101-142]occasion of singing in the house that was his home brought a peculiar

[101-143]demand. She looked toward him in the distance, and he saw that she did;

[101-144]but he remained where he was, and watched the streams of emulous

[101-145]admirers closing round her, till presently they parted to make way for

[101-146]Gwendolen, who was taken up to be introduced by [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Mrs. Klesmer]]. Easier

[101-147]now about “the little Jewess,” Daniel relented toward poor Gwendolen in

[101-148]her splendor, and his memory went back, with some penitence for his

[101-149]momentary hardness, over all the signs and confessions that she too

[101-150]needed a rescue, and one much more difficult than that of the wanderer

[101-151]by the river—a rescue for which he felt himself helpless. The silent

[101-152]question—“But is it not cowardly to make that a reason for turning

[101-153]away?” was the form in which he framed his resolve to go near her on

[101-154]the first opportunity, and show his regard for her past confidence, in

[101-155]spite of Sir Hugo’s unwelcome hints.

[101-156]Klesmer, having risen to Gwendolen as she approached, and being

[101-157]included by her in the opening conversation with Mirah, continued near

[101-158]them a little while, looking down with a smile, which was rather in his

[101-159]eyes than on his lips, at the piquant contrast of the two charming

[101-160]young creatures seated on the red divan. The solicitude seemed to be

[101-161]all on the side of the splendid one.

[101-162]“You must let me say how much I am obliged to you,” said Gwendolen. “I

[101-163]had heard from Mr. Deronda that I should have a great treat in your

[101-164]singing, but I was too ignorant to imagine how great.”

[101-165]“You are very good to say so,” answered Mirah, her mind chiefly

[101-166]occupied in contemplating Gwendolen. It was like a new kind of

[101-167]stage-experience to her to be close to genuine grand ladies with

[101-168]genuine brilliants and complexions, and they impressed her vaguely as

[101-169]coming out of some unknown drama, in which their parts perhaps got more

[101-170]tragic as they went on.

[101-171]“We shall all want to learn of you—I, at least,” said Gwendolen. “I

[101-172]sing very badly, as Herr Klesmer will tell you,”—here she glanced

[101-173]upward to that higher power rather archly, and continued—“but I have

[101-174]been rebuked for not liking to be middling, since I can be nothing more. I

[101-175]think that is a different doctrine from yours?” She was still looking

[101-176]at Klesmer, who said quickly,

[101-177]“Not if it means that it would be worth while for you to study further,

[101-178]and for Miss [[Lapidoth]] to have the pleasure of helping you.” With that

[101-179]he moved away, and Mirah taking everything with _naïve_ seriousness,

[101-180]said,
