---
id: ch103
label: "Section 103"
type: chapter
description: "CHAPTER XLVI."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[103-001]CHAPTER XLVI.

[103-002]“If any one should importune me to give a reason why I loved him, I

[103-003]feel it could no otherwise be expressed than by making answer,

[103-004]‘Because it was he, because it was I.’ There is, beyond what I am able

[103-005]to say, I know not what inexplicable power that brought on this

[103-006]union.”—MONTAIGNE: _On Friendship_.

[103-007]The time had come to prepare [[Mordecai]] for the revelation of the

[103-008]restored sister and for the change of abode which was desirable before

[103-009][[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s meeting with her brother. Mrs. Meyrick, to whom [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] had

[103-010]confided everything except Mordecai’s peculiar relation to himself, had

[103-011]been active in helping him to find a suitable lodging in Brompton, not

[103-012]many minutes’ walk from her own house, so that the brother and sister

[103-013]would be within reach of her motherly care. Her happy mixture of

[103-014]Scottish fervor and Gaelic liveliness had enabled her to keep the

[103-015]secret close from the girls as well as from [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]], any betrayal to them

[103-016]being likely to reach Mirah in some way that would raise an agitating

[103-017]suspicion, and spoil the important opening of that work which was to

[103-018]secure her [[freedom|independence]], as we rather arbitrarily call one of the more

[103-019]arduous and dignified forms of our dependence. And both Mrs. Meyrick

[103-020]and Deronda had more reasons than they could have expressed for

[103-021]desiring that Mirah should be able to maintain herself. Perhaps “the

[103-022]little mother” was rather helped in her secrecy by some dubiousness in

[103-023]her sentiment about the remarkable brother described to her; and

[103-024]certainly if she felt any joy and anticipatory admiration, it was due

[103-025]to her [[religion|faith]] in Deronda’s judgment. The consumption was a sorrowful

[103-026]fact that appealed to her tenderness; but how was she to be very glad

[103-027]of an enthusiasm which, to tell the truth, she could only contemplate

[103-028]as Jewish pertinacity, and as rather an undesirable introduction among

[103-029]them all of a man whose conversation would not be more modern and

[103-030]encouraging than that of Scott’s Covenanters? Her mind was anything but

[103-031]prosaic, and had her soberer share of Mab’s delight in the romance of

[103-032]Mirah’s story and of her abode with them; but the romantic or unusual

[103-033]in real life requires some adaptation. We sit up at night to read about

[103-034]Sakya-Mouni, St. Francis, or Oliver Cromwell; but whether we should be

[103-035]glad for any one at all like them to call on us the next morning, still

[103-036]more, to reveal himself as a new relation, is quite another affair.

[103-037]Besides, Mrs. Meyrick had hoped, as her children did, that the

[103-038]intensity of Mirah’s feeling about Judaism would slowly subside, and be

[103-039]merged in the gradually deepening current of loving interchange with

[103-040]her new friends. In fact, her secret favorite continuation of the

[103-041]romance had been no discovery of Jewish relations, but something much

[103-042]more favorable to the hopes she discerned in Hans. And now—here was a

[103-043]brother who would dip Mirah’s mind over again in the deepest dye of

[103-044]Jewish sentiment. She could not help saying to Deronda,

[103-045]“I am as glad as you are that the pawnbroker is not her brother: there

[103-046]are Ezras and Ezras in the world; and really it is a comfort to think

[103-047]that all Jews are not like those shopkeepers who _will not_ let you get

[103-048]out of their shops: and besides, what he said to you about his mother

[103-049]and sister makes me bless him. I am sure he’s good. But I never did

[103-050]like anything fanatical. I suppose I heard a little too much preaching

[103-051]in my youth and lost my palate for it.”

[103-052]“I don’t think you will find that Mordecai obtrudes any preaching,”

[103-053]said Deronda. “He is not what I should call fanatical. I call a man

[103-054]fanatical when his enthusiasm is narrow and hoodwinked, so that he has

[103-055]no sense of proportions, and becomes unjust and unsympathetic to men

[103-056]who are out of his own track. Mordecai is an enthusiast; I should like

[103-057]to keep that word for the highest order of minds—those who care

[103-058]supremely for grand and general benefits to mankind. He is not a

[103-059]strictly orthodox Jew, and is full of allowances for others; his

[103-060]conformity in many things is an allowance for the condition of other

[103-061]Jews. The people he lives with are as fond of him as possible, and they

[103-062]can’t in the least understand his ideas.”

[103-063]“Oh, well, I can live up to the level of the pawnbroker’s mother, and

[103-064]like him for what I see to be good in him; and for what I don’t see the

[103-065]merits of I will take your word. According to your definition, I

[103-066]suppose one might be fanatical in worshipping common-sense; for my poor

[103-067]husband used to say the world would be a poor place if there were

[103-068]nothing but common-sense in it. However, Mirah’s brother will have good

[103-069]bedding—that I have taken care of; and I shall have this extra window

[103-070]pasted up with paper to prevent draughts.” (The conversation was taking

[103-071]place in the destined lodging.) “It is a comfort to think that the

[103-072]people of the house are no strangers to me—no hypocritical harpies.

[103-073]And when the children know, we shall be able to make the rooms much

[103-074]prettier.”

[103-075]“The next stage of the affair is to tell all to Mordecai, and get him

[103-076]to move—which may be a more difficult business,” said Deronda.

[103-077]“And will you tell Mirah before I say anything to the children?” said

[103-078]Mrs. Meyrick. But Deronda hesitated, and she went on in a tone of

[103-079]persuasive deliberation—“No, I think not. Let me tell Hans and the

[103-080]girls the evening before, and they will be away the next morning?”

[103-081]“Yes, that will be best. But do justice to my account of Mordecai—or

[103-082]Ezra, as I suppose Mirah will wish to call him: don’t assist their

[103-083]imagination by referring to Habakkuk Mucklewrath,” said Deronda,

[103-084]smiling—Mrs. Meyrick herself having used the comparison of the

[103-085]Covenanters.

[103-086]“Trust me, trust me,” said the little mother. “I shall have to persuade

[103-087]them so hard to be glad, that I shall convert myself. When I am

[103-088]frightened I find it a good thing to have somebody to be angry with for

[103-089]not being brave: it warms the blood.”

[103-090]Deronda might have been more argumentative or persuasive about the view

[103-091]to be taken of Mirah’s brother, if he had been less anxiously

[103-092]preoccupied with the more important task immediately before him, which

[103-093]he desired to acquit himself of without wounding the Cohens. Mordecai,

[103-094]by a memorable answer, had made it evident that he would be keenly

[103-095]alive to any inadvertance in relation to their feelings. In the

[103-096]interval, he had been meeting Mordecai at the _[[hand-and-banner|Hand and Banner]]_, but

[103-097]now after due reflection he wrote to him saying that he had particular

[103-098]reasons for wishing to see him in his own home the next evening, and

[103-099]would beg to sit with him in his workroom for an hour, if the Cohens

[103-100]would not regard it as an intrusion. He would call with the

[103-101]understanding that if there were any objection, Mordecai would

[103-102]accompany him elsewhere. Deronda hoped in this way to create a little

[103-103]expectation that would have a preparatory effect.

[103-104]He was received with the usual friendliness, some additional costume in

[103-105]the women and children, and in all the elders a slight air of wondering

[103-106]which even in Cohen was not allowed to pass the bounds of silence—the

[103-107]guest’s transactions with Mordecai being a sort of mystery which he was

[103-108]rather proud to think lay outside the sphere of light which enclosed

[103-109]his own understanding. But when Deronda said, “I suppose Mordecai is at

[103-110]home and expecting me,” Jacob, who had profited by the family remarks,

[103-111]went up to his knee and said, “What do you want to talk to Mordecai

[103-112]about?”

[103-113]“Something that is very interesting to him,” said Deronda, pinching the

[103-114]lad’s ear, “but that you can’t understand.”

[103-115]“Can you say this?” said Jacob, immediately giving forth a string of

[103-116]his rote-learned Hebrew verses with a wonderful mixture of the throaty

[103-117]and the nasal, and nodding his small head at his hearer, with a sense

[103-118]of giving formidable evidence which might rather alter their mutual

[103-119]position.

[103-120]“No, really,” said Deronda, keeping grave; “I can’t say anything like

[103-121]it.”

[103-122]“I thought not,” said Jacob, performing a dance of triumph with his

[103-123]small scarlet legs, while he took various objects out of the deep

[103-124]pockets of his knickerbockers and returned them thither, as a slight

[103-125]hint of his resources; after which, running to the door of the

[103-126]workroom, he opened it wide, set his back against it, and said,

[103-127]“Mordecai, here’s the young swell”—a copying of his father’s phrase,

[103-128]which seemed to him well fitted to cap the recitation of Hebrew.

[103-129]He was called back with hushes by mother and grandmother, and Deronda,

[103-130]entering and closing the door behind him, saw that a bit of carpet had

[103-131]been laid down, a chair placed, and the fire and lights attended to, in

[103-132]sign of the Cohens’ respect. As Mordecai rose to greet him, Deronda was

[103-133]struck with the air of solemn expectation in his face, such as would

[103-134]have seemed perfectly natural if his letter had declared that some

[103-135]revelation was to be made about the lost sister. Neither of them spoke,

[103-136]till Deronda, with his usual tenderness of manner, had drawn the vacant

[103-137]chair from the opposite side of the hearth and had seated himself near

[103-138]to Mordecai, who then said, in a tone of fervid certainty,

[103-139]“You are coming to tell me something that my soul longs for.”

[103-140]“It is true I have something very weighty to tell you—something I

[103-141]trust that you will rejoice in,” said Deronda, on his guard against the

[103-142]probability that Mordecai had been preparing himself for something

[103-143]quite different from the fact.

[103-144]“It is all revealed—it is made clear to you,” said Mordecai, more

[103-145]eagerly, leaning forward with clasped hands. “You are even as my

[103-146]brother that sucked the breasts of my mother—the [[inheritance|heritage]] is

[103-147]yours—there is no doubt to divide us.”

[103-148]“I have learned nothing new about myself,” said Deronda. The

[103-149]disappointment was inevitable: it was better not to let the feeling be

[103-150]strained longer in a mistaken hope.

[103-151]Mordecai sank back in his chair, unable for the moment to care what was

[103-152]really coming. The whole day his mind had been in a state of tension

[103-153]toward one fulfillment. The reaction was sickening and he closed his

[103-154]eyes.

[103-155]“Except,” Deronda went on gently, after a pause,—“except that I had

[103-156]really some time ago come into another sort of hidden connection with

[103-157]you, besides what you have spoken of as existing in your own feeling.”

[103-158]The eyes were not opened, but there was a fluttering in the lids.

[103-159]“I had made the acquaintance of one in whom you are interested.”

[103-160]“One who is closely related to your departed mother,” Deronda went on

[103-161]wishing to make the disclosure gradual; but noticing a shrinking

[103-162]movement in Mordecai, he added—“whom she and you held dear above all

[103-163]others.”

[103-164]Mordecai, with a sudden start, laid a spasmodic grasp on Deronda’s

[103-165]wrist; there was a great terror in him. And Deronda divined it. A

[103-166]tremor was perceptible in his clear tones as he said,

[103-167]“What was prayed for has come to pass: Mirah has been delivered from

[103-168]evil.”

[103-169]Mordecai’s grasp relaxed a little, but he was panting with a tearless

[103-170]sob.

[103-171]Deronda went on: “Your sister is worthy of the mother you honored.”

[103-172]He waited there, and Mordecai, throwing himself backward in his chair,

[103-173]again closed his eyes, uttering himself almost inaudibly for some

[103-174]minutes in Hebrew, and then subsiding into a happy-looking silence.

[103-175]Deronda, watching the expression in his uplifted face, could have

[103-176]imagined that he was speaking with some beloved object: there was a new

[103-177]suffused sweetness, something like that on the faces of the beautiful

[103-178]dead. For the first time Deronda thought he discerned a family

[103-179]resemblance to Mirah.

[103-180]Presently when Mordecai was ready to listen, the rest was told. But in

[103-181]accounting for Mirah’s flight he made the statement about the father’s

[103-182]conduct as vague as he could, and threw the emphasis on her yearning to

[103-183]come to England as the place where she might find her mother. Also he

[103-184]kept back the fact of Mirah’s intention to drown herself, and his own

[103-185]part in rescuing her; merely describing the home she had found with

[103-186]friends of his, whose interest in her and efforts for her he had

[103-187]shared. What he dwelt on finally was Mirah’s feeling about her mother

[103-188]and brother; and in relation to this he tried to give every detail.
