---
id: ch107
label: "Section 107"
type: chapter
description: "She meant to sling a small stone at her husband in that way."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[107-001]She meant to sling a small stone at her husband in that way.

[107-002]“It’s very indecent of [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] to go about praising that girl,” said

[107-003][[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] in a tone of indifference.

[107-004]“Indecent!” exclaimed [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], reddening and looking at him again,

[107-005]overcome by startled wonder, and unable to reflect on the probable

[107-006]falsity of the phrase—“to go about praising.”

[107-007]“Yes; and especially when she is patronized by Lady Mallinger. He ought

[107-008]to hold his tongue about her. Men can see what is his relation to her.”

[107-009]“Men who judge of others by themselves,” said Gwendolen, turning white

[107-010]after her redness, and immediately smitten with a dread of her own

[107-011]words.

[107-012]“Of course. And a woman should take their judgment—else she is likely

[107-013]to run her head into the wrong place,” said Grandcourt, conscious of

[107-014]using pinchers on that white creature. “I suppose you take Deronda for

[107-015]a saint.”

[107-016]“Oh dear no!” said Gwendolen, summoning desperately her almost

[107-017]miraculous power of self-control, and speaking in a high hard tone.

[107-018]“Only a little less of a monster.”

[107-019]She rose, pushed her chair away without hurry, and walked out of the

[107-020]room with something like the care of a man who is afraid of showing

[107-021]that he has taken more wine than usual. She turned the keys inside her

[107-022]dressing-room doors, and sat down for some time looking pale and quiet

[107-023]as when she was leaving the breakfast-room. Even in the moments after

[107-024]reading the poisonous letter she had hardly had more cruel sensations

[107-025]than now; for emotion was at the acute point, where it is not

[107-026]distinguishable from sensation. Deronda unlike what she had believed

[107-027]him to be, was an image which affected her as a hideous apparition

[107-028]would have done, quite apart from the way in which it was produced. It

[107-029]had taken hold of her as pain before she could consider whether it were

[107-030]fiction or truth; and further to hinder her power of resistance came

[107-031]the sudden perception, how very slight were the grounds of her [[religion|faith]] in

[107-032]Deronda—how little she knew of his life—how childish she had been in

[107-033]her confidence. His rebukes and his severity to her began to seem

[107-034]odious, along with all the poetry and lofty doctrine in the world,

[107-035]whatever it might be; and the grave beauty of his face seemed the most

[107-036]unpleasant mask that the common habits of men could put on.

[107-037]All this went on in her with the rapidity of a sick dream; and her

[107-038]start into resistance was very much like a waking. Suddenly from out

[107-039]the gray sombre morning there came a stream of sunshine, wrapping her

[107-040]in warmth and light where she sat in stony stillness. She moved gently

[107-041]and looked round her—there was a world outside this bad dream, and the

[107-042]dream proved nothing; she rose, stretching her arms upward and clasping

[107-043]her hands with her habitual attitude when she was seeking relief from

[107-044]oppressive feeling, and walked about the room in this flood of sunbeams.

[107-045]“It is not true! What does it matter whether _he_ believes it or not?”

[107-046]This is what she repeated to herself—but this was not her faith come

[107-047]back again; it was only the desperate cry of faith, finding suffocation

[107-048]intolerable. And how could she go on through the day in this state?

[107-049]With one of her impetuous alternations, her imagination flew to wild

[107-050]actions by which she would convince herself of what she wished: she

[107-051]would go to Lady Mallinger and question her about [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]; she would

[107-052]write to Deronda and upbraid him with making the world all false and

[107-053]wicked and hopeless to her—to him she dared pour out all the bitter

[107-054]indignation of her heart. No; she would go to Mirah. This last form

[107-055]taken by her need was more definitely practicable, and quickly became

[107-056]imperious. No matter what came of it. She had the pretext of asking

[107-057]Mirah to sing at her party on the fourth. What was she going to say

[107-058]beside? How satisfy? She did not foresee—she could not wait to

[107-059]foresee. If that idea which was maddening her had been a living thing,

[107-060]she would have wanted to throttle it without waiting to foresee what

[107-061]would come of the act. She rang her bell and asked if Mr. Grandcourt

[107-062]were gone out: finding that he was, she ordered the carriage, and began

[107-063]to dress for the [[ambition|drive]]; then she went down, and walked about the large

[107-064]drawing-room like an imprisoned dumb creature, not recognizing herself

[107-065]in the glass panels, not noting any object around her in the painted

[107-066]gilded prison. Her husband would probably find out where she had been,

[107-067]and punish her in some way or other—no matter—she could neither

[107-068]desire nor fear anything just now but the assurance that she had not

[107-069]been deluding herself in her trust.

[107-070]She was provided with Mirah’s address. Soon she was on the way with all

[107-071]the fine equipage necessary to carry about her poor uneasy heart,

[107-072]depending in its palpitations on some answer or other to questioning

[107-073]which she did not know how she should put. She was as heedless of what

[107-074]happened before she found that Miss [[Lapidoth]] was at home, as one is of

[107-075]lobbies and passages on the way to a court of justice—heedless of

[107-076]everything till she was in a room where there were folding-doors, and

[107-077]she heard Deronda’s voice behind it. Doubtless the identification was

[107-078]helped by forecast, but she was as certain of it as if she had seen

[107-079]him. She was frightened at her own agitation, and began to unbutton her

[107-080]gloves that she might button them again, and bite her lips over the

[107-081]pretended difficulty, while the door opened, and Mirah presented

[107-082]herself with perfect quietude and a sweet smile of recognition. There

[107-083]was relief in the sight of her face, and Gwendolen was able to smile in

[107-084]return, while she put out her hand in silence; and as she seated

[107-085]herself, all the while hearing the voice, she felt some reflux of

[107-086]energy in the confused sense that the truth could not be anything that

[107-087]she dreaded. Mirah drew her chair very near, as if she felt that the

[107-088]sound of the conversation should be subdued, and looked at her visitor

[107-089]with placid expectation, while Gwendolen began in a low tone, with

[107-090]something that seemed like bashfulness,

[107-091]“Perhaps you wonder to see me—perhaps I ought to have written—but I

[107-092]wished to make a particular request.”

[107-093]“I am glad to see you instead of having a letter,” said Mirah,

[107-094]wondering at the changed expression and manner of the “Vandyke

[107-095]duchess,” as [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]] had taught her to call Gwendolen. The rich color and

[107-096]the calmness of her own face were in strong contrast with the pale

[107-097]agitated beauty under the plumed hat.

[107-098]“I thought,” Gwendolen went on—“at least I hoped, you would not object

[107-099]to sing at our house on the 4th—in the evening—at a party like Lady

[107-100]Brackenshaw’s. I should be so much obliged.”

[107-101]“I shall be very happy to sing for you. At ten?” said Mirah, while

[107-102]Gwendolen seemed to get more instead of less embarrassed.

[107-103]“At ten, please,” she answered; then paused, and felt that she had

[107-104]nothing more to say. She could not go. It was impossible to rise and

[107-105]say good-bye. Deronda’s voice was in her ears. She must say it—she

[107-106]could contrive no other sentence,

[107-107]“Mr. Deronda is in the next room.”

[107-108]“Yes,” said Mirah, in her former tone. “He is reading Hebrew with my

[107-109]brother.”

[107-110]“You have a brother?” said Gwendolen, who had heard this from Lady

[107-111]Mallinger, but had not minded it then.

[107-112]“Yes, a dear brother who is ill—consumptive, and Mr. Deronda is the

[107-113]best of friends to him, as he has been to me,” said Mirah, with the

[107-114]impulse that will not let us pass the mention of a precious person

[107-115]indifferently.

[107-116]“Tell me,” said Gwendolen, putting her hand on Mirah’s, and speaking

[107-117]hardly above a whisper—“tell me—tell me the truth. You are sure he is

[107-118]quite good. You know no evil of him. Any evil that people say of him is

[107-119]false.”

[107-120]Could the proud-spirited woman have behaved more like a child? But the

[107-121]strange words penetrated Mirah with nothing but a sense of solemnity

[107-122]and indignation. With a sudden light in her eyes and a tremor in her

[107-123]voice, she said,

[107-124]“Who are the people that say evil of him? I would not believe any evil

[107-125]of him, if an angel came to tell it me. He found me when I was so

[107-126]miserable—I was going to drown myself; I looked so poor and forsaken;

[107-127]you would have thought I was a beggar by the wayside. And he treated me

[107-128]as if I had been a king’s daughter. He took me to the best of women. He

[107-129]found my brother for me. And he honors my brother—though he too was

[107-130]poor—oh, almost as poor as he could be. And my brother honors him.

[107-131]That is no light thing to say”—here Mirah’s tone changed to one of

[107-132]profound emphasis, and she shook her head backward: “for my brother is

[107-133]very learned and great-minded. And Mr. Deronda says there are few men

[107-134]equal to him.” Some Jewish defiance had flamed into her indignant

[107-135]gratitude and her anger could not help including Gwendolen since she

[107-136]seemed to have doubted Deronda’s goodness.

[107-137]But Gwendolen was like one parched with thirst, drinking the fresh

[107-138]water that spreads through the frame as a sufficient bliss. She did not

[107-139]notice that Mirah was angry with her; she was not distinctly conscious

[107-140]of anything but of the penetrating sense that Deronda and his life were

[107-141]no more like her husband’s conception than the morning in the horizon

[107-142]was like the morning mixed with street gas. Even Mirah’s words sank

[107-143]into the indefiniteness of her relief. She could hardly have repeated

[107-144]them, or said how her whole state of feeling was changed. She pressed

[107-145]Mirah’s hand, and said, “Thank you, thank you,” in a hurried whisper,

[107-146]then rose, and added, with only a hazy consciousness, “I must go, I

[107-147]shall see you—on the fourth—I am so much obliged”—bowing herself out

[107-148]automatically, while Mirah, opening the door for her, wondered at what

[107-149]seemed a sudden retreat into chill loftiness.

[107-150]Gwendolen, indeed, had no feeling to spare in any effusiveness toward

[107-151]the creature who had brought her relief. The passionate need of

[107-152]contradiction to Grandcourt’s estimate of Deronda, a need which had

[107-153]blunted her sensibility to everything else, was no sooner satisfied

[107-154]than she wanted to be gone. She began to be aware that she was out of

[107-155]place, and to dread Deronda’s seeing her. And once in the carriage

[107-156]again, she had the vision of what awaited her at home. When she drew up

[107-157]before the door in Grosvenor Square, her husband was arriving with a

[107-158]cigar between his fingers. He threw it away and handed her out,

[107-159]accompanying her up-stairs. She turned into the drawing-room, lest he

[107-160]should follow her farther and give her no place to retreat to; then she

[107-161]sat down with a weary air, taking off her gloves, rubbing her hand over

[107-162]her forehead, and making his presence as much of a cipher as possible.

[107-163]But he sat, too, and not far from her—just in front, where to avoid

[107-164]looking at him must have the emphasis of effort.

[107-165]“May I ask where you have been at this extraordinary hour?” said

[107-166]Grandcourt.

[107-167]“Oh, yes; I have been to Miss Lapidoth’s, to ask her to come and sing

[107-168]for us,” said Gwendolen, laying her gloves on the little table beside

[107-169]her, and looking down at them.

[107-170]“And to ask her about her relations with Deronda?” said Grandcourt,

[107-171]with the coldest possible sneer in his low voice which in poor

[107-172]Gwendolen’s ear was diabolical.

[107-173]For the first time since their marriage she flashed out upon him

[107-174]without inward check. Turning her eyes full on his she said, in a

[107-175]biting tone,

[107-176]“Yes; and what you said is false—a low, wicked falsehood.”
