---
id: ch109
label: "Section 109"
type: chapter
description: "She sat awaiting the announcement of Lush as a sort of searing"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[109-001]She sat awaiting the announcement of [[Lush]] as a sort of searing

[109-002]operation that she had to go through. The facts that galled her

[109-003]gathered a burning power when she thought of their lying in his mind.

[109-004]It was all a part of that new gambling, in which the losing was not

[109-005]simply a _minus_, but a terrible _plus_ that had never entered into her

[109-006]reckoning.

[109-007]Lush was neither quite pleased nor quite displeased with his task.

[109-008][[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] had said to him by way of conclusion, “Don’t make yourself

[109-009]more disagreeable than nature obliges you.”

[109-010]“That depends,” thought Lush. But he said, “I will write a brief

[109-011]abstract for [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Mrs. Grandcourt]] to read.” He did not suggest that he

[109-012]should make the whole communication in writing, which was a proof that

[109-013]the interview did not wholly displease him.

[109-014]Some provision was being made for himself in the will, and he had no

[109-015]reason to be in a bad humor, even if a bad humor had been common with

[109-016]him. He was perfectly convinced that he had penetrated all the secrets

[109-017]of the situation; but he had no diabolical delight in it. He had only

[109-018]the small movements of gratified self-loving resentment in discerning

[109-019]that this marriage had fulfilled his own foresight in not being as

[109-020]satisfactory as the supercilious young lady had expected it to be, and

[109-021]as Grandcourt wished to feign that it was. He had no persistent spite

[109-022]much stronger than what gives the seasoning of ordinary scandal to

[109-023]those who repeat it and exaggerate it by their conjectures. With no

[109-024]active [[sympathy|compassion]] or good-will, he had just as little active

[109-025]malevolence, being chiefly occupied in liking his particular pleasures,

[109-026]and not disliking anything but what hindered those

[109-027]pleasures—everything else ranking with the last murder and the last

[109-028]_opéra bouffe_, under the head of things to talk about. Nevertheless,

[109-029]he was not indifferent to the prospect of being treated uncivilly by a

[109-030]beautiful woman, or to the counterbalancing fact that his present

[109-031]commission put into his hands an official power of humiliating her. He

[109-032]did not mean to use it needlessly; but there are some persons so gifted

[109-033]in relation to us that their “How do you do?” seems charged with

[109-034]offense.

[109-035]By the time that Mr. Lush was announced, Gwendolen had braced herself

[109-036]to a bitter resolve that he should not witness the slightest betrayal

[109-037]of her feeling, whatever he might have to tell. She invited him to sit

[109-038]down with stately quietude. After all, what was this man to her? He was

[109-039]not in the least like her husband. Her power of hating a coarse,

[109-040]familiar-mannered man, with clumsy hands, was now relaxed by the

[109-041]intensity with which she hated his contrast.

[109-042]He held a small paper folded in his hand while he spoke.

[109-043]“I need hardly say that I should not have presented myself if Mr.

[109-044]Grandcourt had not expressed a strong wish to that effect—as no doubt

[109-045]he has mentioned to you.”

[109-046]From some voices that speech might have sounded entirely reverential,

[109-047]and even timidly apologetic. Lush had no intention to the contrary, but

[109-048]to Gwendolen’s ear his words had as much insolence in them as his

[109-049]prominent eyes, and the pronoun “you” was too familiar. He ought to

[109-050]have addressed the folding-screen, and spoke of her as Mrs. Grandcourt.

[109-051]She gave the smallest sign of a bow, and Lush went on, with a little

[109-052]awkwardness, getting entangled in what is elegantly called tautology.

[109-053]“My having been in Mr. Grandcourt’s confidence for fifteen years or

[109-054]more—since he was a youth, in fact—of course gives me a peculiar

[109-055]position. He can speak to me of affairs that he could not mention to

[109-056]any one else; and, in fact, he could not have employed any one else in

[109-057]this affair. I have accepted the task out of friendship for him. Which

[109-058]is my apology for accepting the task—if you would have preferred some

[109-059]one else.”

[109-060]He paused, but she made no sign, and Lush, to give himself a

[109-061]countenance in an apology which met no acceptance, opened the folded

[109-062]paper, and looked at it vaguely before he began to speak again.

[109-063]“This paper contains some information about Mr. Grandcourt’s will, an

[109-064]abstract of a part he wished you to know—if you’ll be good enough to

[109-065]cast your eyes over it. But there is something I had to say by way of

[109-066]introduction—which I hope you’ll pardon me for, if it’s not quite

[109-067]agreeable.” Lush found that he was behaving better than he had

[109-068]expected, and had no idea how insulting he made himself with his “not

[109-069]quite agreeable.”

[109-070]“Say what you have to say without apologizing, please,” said Gwendolen,

[109-071]with the air she might have bestowed on a dog-stealer come to claim a

[109-072]reward for finding the dog he had stolen.

[109-073]“I have only to remind you of something that occurred before your

[109-074]engagement to Mr. Grandcourt,” said Lush, not without the rise of some

[109-075]willing insolence in exchange for her scorn. “You met a lady in Cardell

[109-076]Chase, if you remember, who spoke to you of her position with regard to

[109-077]Mr. Grandcourt. She had children with her—one a very fine boy.”

[109-078]Gwendolen’s lips were almost as pale as her cheeks; her passion had no

[109-079]weapons—words were no better than chips. This man’s speech was like a

[109-080]sharp knife-edge drawn across her skin: but even her indignation at the

[109-081]employment of Lush was getting merged in a crowd of other feelings, dim

[109-082]and alarming as a crowd of ghosts.

[109-083]“Mr. Grandcourt was aware that you were acquainted with this

[109-084]unfortunate affair beforehand, and he thinks it only right that his

[109-085]position and intentions should be made quite clear to you. It is an

[109-086]affair of property and prospects; and if there were any objection you

[109-087]had to make, if you would mention it to me—it is a subject which of

[109-088]course he would rather not speak about himself—if you will be good

[109-089]enough just to read this.” With the last words Lush rose and presented

[109-090]the paper to her.

[109-091]When Gwendolen resolved that she would betray no feeling in the

[109-092]presence of this man, she had not prepared herself to hear that her

[109-093]husband knew the silent consciousness, the silently accepted terms on

[109-094]which she had married him. She dared not raise her hand to take the

[109-095]paper, least it should visibly tremble. For a moment Lush stood holding

[109-096]it toward her, and she felt his gaze on her as ignominy, before she

[109-097]could say even with low-toned haughtiness,

[109-098]“Lay it on the table. And go into the next room, please.”

[109-099]Lush obeyed, thinking as he took an easy-chair in the back

[109-100]drawing-room, “My lady winces considerably. She didn’t know what would

[109-101]be the charge for that superfine article, Henleigh Grandcourt.” But it

[109-102]seemed to him that a penniless girl had done better than she had any

[109-103]right to expect, and that she had been uncommonly knowing for her years

[109-104]and opportunities: her words to Lydia meant nothing, and her running

[109-105]away had probably been part of her adroitness. It had turned out a

[109-106]master-stroke.

[109-107]Meanwhile Gwendolen was rallying her nerves to the reading of the

[109-108]paper. She must read it. Her whole being—pride, longing for rebellion,

[109-109]dreams of freedom, remorseful conscience, dread of fresh

[109-110]visitation—all made one need to know what the paper contained. But at

[109-111]first it was not easy to take in the meaning of the words. When she had

[109-112]succeeded, she found that in the case of there being no son as issue of

[109-113]her marriage, Grandcourt had made the small Henleigh his heir; that was

[109-114]all she cared to extract from the paper with any distinctness. The

[109-115]other statement as to what provision would be made for her in the same

[109-116]case, she hurried over, getting only a confused perception of thousands

[109-117]and [[gadsmere|Gadsmere]]. It was enough. She could dismiss the man in the next room

[109-118]with the defiant energy which had revived in her at the idea that this

[109-119]question of property and inheritance was meant as a finish to her

[109-120]humiliations and her thraldom.

[109-121]She thrust the paper between the leaves of her book, which she took in

[109-122]her hand, and walked with her stateliest air into the next room, where

[109-123]Lush immediately arose, awaiting her approach. When she was four yards

[109-124]from him, it was hardly an instant that she paused to say in a high

[109-125]tone, while she swept him with her eyelashes,

[109-126]“Tell Mr. Grandcourt that his arrangements are just what I

[109-127]desired”—passing on without haste, and leaving Lush time to mingle

[109-128]some admiration of her graceful back with that half-amused sense of her

[109-129]spirit and impertinence, which he expressed by raising his eyebrows and

[109-130]just thrusting his tongue between his teeth. He really did not want her

[109-131]to be worse punished, and he was glad to think that it was time to go

[109-132]and lunch at the club, where he meant to have a lobster salad.

[109-133]What did Gwendolen look forward to? When her husband returned he found

[109-134]her equipped in her riding-dress, ready to ride out with him. She was

[109-135]not again going to be hysterical, or take to her bed and say she was

[109-136]ill. That was the implicit resolve adjusting her muscles before she

[109-137]could have framed it in words, as she walked out of the room, leaving

[109-138]Lush behind her. She was going to act in the spirit of her message, and

[109-139]not to give herself time to reflect. She rang the bell for her maid,

[109-140]and went with the usual care through her change of toilet. Doubtless

[109-141]her husband had meant to produce a great effect on her: by-and-by

[109-142]perhaps she would let him see an effect the very opposite of what he

[109-143]intended; but at present all that she could show was a defiant

[109-144]satisfaction in what had been presumed to be disagreeable. It came as

[109-145]an instinct rather than a thought, that to show any sign which could be

[109-146]interpreted as jealousy, when she had just been insultingly reminded

[109-147]that the conditions were what she had accepted with her eyes open,

[109-148]would be the worst self-[[shame|humiliation]]. She said to herself that she had

[109-149]not time to-day to be clear about her future actions; all she could be

[109-150]clear about was that she would match her husband in ignoring any ground

[109-151]for excitement. She not only rode, but went out with him to dine,

[109-152]contributing nothing to alter their mutual manner, which was never that

[109-153]of rapid interchange in discourse; and curiously enough she rejected a

[109-154]handkerchief on which her maid had by mistake put the wrong scent—a

[109-155]scent that Grandcourt had once objected to. Gwendolen would not have

[109-156]liked to be an object of disgust to this husband whom she hated: she

[109-157]liked all disgust to be on her side.

[109-158]But to defer thought in this way was something like trying to talk

[109-159]without [[music|singing]] in her own ears. The thought that is bound up with our

[109-160]passion is as penetrative as air—everything is porous to it; bows,

[109-161]smiles, conversation, repartee, are mere honeycombs where such thoughts

[109-162]rushes freely, not always with a taste of honey. And without shutting

[109-163]herself up in any solitude, Gwendolen seemed at the end of nine or ten

[109-164]hours to have gone through a labyrinth of reflection, in which already

[109-165]the same succession of prospects had been repeated, the same fallacious

[109-166]outlets rejected, the same shrinking from the necessities of every

[109-167]course. Already she was undergoing some hardening effect from feeling

[109-168]that she was under eyes which saw her past actions solely in the light

[109-169]of her lowest motives. She lived back in the scenes of her courtship,

[109-170]with the new bitter consciousness of what had been in Grandcourt’s

[109-171]mind—certain now, with her present experience of him, that he had a

[109-172]peculiar triumph in conquering her dumb repugnance, and that ever since

[109-173]their marriage he had had a cold exultation in knowing her fancied

[109-174]secret. Her imagination exaggerated every tyrannical impulse he was

[109-175]capable of. “I will insist on being separated from him”—was her first

[109-176]darting determination; then, “I will leave him whether he consents or

[109-177]not. If this boy becomes his heir, I have made an atonement.” But

[109-178]neither in darkness nor in daylight could she imagine the scenes which

[109-179]must carry out those determinations with the courage to feel them

[109-180]endurable. How could she run away to her own family—carry distress

[109-181]among them, and render herself an object of scandal in the society she

[109-182]had left behind her? What future lay before her as Mrs. Grandcourt gone

[109-183]back to her mother, who would be made destitute again by the rupture of

[109-184]the marriage for which one chief excuse had been that it had brought

[109-185]that mother a maintenance? She had lately been seeing her uncle and

[109-186]Anna in [[london|London]], and though she had been saved from any difficulty about

[109-187]inviting them to stay in Grosvenor Square by their wish to be with [[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]],

[109-188]who would not risk a meeting with her, the transient visit she had had

[109-189]from them helped now in giving stronger color to the picture of what it

[109-190]would be for her to take refuge in her own family. What could she say

[109-191]to justify her flight? Her uncle would tell her to go back. Her mother

[109-192]would cry. Her aunt and Anna would look at her with wondering alarm.

[109-193]Her husband would have power to compel her. She had absolutely nothing

[109-194]that she could allege against him in judicious or judicial ears. And to

[109-195]“insist on separation!” That was an easy combination of words; but

[109-196]considered as an action to be executed against Grandcourt, it would be

[109-197]about as practicable as to give him a pliant disposition and a dread of

[109-198]other people’s unwillingness. How was she to begin? What was she to say

[109-199]that would not be a condemnation of herself? “If I am to have misery

[109-200]anyhow,” was the bitter refrain of her rebellious dreams, “I had better

[109-201]have the misery that I can keep to myself.” Moreover, her capability of

[109-202]rectitude told her again and again that she had no right to complain of

[109-203]her contract, or to withdraw from it.
