---
id: ch104
label: "Section 104"
type: chapter
description: "“It was in search of them,” said Deronda, smiling, “that I turned into"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[104-001]“It was in search of them,” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], smiling, “that I turned into

[104-002]this house: the name [[Mordecai|Ezra]] Cohen was just then the most interesting name

[104-003]in the world to me. I confess I had fear for a long while. Perhaps you

[104-004]will forgive me now for having asked you that question about the elder

[104-005]Mrs. Cohen’s daughter. I cared very much what I should find [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s

[104-006]friends to be. But I had found a brother worthy of her when I knew that

[104-007]her Ezra was disguised under the name of Mordecai.”

[104-008]“Mordecai is really my name—Ezra Mordecai Cohen.”

[104-009]“Is there any kinship between this family and yours?” said Deronda.

[104-010]“Only the kinship of Israel. My soul clings to these people, who have

[104-011]sheltered me and given me succor out of the affection that abides in

[104-012]Jewish hearts, as sweet odor in things long crushed and hidden from the

[104-013]outer air. It is good for me to bear with their ignorance and be bound

[104-014]to them in gratitude, that I may keep in mind the spiritual poverty of

[104-015]the Jewish million, and not put impatient knowledge in the stead of

[104-016]loving wisdom.”

[104-017]“But you don’t feel bound to continue with them now there is a closer

[104-018]tie to draw you?” said Deronda, not without fear that he might find an

[104-019]obstacle to overcome. “It seems to me right now—is it not?—that you

[104-020]should live with your sister; and I have prepared a home to take you to

[104-021]in the neighborhood of her friends, that she may join you there. Pray

[104-022]grant me this wish. It will enable me to be with you often in the hours

[104-023]when Mirah is obliged to leave you. That is my selfish reason. But the

[104-024]chief reason is, that Mirah will desire to watch over you, and that you

[104-025]ought to give her the guardianship of a brother’s presence. You shall

[104-026]have books about you. I shall want to learn of you, and to take you out

[104-027]to see the river and trees. And you will have the rest and comfort that

[104-028]you will be more and more in need of—nay, that I need for you. This is

[104-029]the claim I make on you, now that we have found each other.”

[104-030]Deronda spoke in a tone of earnest, affectionate pleading, such as he

[104-031]might have used to a venerated elder brother. Mordecai’s eyes were

[104-032]fixed on him with a listening contemplation, and he was silent for a

[104-033]little while after Deronda had ceased to speak. Then he said, with an

[104-034]almost reproachful emphasis,

[104-035]“And you would have me hold it doubtful whether you were born a Jew!

[104-036]Have we not from the first touched each other with invisible

[104-037]fibres—have we not quivered together like the leaves from a common

[104-038]stem with stirring from a common root? I know what I am outwardly, I am

[104-039]one among the crowd of poor—I am stricken, I am dying. But our souls

[104-040]know each other. They gazed in silence as those who have long been

[104-041]parted and meet again, but when they found voice they were assured, and

[104-042]all their speech is understanding. The life of Israel is in your veins.”

[104-043]Deronda sat perfectly still, but felt his face tingling. It was

[104-044]impossible either to deny or assent. He waited, hoping that Mordecai

[104-045]would presently give him a more direct answer. And after a pause of

[104-046]meditation he did say, firmly,

[104-047]“What you wish of me I will do. And our mother—may the blessing of the

[104-048]Eternal be with her in our souls!—would have wished it too. I will

[104-049]accept what your loving kindness has prepared, and Mirah’s home shall

[104-050]be mine.” He paused a moment, and then added in a more melancholy tone,

[104-051]“But I shall grieve to part from these parents and the little ones. You

[104-052]must tell them, for my heart would fail me.”

[104-053]“I felt that you would want me to tell them. Shall we go now at once?”

[104-054]said Deronda, much relieved by this unwavering compliance.

[104-055]“Yes; let us not defer it. It must be done,” said Mordecai, rising with

[104-056]the air of a man who has to perform a painful duty. Then came, as an

[104-057]afterthought, “But do not dwell on my sister more than is needful.”

[104-058]When they entered the parlor he said to the alert Jacob, “Ask your

[104-059]father to come, and tell Sarah to mind the shop. My friend has

[104-060]something to say,” he continued, turning to the elder Mrs. Cohen. It

[104-061]seemed part of Mordecai’s eccentricity that he should call this

[104-062]gentleman his friend; and the two women tried to show their better

[104-063]manners by warm politeness in begging Deronda to seat himself in the

[104-064]best place.

[104-065]When Cohen entered with a pen behind his ear, he rubbed his hands and

[104-066]said with loud satisfaction, “Well, sir! I’m glad you’re doing us the

[104-067]honor to join our family party again. We are pretty comfortable, I

[104-068]think.”

[104-069]He looked round with shiny gladness. And when all were seated on the

[104-070]hearth the scene was worth peeping in upon: on one side Baby under her

[104-071]scarlet quilt in the corner being rocked by the young mother, and

[104-072]Adelaide Rebekah seated on the grandmother’s knee; on the other, Jacob

[104-073]between his father’s legs; while the two markedly different figures of

[104-074]Deronda and Mordecai were in the middle—Mordecai a little backward in

[104-075]the shade, anxious to conceal his agitated susceptibility to what was

[104-076]going on around him. The chief light came from the fire, which brought

[104-077]out the rich color on a depth of shadow, and seemed to turn into speech

[104-078]the dark gems of eyes that looked at each other kindly.

[104-079]“I have just been telling Mordecai of an event that makes a great

[104-080]change in his life,” Deronda began, “but I hope you will agree with me

[104-081]that it is a joyful one. Since he thinks of you as his best friends, he

[104-082]wishes me to tell you for him at once.”

[104-083]“Relations with money, sir?” burst in Cohen, feeling a power of

[104-084]divination which it was a pity to nullify by waiting for the fact.

[104-085]“No; not exactly,” said Deronda, smiling. “But a very precious relation

[104-086]wishes to be reunited to him—a very good and lovely young sister, who

[104-087]will care for his comfort in every way.”

[104-088]“Married, sir?”

[104-089]“No, not married.”

[104-090]“But with a maintenance?”

[104-091]“With talents which will secure her a maintenance. A home is already

[104-092]provided for Mordecai.”

[104-093]There was silence for a moment or two before the grandmother said in a

[104-094]wailing tone,

[104-095]“Well, well! and so you’re going away from us, Mordecai.”

[104-096]“And where there’s no children as there is here,” said the mother,

[104-097]catching the wail.

[104-098]“No Jacob, and no Adelaide, and no Eugenie!” wailed the grandmother

[104-099]again.

[104-100]“Ay, ay, Jacob’s learning ’ill all wear out of him. He must go to

[104-101]school. It’ll be hard times for Jacob,” said Cohen, in a tone of

[104-102]decision.

[104-103]In the wide-open ears of Jacob his father’s words sounded like a doom,

[104-104]giving an awful finish to the dirge-like effect of the whole

[104-105]announcement. His face had been gathering a wondering incredulous

[104-106]sorrow at the notion of Mordecai’s going away: he was unable to imagine

[104-107]the change as anything lasting; but at the mention of “hard times for

[104-108]Jacob” there was no further suspense of feeling, and he broke forth in

[104-109]loud lamentation. Adelaide Rebekah always cried when her brother cried,

[104-110]and now began to howl with astonishing suddenness, whereupon baby

[104-111]awaking contributed angry screams, and required to be taken out of the

[104-112]cradle. A great deal of hushing was necessary, and Mordecai feeling the

[104-113]cries pierce him, put out his arms to Jacob, who in the midst of his

[104-114]tears and sobs was turning his head right and left for general

[104-115]observation. His father, who had been saying, “Never mind, old man;

[104-116]you shall go to the riders,” now released him, and he went to Mordecai,

[104-117]who clasped him, and laid his cheek on the little black head without

[104-118]speaking. But Cohen, sensible that the master of the family must make

[104-119]some apology for all this weakness, and that the occasion called for a

[104-120]speech, addressed Deronda with some elevation of pitch, squaring his

[104-121]elbows and resting a hand on each knee:

[104-122]“It’s not as we’re the people to grudge anybody’s good luck, sir, or

[104-123]the portion of their cup being made fuller, as I may say. I’m not an

[104-124]envious man, and if anybody offered to set up Mordecai in a shop of my

[104-125]sort two doors lower down, _I_ shouldn’t make wry faces about it. I’m

[104-126]not one of them that had need have a poor opinion of themselves, and be

[104-127]frightened at anybody else getting a chance. If I’m offal, let a wise

[104-128]man come and tell me, for I’ve never heard it yet. And in point of

[104-129]business, I’m not a class of goods to be in danger. If anybody takes to

[104-130]rolling me, I can pack myself up like a caterpillar, and find my feet

[104-131]when I’m let alone. And though, as I may say, you’re taking some of our

[104-132]good works from us, which is property bearing interest, I’m not saying

[104-133]but we can afford that, though my mother and my wife had the good will

[104-134]to wish and do for Mordecai to the last; and a Jew must not be like a

[104-135]servant who works for reward—though I see nothing against a reward if

[104-136]I can get it. And as to the extra outlay in schooling, I’m neither poor

[104-137]nor greedy—I wouldn’t hang myself for sixpence, nor half a crown

[104-138]neither. But the truth of it is, the women and children are fond of

[104-139]Mordecai. You may partly see how it is, sir, by your own sense. A

[104-140]Jewish man is bound to thank God, day by day, that he was not made a

[104-141]woman; but a woman has to thank God that He has made her according to

[104-142]His will. And we all know what He has made her—a child-bearing,

[104-143]tender-hearted thing is the woman of our people. Her children are

[104-144]mostly stout, as I think you’ll say Addy’s are, and she’s not mushy,

[104-145]but her heart is tender. So you must excuse present company, sir, for

[104-146]not being glad all at once. And as to this young lady—for by what you

[104-147]say ‘young lady’ is the proper term”—Cohen here threw some additional

[104-148]emphasis into his look and tone—“we shall all be glad for Mordecai’s

[104-149]sake by-and-by, when we cast up our accounts and see where we are.”

[104-150]Before Deronda could summon any answer to this oddly mixed speech,

[104-151]Mordecai exclaimed,

[104-152]“Friends, friends! For food and raiment and shelter I would not have

[104-153]sought better than you have given me. You have sweetened the morsel

[104-154]with love; and what I thought of as a joy that would be left to me even

[104-155]in the last months of my waning strength was to go on teaching the lad.

[104-156]But now I am as one who had clad himself beforehand in his shroud, and

[104-157]used himself to making the grave his bed, when the divine command

[104-158]sounded in his ears, ‘Arise, and go forth; the night is not yet come.’

[104-159]For no light matter would I have turned away from your kindness to take

[104-160]another’s. But it has been taught us, as you know, that _the reward of

[104-161]one duty is the power to fulfill another_—so said Ben Azai. You have

[104-162]made your duty to one of the poor among your brethren a joy to you and

[104-163]me; and your reward shall be that you will not rest without the joy of

[104-164]like deeds in the time to come. And may not Jacob come and visit me?”

[104-165]Mordecai had turned with this question to Deronda, who said,

[104-166]“Surely that can be managed. It is no further than Brompton.”

[104-167]Jacob, who had been gradually calmed by the need to hear what was going

[104-168]forward, began now to see some daylight on the future, the word “visit”

[104-169]having the lively charm of cakes and general relaxation at his

[104-170]grandfather’s, the dealer in knives. He danced away from Mordecai, and

[104-171]took up a station of survey in the middle of the hearth with his hands

[104-172]in his knickerbockers.
