---
id: ch112
label: "Section 112"
type: chapter
description: "This was the letter which Sir Hugo put into Deronda’s hands:,"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[112-001]This was the letter which [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] put into [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]’s hands:,

[112-002]TO MY SON, DANIEL DERONDA.

[112-003]My good friend and yours, Sir Hugo Mallinger, will have told you that

[112-004]I wish to see you. My health is shaken, and I desire there should be

[112-005]no time lost before I deliver to you what I have long withheld. Let

[112-006]nothing hinder you from being at the _Albergo dell’ Italia_ in

[112-007][[genoa|Genoa]] by the fourteenth of this month. Wait for me there. I am

[112-008]uncertain when I shall be able to make the journey from Spezia, where

[112-009]I shall be staying. That will depend on several things. Wait for

[112-010]me—the [[Leonora-Halm-Eberstein|Princess Halm-Eberstein]]. Bring with you the diamond ring that

[112-011]Sir Hugo gave you. I shall like to see it again.—Your unknown mother,

[112-012]LEONORA HALM-EBERSTEIN.

[112-013]This letter with its colorless wording gave Deronda no clue to what was

[112-014]in reserve for him; but he could not do otherwise than accept Sir

[112-015]Hugo’s reticence, which seemed to imply some pledge not to anticipate

[112-016]the mother’s disclosures; and the discovery that his life-long

[112-017]conjectures had been mistaken checked further surmise. Deronda could

[112-018]not hinder his imagination from taking a quick flight over what seemed

[112-019]possibilities, but he refused to contemplate any of them as more likely

[112-020]than another, lest he should be nursing it into a dominant desire or

[112-021]repugnance, instead of simply preparing himself with resolve to meet

[112-022]the fact bravely, whatever it might turn out to be.

[112-023]In this state of mind he could not have communicated to any one the

[112-024]reason for the absence which in some quarters he was obliged to mention

[112-025]beforehand, least of all to [[Mordecai]], whom it would affect as

[112-026]powerfully as it did himself, only in rather a different way. If he

[112-027]were to say, “I am going to learn the truth about my birth,” Mordecai’s

[112-028]hope would gather what might prove a painful, dangerous excitement. To

[112-029]exclude suppositions, he spoke of his journey as being undertaken by

[112-030]Sir Hugo’s wish, and threw as much indifference as he could into his

[112-031]manner of announcing it, saying he was uncertain of its duration, but

[112-032]it would perhaps be very short.

[112-033]“I will ask to have the child Jacob to stay with me,” said Mordecai,

[112-034]comforting himself in this way, after the first mournful glances.

[112-035]“I will [[ambition|drive]] round and ask Mrs. Cohen to let him come,” said [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]].

[112-036]“The grandmother will deny you nothing,” said Deronda. “I’m glad you

[112-037]were a little wrong as well as I,” he added, smiling at Mordecai. “You

[112-038]thought that old Mrs. Cohen would not bear to see Mirah.”

[112-039]“I undervalued her heart,” said Mordecai. “She is capable of rejoicing

[112-040]that another’s plant blooms though her own be withered.”

[112-041]“Oh, they are dear good people; I feel as if we all belonged to each

[112-042]other,” said Mirah, with a tinge of merriment in her smile.

[112-043]“What should you have felt if that Ezra had been your brother?” said

[112-044]Deronda, mischievously—a little provoked that she had taken kindly at

[112-045]once to people who had caused him so much prospective annoyance on her

[112-046]account.

[112-047]Mirah looked at him with a slight surprise for a moment, and then said,

[112-048]“He is not a bad man—I think he would never forsake any one.” But when

[112-049]she uttered the words she blushed deeply, and glancing timidly at

[112-050]Mordecai, turned away to some occupation. Her father was in her mind,

[112-051]and this was a subject on which she and her brother had a painful

[112-052]mutual consciousness. “If he should come and find us!” was a thought

[112-053]which to Mirah sometimes made the street daylight as shadowy as a

[112-054]haunted forest where each turn screened for her an imaginary apparition.

[112-055]Deronda felt what was her involuntary allusion, and understood the

[112-056]blush. How could he be slow to understand feelings which now seemed

[112-057]nearer than ever to his own? for the words of his mother’s letter

[112-058]implied that his filial relation was not to be freed from painful

[112-059]conditions; indeed, singularly enough that letter which had brought his

[112-060]mother nearer as a living reality had thrown her into more remoteness

[112-061]for his affections. The tender yearning after a being whose life might

[112-062]have been the worse for not having his care and love, the image of a

[112-063]mother who had not had all her dues, whether of reverence or

[112-064][[sympathy|compassion]], had long been secretly present with him in his observation

[112-065]of all the women he had come near. But it seemed now that this

[112-066]picturing of his mother might fit the facts no better than his former

[112-067]conceptions about Sir Hugo. He wondered to find that when this mother’s

[112-068]very handwriting had come to him with words holding her actual

[112-069]feeling, his affections had suddenly shrunk into a state of comparative

[112-070]neutrality toward her. A veiled figure with enigmatic speech had thrust

[112-071]away that image which, in spite of uncertainty, his clinging thought

[112-072]had gradually modeled and made the possessor of his tenderness and

[112-073]duteous longing. When he set off to Genoa, the interest really

[112-074]uppermost in his mind had hardly so much relation to his mother as to

[112-075]Mordecai and Mirah.

[112-076]“God bless you, Dan!” Sir Hugo had said, when they shook hands.

[112-077]“Whatever else changes for you, it can’t change my being the oldest

[112-078]friend you have known, and the one who has all along felt the most for

[112-079]you. I couldn’t have loved you better if you’d been my own—only I

[112-080]should have been better pleased with thinking of you always as the

[112-081]future master of the Abbey instead of my fine nephew; and then you

[112-082]would have seen it necessary for you to take a political line.

[112-083]However—things must be as they may.” It was a defensive movement of

[112-084]the baronet’s to mingle purposeless remarks with the expression of

[112-085]serious feeling.

[112-086]When Deronda arrived at the _Italia_ in Genoa, no Princess

[112-087]Halm-Eberstein was there; but on the second day there was a letter for

[112-088]him, saying that her arrival might happen within a week, or might be

[112-089]deferred a fortnight and more; she was under circumstances which made

[112-090]it impossible for her to fix her journey more precisely, and she

[112-091]entreated him to wait as patiently as he could.

[112-092]With this indefinite prospect of suspense on matters of supreme moment

[112-093]to him, Deronda set about the difficult task of seeking amusement on

[112-094]philosophic grounds, as a means of quieting excited feeling and giving

[112-095]patience a lift over a weary road. His former visit to the superb city

[112-096]had been only cursory, and left him much to learn beyond the prescribed

[112-097]round of sight-seeing, by spending the cooler hours in observant

[112-098]wandering about the streets, the quay, and the environs; and he often

[112-099]took a boat that he might enjoy the magnificent view of the city and

[112-100]harbor from the sea. All sights, all subjects, even the expected

[112-101]meeting with his mother, found a central union in Mordecai and Mirah,

[112-102]and the ideas immediately associated with them; and among the thoughts

[112-103]that most filled his mind while his boat was pushing about within view

[112-104]of the grand harbor was that of the multitudinous Spanish Jews

[112-105]centuries ago driven destitute from their Spanish homes, suffered to

[112-106]land from the crowded ships only for a brief rest on this grand quay of

[112-107]Genoa, overspreading it with a pall of famine and plague—dying mothers

[112-108]and dying children at their breasts—fathers and sons a-gaze at each

[112-109]other’s haggardness, like groups from a hundred Hunger-towers turned

[112-110]out beneath the midday sun. Inevitably dreamy constructions of a

[112-111]possible ancestry for himself would weave themselves with historic

[112-112]memories which had begun to have a new interest for him on his

[112-113]discovery of Mirah, and now, under the influence of Mordecai, had

[112-114]become irresistibly dominant. He would have sealed his mind against

[112-115]such constructions if it had been possible, and he had never yet fully

[112-116]admitted to himself that he wished the facts to verify Mordecai’s

[112-117]conviction: he inwardly repeated that he had no choice in the matter,

[112-118]and that wishing was folly—nay, on the question of parentage, wishing

[112-119]seemed part of that meanness which disowns kinship: it was a disowning

[112-120]by anticipation. What he had to do was simply to accept the fact; and

[112-121]he had really no strong presumption to go upon, now that he was assured

[112-122]of his mistake about Sir Hugo. There had been a resolved [[secrecy|concealment]]

[112-123]which made all inference untrustworthy, and the very name he bore might

[112-124]be a false one. If Mordecai was wrong—if he, the so-called Daniel

[112-125]Deronda, were held by ties entirely aloof from any such course as his

[112-126]friend’s pathetic hope had marked out?—he would not say “I wish”; but

[112-127]he could not help feeling on which side the sacrifice lay.

[112-128]Across these two importunate thoughts, which he resisted as much as one

[112-129]can resist anything in that unstrung condition which belongs to

[112-130]suspense, there came continually an anxiety which he made no effort to

[112-131]banish—dwelling on it rather with a mournfulness, which often seems to

[112-132]us the best atonement we can make to one whose need we have been unable

[112-133]to meet. The anxiety was for [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]. In the wonderful mixtures of

[112-134]our nature there is a feeling distinct from that exclusive passionate

[112-135]love of which some men and women (by no means all) are capable, which

[112-136]yet is not the same with friendship, nor with a merely benevolent

[112-137]regard, whether admiring or compassionate: a man, say—for it is a man

[112-138]who is here concerned—hardly represents to himself this shade of

[112-139]feeling toward a woman more nearly than in words, “I should have loved

[112-140]her, if——”: the “if” covering some prior growth in the inclinations,

[112-141]or else some circumstances which have made an inward prohibitory law as

[112-142]a stay against the emotions ready to quiver out of balance. The “if” in

[112-143]Deronda’s case carried reasons of both kinds; yet he had never

[112-144]throughout his relations with Gwendolen been free from the nervous

[112-145]consciousness that there was something to guard against not only on her

[112-146]account but on his own—some precipitancy in the manifestations of

[112-147]impulsive feeling—some ruinous inroad of what is but momentary on the

[112-148]permanent chosen treasure of the heart—some spoiling of her trust,

[112-149]which wrought upon him now as if it had been the retreating cry of a

[112-150]creature snatched and carried out of his reach by swift horsemen or

[112-151]swifter waves, while his own strength was only a stronger sense of

[112-152]weakness. How could his feelings for Gwendolen ever be exactly like his

[112-153]feelings for other women, even when there was one by whose side he

[112-154]desired to stand apart from them? Strangely the figure entered into the

[112-155]pictures of his present and future; strangely (and now it seemed sadly)

[112-156]their two lots had come in contact, hers narrowly personal, his charged

[112-157]with far-reaching sensibilities, perhaps with durable purposes, which

[112-158]were hardly more present to her than the reasons why men migrate are

[112-159]present to the birds that come as usual for the crumbs and find them no

[112-160]more. Not that Deronda was too ready to imagine himself of supreme

[112-161]importance to a woman; but her words of insistence that he must “remain

[112-162]near her—must not forsake her”—continually recurred to him with the

[112-163]clearness and importunity of imagined sounds, such as [[dantes-divine-comedy|Dante]] has said

[112-164]pierce us like arrows whose points carry the sharpness of pity,

[112-165]“Lamenti saettaron me diversi

[112-166]Che di pietà ferrati avean gli strali”.

[112-167]Day after day passed, and the very air of Italy seemed to carry the

[112-168]consciousness that war had been declared against Austria, and every day

[112-169]was a hurrying march of crowded Time toward the world-changing battle

[112-170]of Sadowa. Meanwhile, in Genoa, the noons were getting hotter, the

[112-171]converging outer roads getting deeper with white dust, the oleanders in

[112-172]the tubs along the wayside gardens looking more and more like fatigued

[112-173]holiday-makers, and the sweet evening changing her office—scattering

[112-174]abroad those whom the midday had sent under shelter, and sowing all

[112-175]paths with happy social sounds, little tinklings of mule-bells and

[112-176]whirrings of thrumbed strings, light footsteps and voices, if not

[112-177]leisurely, then with the hurry of pleasure in them; while the

[112-178]encircling heights, crowned with forts, skirted with fine dwellings and

[112-179]gardens, seemed also to come forth and gaze in fullness of beauty after

[112-180]their long siesta, till all strong color melted in the stream of

[112-181]moonlight which made the Streets a new spectacle with shadows, both

[112-182]still and moving, on cathedral steps and against the façades of massive

[112-183]palaces; and then slowly with the descending moon all sank in deep

[112-184]night and silence, and nothing shone but the port lights of the great

[112-185]Lanterna in the blackness below, and the glimmering stars in the

[112-186]blackness above. Deronda, in his suspense, watched this revolving of

[112-187]the days as he might have watched a wonderful clock where the striking

[112-188]of the hours was made solemn with antique figures advancing and

[112-189]retreating in monitory procession, while he still kept his ear open for

[112-190]another kind of signal which would have its solemnity too: He was

[112-191]beginning to sicken of occupation, and found himself contemplating all

[112-192]activity with the aloofness of a prisoner awaiting ransom. In his

[112-193]letters to Mordecai and [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]], he had avoided writing about himself, but

[112-194]he was really getting into that state of mind to which all subjects

[112-195]become personal; and the few books he had brought to make him a refuge

[112-196]in study were becoming unreadable, because the point of view that life

[112-197]would make for him was in that agitating moment of uncertainty which is

[112-198]close upon decision.
