---
id: ch116
label: "Section 116"
type: chapter
description: "She ceased speaking, and her head sank back while she looked vaguely"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[116-001]She ceased speaking, and her head sank back while she looked vaguely

[116-002]before her. Her thought was traveling through the years, and when she

[116-003]began to speak again her voice had lost its argumentative spirit, and

[116-004]had fallen into a veiled tone of distress.

[116-005]“But months ago this Kalonymos saw you in the [[the-synagogue|synagogue]] at Frankfort.

[116-006]He saw you enter the hotel, and he went to ask your name. There was

[116-007]nobody else in the world to whom the name would have told anything

[116-008]about me.”

[116-009]“Then it is not my real name?” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], with a dislike even to

[116-010]this trifling part of the disguise which had been thrown round him.

[116-011]“Oh, as real as another,” said his mother, indifferently. “The Jews

[116-012]have always been changing their names. My father’s family had kept the

[116-013]name of Charisi: my husband was a Charisi. When I came out as a singer,

[116-014]we made it [[Leonora-Halm-Eberstein|Alcharisi]]. But there had been a branch of the family my

[116-015]father had lost sight of who called themselves Deronda, and when I

[116-016]wanted a name for you, and [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] said, ‘Let it be a foreign name,’ I

[116-017]thought of Deronda. But Joseph Kalonymos had heard my father speak of

[116-018]the Deronda branch, and the name confirmed his suspicion. He began to

[116-019]suspect what had been done. It was as if everything had been whispered

[116-020]to him in the air. He found out where I was. He took a journey into

[116-021]Russia to see me; he found me weak and shattered. He had come back

[116-022]again, with his white hair, and with rage in his soul against me. He

[116-023]said I was going down to the grave clad in falsehood and

[116-024]robbery—falsehood to my father and robbery of my own child. He accused

[116-025]me of having kept the knowledge of your birth from you, and having

[116-026]brought you up as if you had been the son of an English gentleman.

[116-027]Well, it was true; and twenty years before I would have maintained that

[116-028]I had a right to do it. But I can maintain nothing now. No [[religion|faith]] is

[116-029]strong within me. My father may have God on his side. This man’s words

[116-030]were like lion’s teeth upon me. My father’s threats eat into me with my

[116-031]pain. If I tell everything—if I deliver up everything—what else can

[116-032]be demanded of me? I cannot make myself love the people I have never

[116-033]loved—is it not enough that I lost the life I did love?”

[116-034]She had leaned forward a little in her low-toned pleading, that seemed

[116-035]like a smothered cry: her arms and hands were stretched out at full

[116-036]length, as if strained in beseeching, Deronda’s soul was absorbed in

[116-037]the anguish of [[sympathy|compassion]]. He could not mind now that he had been

[116-038]repulsed before. His pity made a flood of forgiveness within him. His

[116-039]single impulse was to kneel by her and take her hand gently, between

[116-040]his palms, while he said in that exquisite voice of soothing which

[116-041]expresses oneness with the sufferer,

[116-042]“Mother, take comfort!”

[116-043]She did not seem inclined to repulse him now, but looked down at him

[116-044]and let him take both her hands to fold between his. Gradually tears

[116-045]gathered, but she pressed her handkerchief against her eyes and then

[116-046]leaned her cheek against his brow, as if she wished that they should

[116-047]not look at each other.

[116-048]“Is it not possible that I could be near you often and comfort you?”

[116-049]said Deronda. He was under that stress of pity that propels us on

[116-050]sacrifices.

[116-051]“No, not possible,” she answered, lifting up her head again and

[116-052]withdrawing her hand as if she wished him to move away. “I have a

[116-053]husband and five children. None of them know of your existence.”

[116-054]Deronda felt painfully silenced. He rose and stood at a little distance.

[116-055]“You wonder why I married,” she went on presently, under the influence

[116-056]of a newly-recurring thought. “I meant never to marry again. I meant to

[116-057]be free and to live for my art. I had parted with you. I had no bonds.

[116-058]For nine years I was a queen. I enjoyed the life I had longed for. But

[116-059]something befell me. It was like a fit of forgetfulness. I began to

[116-060]sing out of tune. They told me of it. Another woman was thrusting

[116-061]herself in my place. I could not endure the prospect of failure and

[116-062]decline. It was horrible to me.” She started up again, with a shudder,

[116-063]and lifted screening hands like one who dreads missiles. “It drove me

[116-064]to marry. I made believe that I preferred being the wife of a Russian

[116-065]noble to being the greatest lyric actress of Europe; I made believe—I

[116-066]acted that part. It was because I felt my greatness sinking away from

[116-067]me, as I feel my life sinking now. I would not wait till men said, ‘She

[116-068]had better go.’”

[116-069]She sank into her seat again, and looked at the evening sky as she went

[116-070]on: “I repented. It was a resolve taken in desperation. That [[music|singing]]

[116-071]out of tune was only like a fit of illness; it went away. I repented;

[116-072]but it was too late. I could not go back. All things hindered, me—all

[116-073]things.”

[116-074]A new haggardness had come in her face, but her son refrained from

[116-075]again urging her to leave further speech till the morrow: there was

[116-076]evidently some mental relief for her in an outpouring such as she could

[116-077]never have allowed herself before. He stood still while she maintained

[116-078]silence longer than she knew, and the light was perceptibly fading. At

[116-079]last she turned to him and said,

[116-080]“I can bear no more now.” She put out her hand, but then quickly

[116-081]withdrew it saying, “Stay. How do I know that I can see you again? I

[116-082]cannot bear to be seen when I am in pain.”

[116-083]She drew forth a pocket-book, and taking out a letter said, “This is

[116-084]addressed to the banking-house in [[mainz|Mainz]], where you are to go for your

[116-085]grandfather’s chest. It is a letter written by Joseph Kalonymos: if he

[116-086]is not there himself, this order of his will be obeyed.”

[116-087]When Deronda had taken the letter, she said, with effort but more

[116-088]gently than before, “Kneel again, and let me kiss you.”

[116-089]He obeyed, and holding his head between her hands, she kissed him

[116-090]solemnly on the brow. “You see, I had no life left to love you with,”

[116-091]she said, in a low murmur. “But there is more fortune for you. Sir Hugo

[116-092]was to keep it in reserve. I gave you all your father’s fortune. They

[116-093]can never accuse me of robbery there.”

[116-094]“If you had needed anything I would have worked for you,” said Deronda,

[116-095]conscious of disappointed yearning—a shutting out forever from long

[116-096]early vistas of affectionate imagination.

[116-097]“I need nothing that the skill of man can give me,” said his mother,

[116-098]still holding his head, and perusing his features. “But perhaps now I

[116-099]have satisfied my father’s will, your face will come instead of

[116-100]his—your young, loving face.”

[116-101]“But you will see me again?” said Deronda, anxiously.

[116-102]“Yes—perhaps. Wait, wait. Leave me now.”

[116-103]CHAPTER LII.

[116-104]“La même fermeté qui sert à résister à l’amour sert aussi à le rendre

[116-105]violent et durable; et les personnes faibles qui sont toujours

[116-106]agitées des passions n’en sont presque jamais véritablement remplies.”

[116-107]—LA ROCHEFOUCAULD.

[116-108]Among Deronda’s letters the next morning was one from [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans Meyrick]] of

[116-109]four quarto pages, in the small, beautiful handwriting which ran in the

[116-110]Meyrick family.

[116-111]MY DEAR DERONDA,—In return for your sketch of Italian movements and

[116-112]your view of the world’s affairs generally, I may say that here at

[116-113]home the most judicious opinion going as to the effects of present

[116-114]causes is that “time will show.” As to the present causes of past

[116-115]effects, it is now seen that the late swindling telegrams account for

[116-116]the last year’s cattle plague—which is a refutation of philosophy

[116-117]falsely so called, and justifies the compensation to the farmers. My

[116-118]own idea that a murrain will shortly break out in the commercial

[116-119]class, and that the cause will subsequently disclose itself in the

[116-120]ready sale of all rejected pictures, has been called an unsound use of

[116-121]analogy; but there are minds that will not hesitate to rob even the

[116-122]neglected painter of his solace. To my feeling there is great beauty

[116-123]in the conception that some bad judge might give a high price for my

[116-124]Berenice series, and that the men in the city would have already been

[116-125]punished for my ill-merited luck.

[116-126]Meanwhile I am consoling myself for your absence by finding my

[116-127]advantage in it—shining like Hesperus when Hyperion has departed;

[116-128]sitting with our Hebrew prophet, and making a study of his head, in

[116-129]the hours when he used to be occupied with you—getting credit with

[116-130]him as a learned young Gentile, who would have been a Jew if he could

[116-131]—and agreeing with him in the general principle, that whatever is

[116-132]best is for that reason Jewish. I never held it my _forte_ to be

[116-133]a severe reasoner, but I can see that if whatever is best is A, and B

[116-134]happens to be best, B must be A, however little you might have

[116-135]expected it beforehand. On that principle I could see the force of a

[116-136]pamphlet I once read to prove that all good art was Protestant.

[116-137]However, our prophet is an uncommonly interesting sitter—a better

[116-138]model than Rembrandt had for his Rabbi—and I never come away from him

[116-139]without a new discovery. For one thing, it is a constant wonder to me

[116-140]that, with all his fiery feeling for his race and their traditions, he

[116-141]is no straight-laced Jew, spitting after the word Christian, and

[116-142]enjoying the prospect that the Gentile mouth will water in vain for a

[116-143]slice of the roasted Leviathan, while Israel will be sending up plates

[116-144]for more, _ad libitum_, (You perceive that my studies had taught

[116-145]me what to expect from the orthodox Jew.) I confess that I have always

[116-146]held lightly by your account of [[Mordecai]], as apologetic, and merely

[116-147]part of your disposition to make an antediluvian point of view lest

[116-148]you should do injustice to the megatherium. But now I have given ear

[116-149]to him in his proper person, I find him really a sort of

[116-150]philosophical-allegorical-mystical believer, and yet with a sharp

[116-151]dialectic point, so that any argumentative rattler of peas in a

[116-152]bladder might soon be pricked in silence by him. The mixture may be

[116-153]one of the Jewish prerogatives, for what I know. In fact, his mind

[116-154]seems so broad that I find my own correct opinions lying in it quite

[116-155]commodiously, and how they are to be brought into agreement with the

[116-156]vast remainder is his affair, not mine. I leave it to him to settle

[116-157]our basis, never yet having seen a basis which is not a

[116-158]world-supporting elephant, more or less powerful and expensive to keep.

[116-159]My means will not allow me to keep a private elephant. I go into mystery

[116-160]instead, as cheaper and more lasting—a sort of gas which is likely to

[116-161]be continually supplied by the decomposition of the elephants. And if

[116-162]I like the look of an opinion, I treat it civilly, without suspicious

[116-163]inquiries. I have quite a friendly feeling toward Mordecai’s notion

[116-164]that a whole Christian is three-fourths a Jew, and that from the

[116-165]Alexandrian time downward the most comprehensive minds have been

[116-166]Jewish; for I think of pointing out to [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] that, Arabic and other

[116-167]incidents of life apart, there is really little difference between me

[116-168]and—Maimonides. But I have lately been finding out that it is your

[116-169]shallow lover who can’t help making a declaration. If Mirah’s ways

[116-170]were less distracting, and it were less of a heaven to be in her

[116-171]presence and watch her, I must long ago have flung myself at her feet,

[116-172]and requested her to tell me, with less indirectness, whether she

[116-173]wished me to blow my brains out. I have a knack of hoping, which is as

[116-174]good as an estate in reversion, if one can keep from the temptation of

[116-175]turning it into certainty, which may spoil all. My Hope wanders among

[116-176]the orchard blossoms, feels the warm snow falling on it through the

[116-177]sunshine, and is in doubt of nothing; but, catching sight of Certainty

[116-178]in the distance, sees an ugly Janus-faced deity, with a dubious wink

[116-179]on the hither side of him, and turns quickly away. But you, with your

[116-180]supreme reasonableness, and self-nullification, and preparation for

[116-181]the worst—you know nothing about Hope, that immortal, delicious

[116-182]maiden forever courted forever propitious, whom fools have called

[116-183]deceitful, as if it were Hope that carried the cup of disappointment,

[116-184]whereas it is her deadly enemy, Certainty, whom she only escapes by

[116-185]transformation. (You observe my new vein of allegory?) Seriously,

[116-186]however, I must be permitted to allege that truth will prevail, that

[116-187]prejudice will melt before it, that diversity, accompanied by merit,

[116-188]will make itself felt as fascination, and that no virtuous [[ambition|aspiration]]

[116-189]will be frustrated—all which, if I mistake not, are doctrines of the

[116-190]schools, and they imply that the Jewess I prefer will prefer me. Any

[116-191]blockhead can cite generalities, but the mind-master discerns the

[116-192]particular cases they represent.
