---
id: ch118
label: "Section 118"
type: chapter
description: "“Ezra, how is it?” Mirah one day said to him—“I am continually going"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[118-001]“[[Mordecai|Ezra]], how is it?” [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] one day said to him—“I am continually going

[118-002]to speak to [[Daniel-Deronda|Mr. Deronda]] as if he were a Jew?”

[118-003]He smiled at her quietly, and said, “I suppose it is because he treats

[118-004]us as if he were our brother. But he loves not to have the difference

[118-005]of birth dwelt upon.”

[118-006]“He has never lived with his parents, Mr. [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]], says,” continued Mirah,

[118-007]to whom this was necessarily a question of interest about every one for

[118-008]whom she had a regard.

[118-009]“Seek not to know such things from Mr. Hans,” said Mordecai, gravely,

[118-010]laying his hand on her curls, as he was wont. “What Daniel Deronda

[118-011]wishes us to know about himself is for him to tell us.”

[118-012]And Mirah felt herself rebuked, as Deronda had done. But to be rebuked

[118-013]in this way by Mordecai made her rather proud.

[118-014]“I see no one so great as my brother,” she said to Mrs. Meyrick one day

[118-015]that she called at the Chelsea house on her way home, and, according to

[118-016]her hope, found the little mother alone. “It is difficult to think that

[118-017]he belongs to the same world as those people I used to live amongst. I

[118-018]told you once that they made life seem like a madhouse; but when I am

[118-019]with Ezra he makes me feel that his life is a great good, though he has

[118-020]suffered so much; not like me, who wanted to die because I had suffered

[118-021]a little, and only for a little while. His soul is so full, it is

[118-022]impossible for him to wish for death as I did. I get the same sort of

[118-023]feeling from him that I got yesterday, when I was tired, and came home

[118-024]through the park after the sweet rain had fallen and the sunshine lay

[118-025]on the grass and flowers. Everything in the sky and under the sky

[118-026]looked so pure and beautiful that the weariness and trouble and folly

[118-027]seemed only a small part of what is, and I became more patient and

[118-028]hopeful.”

[118-029]A dove-like note of melancholy in this speech caused Mrs. Meyrick to

[118-030]look at Mirah with new examination. After laying down her hat and

[118-031]pushing her curls flat, with an air of fatigue, she placed herself on a

[118-032]chair opposite her friend in her habitual attitude, her feet and hands

[118-033]just crossed; and at a distance she might have seemed a colored statue

[118-034]of serenity. But Mrs. Meyrick discerned a new look of suppressed

[118-035]suffering in her face, which corresponded to the hint that to be

[118-036]patient and hopeful required some extra influence.

[118-037]“Is there any fresh trouble on your mind, my dear?” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[118-038]giving up her needlework as a sign of concentrated attention.

[118-039]Mirah hesitated before she said, “I am too ready to speak of troubles,

[118-040]I think. It seems unkind to put anything painful into other people’s

[118-041]minds, unless one were sure it would hinder something worse. And

[118-042]perhaps I am too hasty and fearful.”

[118-043]“Oh, my dear, mothers are made to like pain and trouble for the sake of

[118-044]their children. Is it because the [[music|singing]] lessons are so few, and are

[118-045]likely to fall off when the season comes to an end? Success in these

[118-046]things can’t come all at once.” Mrs. Meyrick did not believe that she

[118-047]was touching the real grief; but a guess that could be corrected would

[118-048]make an easier channel for confidence.

[118-049]“No, not that,” said Mirah, shaking her head gently. “I have been a

[118-050]little disappointed because so many ladies said they wanted me to give

[118-051]them or their daughters lessons, and then I never heard of them again,

[118-052]But perhaps after the holidays I shall teach in some schools. Besides,

[118-053]you know, I am as rich as a princess now. I have not touched the

[118-054]hundred pounds that [[Catherine-Arrowpoint|Mrs. Klesmer]] gave me; and I should never be afraid

[118-055]that Ezra would be in want of anything, because there is Mr. Deronda,

[118-056]and he said, ‘It is the chief honor of my life that your brother will

[118-057]share anything with me.’ Oh, no! Ezra and I can have no fears for each

[118-058]other about such things as food and clothing.”

[118-059]“But there is some other fear on your mind,” said Mrs. Meyrick not

[118-060]without divination—“a fear of something that may disturb your peace.

[118-061]Don’t be forecasting evil, dear child, unless it is what you can guard

[118-062]against. Anxiety is good for nothing if we can’t turn it into a

[118-063]defense. But there’s no defense against all the things that might be.

[118-064]Have you any more reason for being anxious now than you had a month

[118-065]ago?”

[118-066]“Yes, I have,” said Mirah. “I have kept it from Ezra. I have not dared

[118-067]to tell him. Pray forgive me that I can’t do without telling you. I

[118-068]_have_ more reason for being anxious. It is five days ago now. I am

[118-069]quite sure I saw my father.”

[118-070]Mrs. Meyrick shrank into a smaller space, packing her arms across her

[118-071]chest and leaning forward—to hinder herself from pelting that father

[118-072]with her worst epithets.

[118-073]“The year has changed him,” Mirah went on. “He had already been much

[118-074]altered and worn in the time before I left him. You remember I said how

[118-075]he used sometimes to cry. He was always excited one way or the other. I

[118-076]have told Ezra everything that I told you, and he says that my father

[118-077]had taken to gambling, which makes people easily distressed, and then

[118-078]again exalted. And now—it was only a moment that I saw him—his face

[118-079]was more haggard, and his clothes were shabby. He was with a much

[118-080]worse-looking man, who carried something, and they were hurrying along

[118-081]after an omnibus.”

[118-082]“Well, child, he did not see you, I hope?”

[118-083]“No. I had just come from Mrs. Raymond’s, and I was waiting to cross

[118-084]near the Marble Arch. Soon he was on the omnibus and gone out of sight.

[118-085]It was a dreadful moment. My old life seemed to have come back again,

[118-086]and it was worse than it had ever been before. And I could not help

[118-087]feeling it a new deliverance that he was gone out of sight without

[118-088]knowing that I was there. And yet it hurt me that I was feeling so—it

[118-089]seemed hateful in me—almost like words I once had to speak in a play,

[118-090]that ‘I had warmed my hands in the blood of my kindred.’ For where

[118-091]might my father be going? What may become of him? And his having a

[118-092]daughter who would own him in spite of all, might have hindered the

[118-093]worst. Is there any pain like seeing what ought to be the best things

[118-094]in life turned into the worst? All those opposite feelings were meeting

[118-095]and pressing against each other, and took up all my strength. No one

[118-096]could act that. Acting is slow and poor to what we go through within. I

[118-097]don’t know how I called a cab. I only remember that I was in it when I

[118-098]began to think, ‘I cannot tell Ezra; he must not know.’”

[118-099]“You are afraid of grieving him?” Mrs. Meyrick asked, when Mirah had

[118-100]paused a little.

[118-101]“Yes—and there is something more,” said Mirah, hesitatingly, as if she

[118-102]were examining her feeling before she would venture to speak of it. “I

[118-103]want to tell you; I cannot tell any one else. I could not have told my

[118-104]own mother: I should have closed it up before her. I feel shame for my

[118-105]father, and it is perhaps strange—but the shame is greater before Ezra

[118-106]than before any one else in the world. He desired me to tell him all

[118-107]about my life, and I obeyed him. But it is always like a smart to me to

[118-108]know that those things about my father are in Ezra’s mind. And—can you

[118-109]believe it? when the thought haunts me how it would be if my father

[118-110]were to come and show himself before us both, what seems as if it would

[118-111]scorch me most is seeing my father shrinking before Ezra. That is the

[118-112]truth. I don’t know whether it is a right feeling. But I can’t help

[118-113]thinking that I would rather try to maintain my father in secret, and

[118-114]bear a great deal in that way, if I could hinder him from meeting my

[118-115]brother.”

[118-116]“You must not encourage that feeling, Mirah,” said Mrs. Meyrick,

[118-117]hastily. “It would be very dangerous; it would be wrong. You must not

[118-118]have [[secrecy|concealment]] of that sort.”

[118-119]“But ought I now to tell Ezra that I have seen my father?” said Mirah,

[118-120]with deprecation in her tone.

[118-121]“No,” Mrs. Meyrick answered, dubitatively. “I don’t know that it is

[118-122]necessary to do that. Your father may go away with the birds. It is not

[118-123]clear that he came after you; you may never see him again. And then

[118-124]your brother will have been spared a useless anxiety. But promise me

[118-125]that if your father sees you—gets hold of you in any way again—and

[118-126]you will let us all know. Promise me that solemnly, Mirah. I have a

[118-127]right to ask it.”

[118-128]Mirah reflected a little, then leaned forward to put her hands in Mrs.

[118-129]Meyrick’s, and said, “Since you ask it, I do promise. I will bear this

[118-130]feeling of shame. I have been so long used to think that I must bear

[118-131]that sort of inward pain. But the shame for my father burns me more

[118-132]when I think of his meeting Ezra.” She was silent a moment or two, and

[118-133]then said, in a new tone of yearning [[sympathy|compassion]], “And we are his

[118-134]children—and he was once young like us—and my mother loved him. Oh! I

[118-135]cannot help seeing it all close, and it hurts me like a cruelty.”

[118-136]Mirah shed no tears: the discipline of her whole life had been against

[118-137]indulgence in such manifestation, which soon falls under the control of

[118-138]strong motives; but it seemed that the more intense expression of

[118-139]sorrow had entered into her voice. Mrs. Meyrick, with all her quickness

[118-140]and loving insight, did not quite understand that filial feeling in

[118-141]Mirah which had active roots deep below her indignation for the worst

[118-142]offenses. She could conceive that a mother would have a clinging pity

[118-143]and shame for a reprobate son, but she was out of patience with what

[118-144]she held an exaggerated susceptibility on behalf of this father, whose

[118-145]reappearance inclined her to wish him under the care of a turnkey.

[118-146]Mirah’s promise, however, was some security against her weakness.

[118-147]That incident was the only reason that Mirah herself could have stated

[118-148]for the hidden sadness which Hans had divined. Of one element in her

[118-149]changed mood she could have given no definite account: it was something

[118-150]as dim as the sense of approaching weather-change, and had extremely

[118-151]slight external promptings, such as we are often ashamed to find all we

[118-152]can allege in support of the busy constructions that go on within us,

[118-153]not only without effort, but even against it, under the influence of

[118-154]any blind emotional stirring. Perhaps the first leaven of uneasiness

[118-155]was laid by [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s behavior on that visit which was entirely

[118-156]superfluous as a means of engaging Mirah to sing, and could have no

[118-157]other motive than the excited and strange questioning about Deronda.

[118-158]Mirah had instinctively kept the visit a secret, but the active

[118-159]remembrance of it had raised a new susceptibility in her, and made her

[118-160]alive as she had never been before to the relations Deronda must have

[118-161]with that society which she herself was getting frequent glimpses of

[118-162]without belonging to it. Her peculiar life and education had produced

[118-163]in her an extraordinary mixture of unworldliness, with knowledge of the

[118-164]world’s evil, and even this knowledge was a strange blending of direct

[118-165]observation with the effects of reading and theatrical study. Her

[118-166]memory was furnished with abundant passionate situation and intrigue,

[118-167]which she never made emotionally her own, but felt a repelled aloofness

[118-168]from, as she had done from the actual life around her. Some of that

[118-169]imaginative knowledge began now to weave itself around Mrs. [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]];

[118-170]and though Mirah would admit no position likely to affect her reverence

[118-171]for Deronda, she could not avoid a new painfully vivid association of

[118-172]his general life with a world away from her own, where there might be

[118-173]some involvement of his feeling and action with a woman like Gwendolen,

[118-174]who was increasingly repugnant to her—increasingly, even after she had

[118-175]ceased to see her; for liking and disliking can grow in meditation as

[118-176]fast as in the more immediate kind of presence. Any disquietude

[118-177]consciously due to the idea that Deronda’s deepest care might be for

[118-178]something remote not only from herself but even from his friendship for

[118-179]her brother, she would have checked with rebuking questions:—What was

[118-180]she but one who had shared his generous kindness with many others? and

[118-181]his attachment to her brother, was it not begun late to be soon ended?

[118-182]Other ties had come before, and others would remain after this had been

[118-183]cut by swift-coming death. But her uneasiness had not reached that

[118-184]point of self-recognition in which she would have been ashamed of it as

[118-185]an indirect, presumptuous claim on Deronda’s feeling. That she or any

[118-186]one else should think of him as her possible lover was a conception

[118-187]which had never entered her mind; indeed it was equally out of the

[118-188]question with Mrs. Meyrick and the girls, who with Mirah herself

[118-189]regarded his intervention in her life as something exceptional, and

[118-190]were so impressed by his mission as her deliverer and guardian that

[118-191]they would have held it an offense to him at his holding any other

[118-192]relation toward her: a point of view which Hans also had readily

[118-193]adopted. It is a little hard upon some men that they appear to sink for

[118-194]us in becoming lovers. But precisely to this innocence of the Meyricks

[118-195]was owing the disturbance of Mirah’s unconsciousness. The first

[118-196]occasion could hardly have been more trivial, but it prepared her

[118-197]emotive nature for a deeper effect from what happened afterward.
