---
id: ch115
label: "Section 115"
type: chapter
description: "“Where was my grandfather’s home?”"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[115-001]“Where was my grandfather’s home?”

[115-002]“Here in [[genoa|Genoa]], where I was married; and his family had lived here

[115-003]generations ago. But my father had been in various countries.”

[115-004]“You must surely have lived in England?”

[115-005]“My mother was English—a Jewess of Portuguese descent. My father

[115-006]married her in England. Certain circumstances of that marriage made all

[115-007]the difference in my life: through that marriage my father thwarted his

[115-008]own plans. My mother’s sister was a singer, and afterward she married

[115-009]the English partner of a merchant’s house here in Genoa, and they came

[115-010]and lived here eleven years. My mother died when I was eight years old,

[115-011]and my father allowed me to be continually with my Aunt [[Leonora-Halm-Eberstein|Leonora]] and be

[115-012]taught under her eyes, as if he had not minded the danger of her

[115-013]encouraging my wish to be a singer, as she had been. But this was it—I

[115-014]saw it again and again in my father:—he did not guard against

[115-015]consequences, because he felt sure he could hinder them if he liked.

[115-016]Before my aunt left Genoa, I had had enough teaching to bring out the

[115-017]born singer and actress within me: my father did not know everything

[115-018]that was done; but he knew that I was taught [[art|music]] and [[music|singing]]—he knew

[115-019]my inclination. That was nothing to him: he meant that I should obey

[115-020]his will. And he was resolved that I should marry my cousin Ephraim,

[115-021]the only one left of my father’s family that he knew. I wanted not to

[115-022]marry. I thought of all plans to resist it, but at last I found that I

[115-023]could rule my cousin, and I consented. My father died three weeks after

[115-024]we were married, and then I had my way!” She uttered these words almost

[115-025]exultantly; but after a little pause her face changed, and she said in

[115-026]a biting tone, “It has not lasted, though. My father is getting his way

[115-027]now.”

[115-028]She began to look more contemplatively again at her son, and presently

[115-029]said,

[115-030]“You are like him—but milder—there is something of your own father in

[115-031]you; and he made it the labor of his life to devote himself to me:

[115-032]wound up his money-changing and banking, and lived to wait upon me—he

[115-033]went against his conscience for me. As I loved the life of my art, so

[115-034]he loved me. Let me look at your hand again: the hand with the ring on.

[115-035]It was your father’s ring.”

[115-036]He drew his chair nearer to her and gave her his hand. We know what

[115-037]kind of a hand it was: her own, very much smaller, was of the same

[115-038]type. As he felt the smaller hand holding his, as he saw nearer to him

[115-039]the face that held the likeness of his own, aged not by time but by

[115-040]intensity, the strong bent of his nature toward a reverential

[115-041]tenderness asserted itself above every other impression and in his most

[115-042]fervent tone he said,

[115-043]“Mother! take us all into your heart—the living and the dead. Forgive

[115-044]every thing that hurts you in the past. Take my affection.”

[115-045]She looked at him admiringly rather than lovingly, then kissed him on

[115-046]the brow, and saying sadly, “I reject nothing, but I have nothing to

[115-047]give,” she released his hand and sank back on her cushions. [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]

[115-048]turned pale with what seems always more of a sensation than an

[115-049]emotion—the pain of repulsed tenderness. She noticed the expression of

[115-050]pain, and said, still with melodious melancholy in her tones,

[115-051]“It is better so. We must part again soon and you owe me no duties. I

[115-052]did not wish you to be born. I parted with you willingly. When your

[115-053]father died I resolved that I would have no more ties, but such as I

[115-054]could free myself from. I was the Alcharisi you have heard of: the name

[115-055]had magic wherever it was carried. Men courted me. [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo Mallinger]]

[115-056]was one who wished to marry me. He was madly in love with me. One day I

[115-057]asked him, ‘Is there a man capable of doing something for love of me,

[115-058]and expecting nothing in return?’ He said: ‘What is it you want done?’

[115-059]I said, ‘Take my boy and bring him up as an Englishman, and never let

[115-060]him know anything about his parents.’ You were little more than two

[115-061]years old, and were sitting on his foot. He declared that he would pay

[115-062]money to have such a boy. I had not meditated much on the plan

[115-063]beforehand, but as soon as I had spoken about it, it took possession of

[115-064]me as something I could not rest without doing. At first he thought I

[115-065]was not serious, but I convinced him, and he was never surprised at

[115-066]anything. He agreed that it would be for your good, and the finest

[115-067]thing for you. A great singer and actress is a queen, but she gives no

[115-068]royalty to her son. All that happened at Naples. And afterward I made

[115-069]Sir Hugo the trustee of your fortune. That is what I did; and I had a

[115-070]joy in doing it. My father had tyrannized over me—he cared more about

[115-071]a grandson to come than he did about me: I counted as nothing. You were

[115-072]to be such a Jew as he; you were to be what he wanted. But you were my

[115-073]son, and it was my turn to say what you should be. I said you should

[115-074]not know you were a Jew.”

[115-075]“And for months events have been preparing me to be glad that I am a

[115-076]Jew,” said Deronda, his opposition roused again. The point touched the

[115-077]quick of his experience. “It would always have been better that I

[115-078]should have known the truth. I have always been rebelling against the

[115-079]secrecy that looked like shame. It is no shame to have Jewish

[115-080]parents—the shame is to disown it.”

[115-081]“You say it was a shame to me, then, that I used that secrecy,” said

[115-082]his mother, with a flash of new anger. “There is no shame attaching to

[115-083]me. I have no reason to be ashamed. I rid myself of the Jewish tatters

[115-084]and gibberish that make people nudge each other at sight of us, as if

[115-085]we were tattooed under our clothes, though our faces are as whole as

[115-086]theirs. I delivered you from the pelting contempt that pursues Jewish

[115-087]separateness. I am not ashamed that I did it. It was the better for

[115-088]you.”

[115-089]“Then why have you now undone the secrecy?—no, not undone it—the

[115-090]effects will never be undone. But why have you now sent for me to tell

[115-091]me that I am a Jew?” said Deronda, with an intensity of opposition in

[115-092]feeling that was almost bitter. It seemed as if her words had called

[115-093]out a latent obstinacy of race in him.

[115-094]“Why?—ah, why?” said the Princess, rising quickly and walking to the

[115-095]other side of the room, where she turned round and slowly approached

[115-096]him, as he, too, stood up. Then she began to speak again in a more

[115-097]veiled voice. “I can’t explain; I can only say what is. I don’t love my

[115-098]father’s religion now any more than I did then. Before I married the

[115-099]second time I was baptized; I made myself like the people I lived

[115-100]among. I had a right to do it; I was not like a brute, obliged to go

[115-101]with my own herd. I have not repented; I will not say that I have

[115-102]repented. But yet”—here she had come near to her son, and paused; then

[115-103]again retreated a little and stood still, as if resolute not to give

[115-104]way utterly to an imperious influence; but, as she went on speaking,

[115-105]she became more and more unconscious of anything but the awe that

[115-106]subdued her voice. “It is illness, I don’t doubt that it has been

[115-107]gathering illness—my mind has gone back: more than a year ago it

[115-108]began. You see my gray hair, my worn look: it has all come fast.

[115-109]Sometimes I am in an agony of pain—I dare say I shall be to-night.

[115-110]Then it is as if all the life I have chosen to live, all thoughts, all

[115-111]will, forsook me and left me alone in spots of memory, and I can’t get

[115-112]away: my pain seems to keep me there. My childhood—my girlhood—the

[115-113]day of my marriage—the day of my father’s death—there seems to be

[115-114]nothing since. Then a great horror comes over me: what do I know of

[115-115]life or death? and what my father called ‘right’ may be a power that is

[115-116]laying hold of me—that is clutching me now. Well, I will satisfy him.

[115-117]I cannot go into the darkness without satisfying him. I have hidden

[115-118]what was his. I thought once I would burn it. I have not burned it. I

[115-119]thank God I have not burned it!”

[115-120]She threw herself on her cushions again, visibly fatigued. Deronda,

[115-121]moved too strongly by her suffering for other impulses to act within

[115-122]him, drew near her, and said, entreatingly,

[115-123]“Will you not spare yourself this evening? Let us leave the rest till

[115-124]to-morrow.”

[115-125]“No,” she said decisively. “I will confess it all, now that I have come

[115-126]up to it. Often when I am at ease it all fades away; my whole self

[115-127]comes quite back; but I know it will sink away again, and the other

[115-128]will come—the poor, solitary, forsaken remains of self, that can

[115-129]resist nothing. It was my nature to resist, and say, ‘I have a right to

[115-130]resist.’ Well, I say so still when I have any strength in me. You have

[115-131]heard me say it, and I don’t withdraw it. But when my strength goes,

[115-132]some other right forces itself upon me like iron in an inexorable hand;

[115-133]and even when I am at ease, it is beginning to make ghosts upon the

[115-134]daylight. And now you have made it worse for me,” she said, with a

[115-135]sudden return of impetuosity; “but I shall have told you everything.

[115-136]And what reproach is there against me,” she added bitterly, “since I

[115-137]have made you glad to be a Jew? Joseph Kalonymos reproached me: he said

[115-138]you had been turned into a proud Englishman, who resented being touched

[115-139]by a Jew. I wish you had!” she ended, with a new marvelous alternation.

[115-140]It was as if her mind were breaking into several, one jarring the other

[115-141]into impulsive action.

[115-142]“Who is Joseph Kalonymos?” said Deronda, with a darting recollection of

[115-143]that Jew who touched his arm in the Frankfort [[the-synagogue|synagogue]].

[115-144]“Ah! some vengeance sent him back from the East, that he might see you

[115-145]and come to reproach me. He was my father’s friend. He knew of your

[115-146]birth: he knew of my husband’s death, and once, twenty years ago, after

[115-147]he had been away in the Levant, he came to see me and inquire about

[115-148]you. I told him that you were dead: I meant you to be dead to all the

[115-149]world of my childhood. If I had said that you were living, he would

[115-150]have interfered with my plans: he would have taken on him to represent

[115-151]my father, and have tried to make me recall what I had done. What could

[115-152]I do but say you were dead? The act was done. If I had told him of it

[115-153]there would have been trouble and scandal—and all to conquer me, who

[115-154]would not have been conquered. I was strong then, and I would have had

[115-155]my will, though there might have been a hard fight against me. I took

[115-156]the way to have it without any fight. I felt then that I was not really

[115-157]deceiving: it would have come to the same in the end; or if not to the

[115-158]same, to something worse. He believed me and begged that I would give

[115-159]up to him the chest that my father had charged me and my husband to

[115-160]deliver to our eldest son. I knew what was in the chest—things that

[115-161]had been dinned in my ears since I had had any understanding—things

[115-162]that were thrust on my mind that I might feel them like a wall around

[115-163]my life—my life that was growing like a tree. Once, after my husband

[115-164]died, I was going to burn the chest. But it was difficult to burn; and

[115-165]burning a chest and papers looks like a shameful act. I have committed

[115-166]no shameful act—except what Jews would call shameful. I had kept the

[115-167]chest, and I gave it to Joseph Kalonymos. He went away mournful, and

[115-168]said, ‘If you marry again, and if another grandson is born to him who

[115-169]is departed, I will deliver up the chest to him.’ I bowed in silence. I

[115-170]meant not to marry again—no more than I meant to be the shattered

[115-171]woman that I am now.”
