---
id: ch129
label: "Section 129"
type: chapter
description: "“My dears, Mr. Grandcourt—” She paused an instant, and then began"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[129-001]“My dears, [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]]—” She paused an instant, and then began

[129-002]again, “Mr. Grandcourt is drowned.”

[129-003][[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]] started up as if a missile had been suddenly thrown into the room.

[129-004]He could not help himself, and Anna’s first look was at him. But then,

[129-005]gathering some self-command while [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] was reading what the

[129-006]rector had written on the enclosing paper, he said,

[129-007]“Can I do anything, aunt? Can I carry any word to my father from you?”

[129-008]“Yes, dear. Tell him I will be ready—he is very good. He says he will

[129-009]go with me to [[genoa|Genoa]]—he will be here at half-past six. Jocosa and

[129-010]Alice, help me to get ready. She is safe—[[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] is safe—but she

[129-011]must be ill. I am sure she must be very ill. Rex, dear—Rex and

[129-012]Anna—go and and tell your father I will be quite ready. I would not

[129-013]for the world lose another night. And bless him for being ready so

[129-014]soon. I can travel night and day till we get there.”

[129-015]Rex and Anna hurried away through the sunshine which was suddenly

[129-016]solemn to them, without uttering a word to each other: she chiefly

[129-017]possessed by solicitude about any reopening of his wound, he struggling

[129-018]with a tumultuary crowd of thoughts that were an offence against his

[129-019]better will. The tumult being undiminished when they were at the

[129-020]rectory gate, he said,

[129-021]“Nannie, I will leave you to say everything to my father. If he wants

[129-022]me immediately, let me know. I shall stay in the shrubbery for ten

[129-023]minutes—only ten minutes.”

[129-024]Who has been quite free from egoistic escapes of the imagination,

[129-025]picturing desirable consequences on his own future in the presence of

[129-026]another’s misfortune, sorrow, or death? The expected promotion or

[129-027][[inheritance|legacy]] is the common type of a temptation which makes speech and even

[129-028]prayer a severe avoidance of the most insistent thoughts, and sometimes

[129-029]raises an inward shame, a self-distaste that is worse than any other

[129-030]form of unpleasant companionship. In Rex’s nature the shame was

[129-031]immediate, and overspread like an ugly light all the hurrying images of

[129-032]what might come, which thrust themselves in with the idea that

[129-033]Gwendolen was again free—overspread them, perhaps, the more

[129-034]persistently because every phantasm of a hope was quickly nullified by

[129-035]a more substantial obstacle. Before the vision of “Gwendolen free” rose

[129-036]the impassable vision of “Gwendolen rich, exalted, courted;” and if in

[129-037]the former time, when both their lives were fresh, she had turned from

[129-038]his love with repugnance, what ground was there for supposing that her

[129-039]heart would be more open to him in the future?

[129-040]These thoughts, which he wanted to master and suspend, were like a

[129-041]tumultuary ringing of opposing chimes that he could not escape from by

[129-042]running. During the last year he had brought himself into a state of

[129-043]calm resolve, and now it seemed that three words had been enough to

[129-044]undo all that difficult work, and cast him back into the wretched

[129-045]fluctuations of a longing which he recognized as simply perturbing and

[129-046]hopeless. And at this moment the activity of such longing had an

[129-047]untimeliness that made it repulsive to his better self. Excuse poor

[129-048]Rex; it was not much more than eighteen months since he had been laid

[129-049]low by an archer who sometimes touches his arrow with a subtle,

[129-050]lingering poison. The disappointment of a youthful passion has effects

[129-051]as incalculable as those of small-pox which may make one person plain

[129-052]and a genius, another less plain and more foolish, another plain

[129-053]without detriment to his folly, and leave perhaps the majority without

[129-054]obvious change. Everything depends—not on the mere fact of

[129-055]disappointment, but—on the nature affected and the force that stirs

[129-056]it. In Rex’s well-endowed nature, brief as the hope had been, the

[129-057]passionate stirring had gone deep, and the effect of disappointment was

[129-058]revolutionary, though fraught with a beneficent new order which

[129-059]retained most of the old virtues; in certain respects he believed that

[129-060]it had finally determined the bias and color of his life. Now, however,

[129-061]it seemed that his inward peace was hardly more than that of republican

[129-062]Florence, and his heart no better than the alarm-bell that made work

[129-063]slack and tumult busy.

[129-064]Rex’s love had been of that sudden, penetrating, clinging sort which

[129-065]the ancients knew and sung, and in [[music|singing]] made a fashion of talk for

[129-066]many moderns whose experience has by no means a fiery, demonic

[129-067]character. To have the consciousness suddenly steeped with another’s

[129-068]personality, to have the strongest inclinations possessed by an image

[129-069]which retains its dominance in spite of change and apart from

[129-070]worthiness—nay, to feel a passion which clings faster for the tragic

[129-071]pangs inflicted by a cruel, reorganized unworthiness—is a phase of

[129-072]love which in the feeble and common-minded has a repulsive likeness to

[129-073]his blind animalism insensible to the higher sway of moral affinity or

[129-074]heaven-lit admiration. But when this attaching force is present in a

[129-075]nature not of brutish unmodifiableness, but of a human dignity that can

[129-076]risk itself safely, it may even result in a devotedness not unfit to be

[129-077]called divine in a higher sense than the ancient. Phlegmatic

[129-078]rationality stares and shakes its head at these unaccountable

[129-079]prepossessions, but they exist as undeniably as the winds and waves,

[129-080]determining here a wreck and there a triumphant voyage.

[129-081]This sort of passion had nested in the sweet-natured, strong Rex, and

[129-082]he had made up his mind to its companionship, as if it had been an

[129-083]object supremely dear, stricken dumb and helpless, and turning all the

[129-084]future of tenderness into a shadow of the past. But he had also made up

[129-085]his mind that his life was not to be pauperized because he had had to

[129-086]renounce one sort of joy; rather, he had begun life again with a new

[129-087]counting-up of the treasures that remained to him, and he had even felt

[129-088]a release of power such as may come from ceasing to be afraid of your

[129-089]own neck.

[129-090]And now, here he was pacing the shrubbery, angry with himself that the

[129-091]sense of irrevocableness in his lot, which ought in reason to have been

[129-092]as strong as ever, had been shaken by a change of circumstances that

[129-093]could make no change in relation to him. He told himself the truth

[129-094]quite roughly,

[129-095]“She would never love me; and that is not the question—I could never

[129-096]approach her as a lover in her present position. I am exactly of no

[129-097]consequence at all, and am not likely to be of much consequence till my

[129-098]head is turning gray. But what has that to do with it? She would not

[129-099]have me on any terms, and I would not ask her. It is a meanness to be

[129-100]thinking about it now—no better than lurking about the battle-field to

[129-101]strip the dead; but there never was more gratuitous sinning. I have

[129-102]nothing to gain there—absolutely nothing. Then why can’t I face the

[129-103]facts, and behave as they demand, instead of leaving my father to

[129-104]suppose that there are matters he can’t speak to me about, though I

[129-105]might be useful in them?”

[129-106]The last thought made one wave with the impulse that sent Rex walking

[129-107]firmly into the house and through the open door of the study, where he

[129-108]saw his father packing a traveling-desk.

[129-109]“Can I be of any use, sir?” said Rex, with rallied courage, as his

[129-110]father looked up at him.

[129-111]“Yes, my boy; when I’m gone, just see to my letters, and answer where

[129-112]necessary, and send me word of everything. Dymock will manage the

[129-113]parish very well, and you will stay with your mother, or, at least, go

[129-114]up and down again, till I come back, whenever that may be.”

[129-115]“You will hardly be very long, sir, I suppose,” said Rex, beginning to

[129-116]strap a railway rug. “You will perhaps bring my cousin back to

[129-117]England?” He forced himself to speak of Gwendolen for the first time,

[129-118]and the rector noticed the epoch with satisfaction.

[129-119]“That depends,” he answered, taking the subject as a matter-of-course

[129-120]between them. “Perhaps her mother may stay there with her, and I may

[129-121]come back very soon. This telegram leaves us in ignorance which is

[129-122]rather anxious. But no doubt the arrangements of the will lately made

[129-123]are satisfactory, and there may possibly be an heir yet to be born. In

[129-124]any case, I feel confident that Gwendolen will be liberally—I should

[129-125]expect, splendidly—provided for.”

[129-126]“It must have been a great shock for her,” said Rex, getting more

[129-127]resolute after the first twinge had been borne. “I suppose he was a

[129-128]devoted husband.”

[129-129]“No doubt of it,” said the rector, in his most decided manner. “Few men

[129-130]of his position would have come forward as he did under the

[129-131]circumstances.”

[129-132]Rex had never seen Grandcourt, had never been spoken to about him by

[129-133]any one of the family, and knew nothing of Gwendolen’s flight from her

[129-134]suitor to [[Leubronn]]. He only knew that Grandcourt, being very much in

[129-135]love with her, had made her an offer in the first weeks of her sudden

[129-136]poverty, and had behaved very handsomely in providing for her mother

[129-137]and sisters. That was all very natural and what Rex himself would have

[129-138]liked to do. Grandcourt had been a lucky fellow, and had had some

[129-139]happiness before he got drowned. Yet Rex wondered much whether

[129-140]Gwendolen had been in love with the successful suitor, or had only

[129-141]forborne to tell him that she hated being made love to.

[129-142]CHAPTER LIX.

[129-143]“I count myself in nothing else so happy

[129-144]As in a soul remembering my good friends.”

[129-145]—SHAKESPEARE.

[129-146][[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo Mallinger]] was not so prompt in starting for Genoa as Mr.

[129-147]Gascoigne had been, and [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] on all accounts would not take his

[129-148]departure until he had seen the baronet. There was not only

[129-149]Grandcourt’s death, but also the late crisis in his own life to make

[129-150]reasons why his oldest friend would desire to have the unrestrained

[129-151]communication of speech with him, for in writing he had not felt able

[129-152]to give any details concerning the mother who had come and gone like an

[129-153]apparition. It was not till the fifth evening that Deronda, according

[129-154]to telegram, waited for Sir Hugo at the station, where he was to arrive

[129-155]between eight and nine; and while he was looking forward to the sight

[129-156]of the kind, familiar face, which was part of his earliest memories,

[129-157]something like a smile, in spite of his late tragic experience, might

[129-158]have been detected in his eyes and the curve of his lips at the idea of

[129-159]Sir Hugo’s pleasure in being now master of his estates, able to leave

[129-160]them to his daughters, or at least—according to a view of inheritance

[129-161]which had just been strongly impressed on Deronda’s imagination—to

[129-162]take makeshift feminine offspring as intermediate to a satisfactory

[129-163]heir in a grandson. We should be churlish creatures if we could have no

[129-164]joy in our fellow-mortals’ joy, unless it were in agreement with our

[129-165]theory of righteous distribution and our highest ideal of human good:

[129-166]what sour corners our mouths would get—our eyes, what frozen glances!

[129-167]and all the while our own possessions and desires would not exactly

[129-168]adjust themselves to our ideal. We must have some comradeship with

[129-169]imperfection; and it is, happily, possible to feel gratitude even where

[129-170]we discern a mistake that may have been injurious, the vehicle of the

[129-171]mistake being an affectionate intention prosecuted through a life-time

[129-172]of kindly offices. Deronda’s feeling and judgment were strongly against

[129-173]the action of Sir Hugo in making himself the agent of a falsity—yes, a

[129-174]falsity: he could give no milder name to the [[secrecy|concealment]] under which he

[129-175]had been reared. But the baronet had probably had no clear knowledge

[129-176]concerning the mother’s breach of trust, and with his light, easy way

[129-177]of taking life, had held it a reasonable preference in her that her son

[129-178]should be made an English gentleman, seeing that she had the

[129-179]eccentricity of not caring to part from her child, and be to him as if

[129-180]she were not. Daniel’s affectionate gratitude toward Sir Hugo made him

[129-181]wish to find grounds of excuse rather than blame; for it is as possible

[129-182]to be rigid in principle and tender in blame, as it is to suffer from

[129-183]the sight of things hung awry, and yet to be patient with the hanger

[129-184]who sees amiss. If Sir Hugo in his bachelorhood had been beguiled into

[129-185]regarding children chiefly as a product intended to make life more

[129-186]agreeable to the full-grown, whose convenience alone was to be

[129-187]consulted in the disposal of them—why, he had shared an assumption

[129-188]which, if not formally avowed, was massively acted on at that date of

[129-189]the world’s history; and Deronda, with all his keen memory of the

[129-190]painful inward struggle he had gone through in his boyhood, was able

[129-191]also to remember the many signs that his experience had been entirely

[129-192]shut out from Sir Hugo’s conception. Ignorant kindness may have the

[129-193]effect of cruelty; but to be angry with it as if it were direct cruelty

[129-194]would be an ignorant _un_kindness, the most remote from Deronda’s large

[129-195]imaginative lenience toward others. And perhaps now, after the

[129-196]searching scenes of the last ten days, in which the curtain had been

[129-197]lifted for him from the secrets of lives unlike his own, he was more

[129-198]than ever disposed to check that rashness of indignation or resentment

[129-199]which has an unpleasant likeness to the love of punishing. When he saw

[129-200]Sir Hugo’s familiar figure descending from the railway carriage, the

[129-201]life-long affection which had been well accustomed to make excuses,

[129-202]flowed in and submerged all newer knowledge that might have seemed

[129-203]fresh ground for blame.
