---
id: ch126
label: "Section 126"
type: chapter
description: "“It had all been in my mind when I first spoke to you—when we were at"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[126-001]“It had all been in my mind when I first spoke to you—when we were at

[126-002]the Abbey. I had done something then. I could not tell you that. It was

[126-003]the only thing I did toward carrying out my thoughts. They went about

[126-004]over everything; but they all remained like dreadful dreams—all but

[126-005]one. I did one act—and I never undid it—it is there still—as long

[126-006]ago as when we were at [[ryelands|Ryelands]]. There it was—something my fingers

[126-007]longed for among the beautiful toys in the cabinet in my boudoir—small

[126-008]and sharp like a long willow leaf in a silver sheath. I locked it in

[126-009]the drawer of my dressing-case. I was continually haunted with it and

[126-010]how I should use it. I fancied myself putting it under my pillow. But I

[126-011]never did. I never looked at it again. I dared not unlock the drawer:

[126-012]it had a key all to itself; and not long ago, when we were in the

[126-013]yacht, I dropped the key into the deep water. It was my wish to drop it

[126-014]and deliver myself. After that I began to think how I could open the

[126-015]drawer without the key: and when I found we were to stay at [[genoa|Genoa]], it

[126-016]came into my mind that I could get it opened privately at the hotel.

[126-017]But then, when we were going up the stairs, I met you; and I thought I

[126-018]should talk to you alone and tell you this—everything I could not tell

[126-019]you in town; and then I was forced to go out in the boat.”

[126-020]A sob had for the first time risen with the last words, and she sank

[126-021]back in her chair. The memory of that acute disappointment seemed for

[126-022]the moment to efface what had come since. [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] did not look at her,

[126-023]but he said, insistently,

[126-024]“And it has all remained in your imagination. It has gone on only in

[126-025]your thought. To the last the evil temptation has been resisted?”

[126-026]There was silence. The tears had rolled down her cheeks. She pressed

[126-027]her handkerchief against them and sat upright. She was summoning her

[126-028]resolution; and again, leaning a little toward Deronda’s ear, she began

[126-029]in a whisper,

[126-030]“No, no; I will tell you everything as God knows it. I will tell you no

[126-031]falsehood; I will tell you the exact truth. What should I do else? I

[126-032]used to think I could never be wicked. I thought of wicked people as if

[126-033]they were a long way off me. Since then I have been wicked. I have felt

[126-034]wicked. And everything has been a punishment to me—all the things I

[126-035]used to wish for—it is as if they had been made red-hot. The very

[126-036]daylight has often been a punishment to me. Because—you know—I ought

[126-037]not to have married. That was the beginning of it. I wronged some one

[126-038]else. I broke my promise. I meant to get pleasure for myself, and it

[126-039]all turned to misery. I wanted to make my gain out of another’s

[126-040]loss—you remember?—it was like [[gambling|roulette]]—and the money burned into

[126-041]me. And I could not complain. It was as if I had prayed that another

[126-042]should lose and I should win. And I had won, I knew it all—I knew I

[126-043]was guilty. When we were on the sea, and I lay awake at night in the

[126-044]cabin, I sometimes felt that everything I had done lay open without

[126-045]excuse—nothing was hidden—how could anything be known to me only?—it

[126-046]was not my own knowledge, it was God’s that had entered into me, and

[126-047]even the stillness—everything held a punishment for me—everything but

[126-048]you. I always thought that you would not want me to be punished—you

[126-049]would have tried and helped me to be better. And only thinking of that

[126-050]helped me. You will not change—you will not want to punish me now?”

[126-051]Again a sob had risen.

[126-052]“God forbid!” groaned Deronda. But he sat motionless.

[126-053]This long wandering with the conscious-stricken one over her past was

[126-054]difficult to bear, but he dared not again urge her with a question. He

[126-055]must let her mind follow its own need. She unconsciously left intervals

[126-056]in her retrospect, not clearly distinguishing between what she said and

[126-057]what she had only an inward vision of. Her next words came after such

[126-058]an interval.

[126-059]“That all made it so hard when I was forced to go in the boat. Because

[126-060]when I saw you it was an unexpected joy, and I thought I could tell you

[126-061]everything—about the locked-up drawer and what I had not told you

[126-062]before. And if I had told you, and knew it was in your mind, it would

[126-063]have less power over me. I hoped and trusted in that. For after all my

[126-064]struggles and my crying, the hatred and rage, the temptation that

[126-065]frightened me, the longing, the thirst for what I dreaded, always came

[126-066]back. And that disappointment—when I was quite shut out from speaking

[126-067]to you, and was driven to go in the boat—brought all the evil back, as

[126-068]if I had been locked in a prison with it and no escape. Oh, it seems so

[126-069]long ago now since I stepped into that boat! I could have given up

[126-070]everything in that moment, to have the forked lightning for a weapon to

[126-071]strike him dead.”

[126-072]Some of the compressed fierceness that she was recalling seemed to find

[126-073]its way into her undertoned utterance. After a little silence she said,

[126-074]with agitated hurry,

[126-075]“If he were here again, what should I do? I cannot wish him here—and

[126-076]yet I cannot bear his dead face. I was a coward. I ought to have borne

[126-077]contempt. I ought to have gone away—gone and wandered like a beggar

[126-078]rather than stay to feel like a fiend. But turn where I would there

[126-079]was something I could not bear. Sometimes I thought he would kill _me_

[126-080]if I resisted his will. But now—his dead face is there, and I cannot

[126-081]bear it.”

[126-082]Suddenly loosing Deronda’s hand, she started up, stretching her arms to

[126-083]their full length upward, and said with a sort of moan,

[126-084]“I have been a cruel woman! What can _I_ do but cry for help? _I_ am

[126-085]sinking. Die—die—you are forsaken—go down, go down into darkness.

[126-086]Forsaken—no pity—_I_ shall be forsaken.”

[126-087]She sank in her chair again and broke into sobs. Even Deronda had no

[126-088]place in her consciousness at that moment. He was completely unmanned.

[126-089]Instead of finding, as he had imagined, that his late experience had

[126-090]dulled his susceptibility to fresh emotion, it seemed that the lot of

[126-091]this young creature, whose swift travel from her bright rash girlhood

[126-092]into this agony of [[conscience|remorse]] he had had to behold in helplessness,

[126-093]pierced him the deeper because it came close upon another sad

[126-094]revelation of spiritual conflict: he was in one of those moments when

[126-095]the very anguish of passionate pity makes us ready to choose that we

[126-096]will know pleasure no more, and live only for the stricken and

[126-097]afflicted. He had risen from his seat while he watched that terrible

[126-098]outburst—which seemed the more awful to him because, even in this

[126-099]supreme agitation, she kept the suppressed voice of one who confesses

[126-100]in secret. At last he felt impelled to turn his back toward her and

[126-101]walk to a distance.

[126-102]But presently there was stillness. Her mind had opened to the sense

[126-103]that he had gone away from her. When Deronda turned round to approach

[126-104]her again, he saw her face bent toward him, her eyes dilated, her lips

[126-105]parted. She was an image of timid forlorn beseeching—too timid to

[126-106]entreat in words while he kept himself aloof from her. Was she forsaken

[126-107]by him—now—already? But his eyes met hers sorrowfully—met hers for

[126-108]the first time fully since she had said, “You know I am a guilty

[126-109]woman,” and that full glance in its intense mournfulness seemed to say,

[126-110]“I know it, but I shall all the less forsake you.” He sat down by her

[126-111]side again in the same attitude—without turning his face toward her

[126-112]and without again taking her hand.

[126-113]Once more [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] was pierced, as she had been by his face of sorrow

[126-114]at the Abbey, with a compunction less egoistic than that which urged

[126-115]her to confess, and she said, in a tone of loving regret,

[126-116]“I make you very unhappy.”

[126-117]Deronda gave an indistinct “Oh,” just shrinking together and changing

[126-118]his attitude a little. Then he had gathered resolution enough to say

[126-119]clearly, “There is no question of being happy or unhappy. What I most

[126-120]desire at this moment is what will most help you. Tell me all you feel

[126-121]it a relief to tell.”

[126-122]Devoted as these words were, they widened his spiritual distance from

[126-123]her, and she felt it more difficult to speak: she had a vague need of

[126-124]getting nearer to that [[sympathy|compassion]] which seemed to be regarding her from

[126-125]a halo of superiority, and the need turned into an impulse to humble

[126-126]herself more. She was ready to throw herself on her knees before him;

[126-127]but no—her wonderfully mixed consciousness held checks on that

[126-128]impulse, and she was kept silent and motionless by the pressure of

[126-129]opposing needs. Her stillness made Deronda at last say,

[126-130]“Perhaps you are too weary. Shall I go away, and come again whenever

[126-131]you wish it?”

[126-132]“No, no,” said Gwendolen—the dread of his leaving her bringing back

[126-133]her power of speech. She went on with her low-toned eagerness, “I want

[126-134]to tell you what it was that came over me in that boat. I was full of

[126-135]rage at being obliged to go—full of rage—and I could do nothing but

[126-136]sit there like a galley slave. And then we got away—out of the

[126-137]port—into the deep—and everything was still—and we never looked at

[126-138]each other, only he spoke to order me—and the very light about me

[126-139]seemed to hold me a prisoner and force me to sit as I did. It came over

[126-140]me that when I was a child I used to fancy sailing away into a world

[126-141]where people were not forced to live with any one they did not like—I

[126-142]did not like my father-in-law to come home. And now, I thought, just

[126-143]the opposite had come to me. I had stepped into a boat, and my life was

[126-144]a sailing and sailing away—gliding on and no help—always into

[126-145]solitude with _him_, away from deliverance. And because I felt more

[126-146]helpless than ever, my thoughts went out over worse things—I longed

[126-147]for worse things—I had cruel wishes—I fancied impossible ways of—I

[126-148]did not want to die myself; I was afraid of our being drowned together.

[126-149]If it had been any use I should have prayed—I should have prayed that

[126-150]something might befall him. I should have prayed that he might sink out

[126-151]of my sight and leave me alone. I knew no way of killing him there, but

[126-152]I did, I did kill him in my thoughts.”

[126-153]She sank into silence for a minute, submerged by the weight of memory

[126-154]which no words could represent.

[126-155]“But yet, all the while I felt that I was getting more wicked. And what

[126-156]had been with me so much, came to me just then—what you once

[126-157]said—about dreading to increase my wrong-doing and my [[guilt|remorse]]—I

[126-158]should hope for nothing then. It was all like a writing of fire within

[126-159]me. Getting wicked was misery—being shut out forever from knowing what

[126-160]you—what better lives were. That had always been coming back to me

[126-161]then—but yet with a despair—a feeling that it was no use—evil wishes

[126-162]were too strong. I remember then letting go the tiller and saying ‘God

[126-163]help me!’ But then I was forced to take it again and go on; and the

[126-164]evil longings, the evil prayers came again and blotted everything else

[126-165]dim, till, in the midst of them—I don’t know how it was—he was

[126-166]turning the sail—there was a gust—he was struck—I know nothing—I

[126-167]only know that I saw my wish outside me.”
