---
id: ch127
label: "Section 127"
type: chapter
description: "She began to speak more hurriedly, and in more of a whisper."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[127-001]She began to speak more hurriedly, and in more of a whisper.

[127-002]“I saw him sink, and my heart gave a leap as if it were going out of

[127-003]me. I think I did not move. I kept my hands tight. It was long enough

[127-004]for me to be glad, and yet to think it was no use—he would come up

[127-005]again. And he _was_ come—farther off—the boat had moved. It was all

[127-006]like lightning. ‘The rope!’ he called out in a voice—not his own—I

[127-007]hear it now—and I stooped for the rope—I felt I must—I felt sure he

[127-008]could swim, and he would come back whether or not, and I dreaded him.

[127-009]That was in my mind—he would come back. But he was gone down again,

[127-010]and I had the rope in my hand—no, there he was again—his face above

[127-011]the water—and he cried again—and I held my hand, and my heart said,

[127-012]‘Die!’—and he sank; and I felt ‘It is done—I am wicked, I am

[127-013]lost!—and I had the rope in my hand—I don’t know what I thought—I

[127-014]was leaping away from myself—I would have saved him then. I was

[127-015]leaping from my crime, and there it was—close to me as I fell—there

[127-016]was the dead face—dead, dead. It can never be altered. That was what

[127-017]happened. That was what I did. You know it all. It can never be

[127-018]altered.”

[127-019]She sank back in her chair, exhausted with the agitation of memory and

[127-020]speech. [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] felt the burden on his spirit less heavy than the

[127-021]foregoing dread. The word “guilty” had held a possibility of

[127-022]interpretations worse than the fact; and [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s confession, for

[127-023]the very reason that her conscience made her dwell on the determining

[127-024]power of her evil thoughts, convinced him the more that there had been

[127-025]throughout a counterbalancing struggle of her better will. It seemed

[127-026]almost certain that her murderous thought had had no outward

[127-027]effect—that, quite apart from it, the death was inevitable. Still, a

[127-028]question as to the outward effectiveness of a criminal desire dominant

[127-029]enough to impel even a momentary act, cannot alter our judgment of the

[127-030]desire; and Deronda shrank from putting that question forward in the

[127-031]first instance. He held it likely that Gwendolen’s [[conscience|remorse]] aggravated

[127-032]her inward guilt, and that she gave the character of decisive action to

[127-033]what had been an inappreciably instantaneous glance of desire. But her

[127-034][[guilt|remorse]] was the precious sign of a recoverable nature; it was the

[127-035]culmination of that self-disapproval which had been the awakening of a

[127-036]new life within her; it marked her off from the criminals whose only

[127-037]regret is failure in securing their evil wish. Deronda could not utter

[127-038]one word to diminish that sacred aversion to her worst self—that

[127-039]thorn-pressure which must come with the crowning of the sorrowful

[127-040]better, suffering because of the worse. All this mingled thought and

[127-041]feeling kept him silent; speech was too momentous to be ventured on

[127-042]rashly. There were no words of comfort that did not carry some

[127-043]sacrilege. If he had opened his lips to speak, he could only have

[127-044]echoed, “It can never be altered—it remains unaltered, to alter other

[127-045]things.” But he was silent and motionless—he did not know how

[127-046]long—before he turned to look at her, and saw her sunk back with

[127-047]closed eyes, like a lost, weary, storm-beaten white doe, unable to rise

[127-048]and pursue its unguided way. He rose and stood before her. The movement

[127-049]touched her consciousness, and she opened her eyes with a slight

[127-050]quivering that seemed like fear.

[127-051]“You must rest now. Try to rest: try to sleep. And may I see you again

[127-052]this evening—to-morrow—when you have had some rest? Let us say no

[127-053]more now.”

[127-054]The tears came, and she could not answer except by a slight movement of

[127-055]the head. Deronda rang for attendance, spoke urgently of the necessity

[127-056]that she should be got to rest, and then left her.

[127-057]CHAPTER LVII.

[127-058]“The unripe grape, the ripe, and the dried. All things are changes,

[127-059]not into nothing, but into that which is not at present.”—MARCUS

[127-060]AURELIUS.

[127-061]Deeds are the pulse of Time, his beating life,

[127-062]And righteous or unrighteous, being done,

[127-063]Must throb in after-throbs till Time itself

[127-064]Be laid in darkness, and the universe

[127-065]Quiver and breathe upon no mirror more.

[127-066]In the evening she sent for him again. It was already near the hour at

[127-067]which she had been brought in from the sea the evening before, and the

[127-068]light was subdued enough with blinds drawn up and windows open. She was

[127-069]seated gazing fixedly on the sea, resting her cheek on her hand,

[127-070]looking less shattered than when he had left her, but with a deep

[127-071]melancholy in her expression which as Deronda approached her passed

[127-072]into an anxious timidity. She did not put out her hand, but said, “How

[127-073]long ago it is!” Then, “Will you sit near me again a little while?”

[127-074]He placed himself by her side as he had done before, and seeing that

[127-075]she turned to him with that indefinable expression which implies a wish

[127-076]to say something, he waited for her to speak. But again she looked

[127-077]toward the window silently, and again turned with the same expression,

[127-078]which yet did not issue in speech. There was some fear hindering her,

[127-079]and Deronda, wishing to relieve her timidity, averted his face.

[127-080]Presently he heard her cry imploringly,

[127-081]“You will not say that any one else should know?”

[127-082]“Most decidedly not,” said Deronda. “There is no action that ought to

[127-083]be taken in consequence. There is no injury that could be righted in

[127-084]that way. There is no retribution that any mortal could apportion

[127-085]justly.”

[127-086]She was so still during a pause that she seemed to be holding her

[127-087]breath before she said,

[127-088]“But if I had not had that murderous will—that moment—if I had thrown

[127-089]the rope on the instant—perhaps it would have hindered death?”

[127-090]“No—I think not,” said Deronda, slowly. “If it were true that he could

[127-091]swim, he must have been seized with cramp. With your quickest, utmost

[127-092]effort, it seems impossible that you could have done anything to save

[127-093]him. That momentary murderous will cannot, I think, have altered the

[127-094]course of events. Its effect is confined to the motives in your own

[127-095]breast. Within ourselves our evil will is momentous, and sooner or

[127-096]later it works its way outside us—it may be in the vitiation that

[127-097]breeds evil acts, but also it may be in the self-abhorrence that stings

[127-098]us into better striving.”

[127-099]“I am saved from robbing others—there are others—they will have

[127-100]everything—they will have what they ought to have. I knew that some

[127-101]time before I left town. You do not suspect me of wrong desires about

[127-102]those things?” She spoke hesitatingly.

[127-103]“I had not thought of them,” said Deronda; “I was thinking too much of

[127-104]the other things.”

[127-105]“Perhaps you don’t quite know the beginning of it all,” said Gwendolen,

[127-106]slowly, as if she were overcoming her reluctance. “There was some one

[127-107]else he ought to have married. And I knew it, and I told her I would

[127-108]not hinder it. And I went away—that was when you first saw me. But

[127-109]then we became poor all at once, and I was very miserable, and I was

[127-110]tempted. I thought, ‘I shall do as I like and make everything right.’ I

[127-111]persuaded myself. And it was all different. It was all dreadful. Then

[127-112]came hatred and wicked thoughts. That was how it all came. I told you I

[127-113]was afraid of myself. And I did what you told me—I did try to make my

[127-114]fear a safeguard. I thought of what would be if I—I felt what would

[127-115]come—how I should dread the morning—wishing it would be always

[127-116]night—and yet in the darkness always seeing something—seeing death.

[127-117]If you did not know how miserable I was, you might—but now it has all

[127-118]been no use. I can care for nothing but saving the rest from

[127-119]knowing—poor mamma, who has never been happy.”

[127-120]There was silence again before she said with a repressed sob—“You

[127-121]cannot bear to look at me any more. You think I am too wicked. You do

[127-122]not believe that I can become any better—worth anything—worthy

[127-123]enough—I shall always be too wicked to—” The voice broke off helpless.

[127-124]Deronda’s heart was pierced. He turned his eyes on her poor beseeching

[127-125]face and said, “I believe that you may become worthier than you have

[127-126]ever yet been—worthy to lead a life that may be a blessing. No evil

[127-127]dooms us hopelessly except the evil we love, and desire to continue in,

[127-128]and make no effort to escape from. You _have_ made efforts—you will go

[127-129]on making them.”

[127-130]“But you were the beginning of them. You must not forsake me,” said

[127-131]Gwendolen, leaning with her clasped hands on the arm of her chair and

[127-132]looking at him, while her face bore piteous traces of the

[127-133]life-experience concentrated in the twenty-four hours—that new

[127-134]terrible life lying on the other side of the deed which fulfills a

[127-135]criminal desire. “I will bear any penance. I will lead any life you

[127-136]tell me. But you must not forsake me. You must be near. If you had been

[127-137]near me—if I could have said everything to you, I should have been

[127-138]different. You will not forsake me?”

[127-139]“It could never be my impulse to forsake you,” said Deronda promptly,

[127-140]with that voice which, like his eyes, had the unintentional effect of

[127-141]making his ready sympathy seem more personal and special than it really

[127-142]was. And in that moment he was not himself quite free from a foreboding

[127-143]of some such self-committing effect. His strong feeling for this

[127-144]stricken creature could not hinder rushing images of future difficulty.

[127-145]He continued to meet her appealing eyes as he spoke, but it was with

[127-146]the painful consciousness that to her ear his words might carry a

[127-147]promise which one day would seem unfulfilled: he was making an

[127-148]indefinite promise to an indefinite hope. Anxieties, both immediate and

[127-149]distant, crowded on his thought, and it was under their influence that,

[127-150]after a moment’s silence, he said,

[127-151]“I expect [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo Mallinger]] to arrive by to-morrow night at least; and

[127-152]I am not without hope that [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] may shortly follow him. Her

[127-153]presence will be the greatest comfort to you—it will give you a motive

[127-154]to save her from unnecessary pain?”

[127-155]“Yes, yes—I will try. And you will not go away?”

[127-156]“Not till after Sir Hugo has come.”

[127-157]“But we shall all go to England?”

[127-158]“As soon as possible,” said Deronda, not wishing to enter into

[127-159]particulars.

[127-160]Gwendolen looked toward the window again with an expression which

[127-161]seemed like a gradual awakening to new thoughts. The twilight was

[127-162]perceptibly deepening, but Deronda could see a movement in her eyes and

[127-163]hands such as accompanies a return of perception in one who has been

[127-164]stunned.

[127-165]“You will always be with Sir Hugo now!” she said presently, looking at

[127-166]him. “You will always live at the Abbey—or else at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]]?”

[127-167]“I am quite uncertain where I shall live,” said Deronda, coloring.

[127-168]She was warned by his changed color that she had spoken too rashly, and

[127-169]fell silent. After a little while she began, again looking away,

[127-170]“It is impossible to think how my life will go on. I think now it would

[127-171]be better for me to be poor and obliged to work.”

[127-172]“New promptings will come as the days pass. When you are among your

[127-173]friends again, you will discern new duties,” said Deronda. “Make it a

[127-174]task now to get as well and calm—as much like yourself as you can,

[127-175]before—” He hesitated.

[127-176]“Before my mother comes,” said Gwendolen. “Ah! I must be changed. I

[127-177]have not looked at myself. Should you have known me,” she added,

[127-178]turning toward him, “if you had met me now?—should you have known me

[127-179]for the one you saw at [[Leubronn]]?”
