---
id: ch123
label: "Section 123"
type: chapter
description: "“Do you mind that?” said Gwendolen, who lay looking very white amidst"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[123-001]“Do you mind that?” said [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]], who lay looking very white amidst

[123-002]her white drapery.

[123-003]“I should think so. Who wants to be broiling at [[genoa|Genoa]]?”

[123-004]“It will be a change,” said Gwendolen, made a little incautious by her

[123-005]languor.

[123-006]“_I_ don’t want any change. Besides, the place is intolerable; and one

[123-007]can’t move along the roads. I shall go out in a boat, as I used to do,

[123-008]and manage it myself. One can get a few hours every day in that way

[123-009]instead of striving in a damnable hotel.”

[123-010]Here was a prospect which held hope in it. Gwendolen thought of hours

[123-011]when she would be alone, since [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] would not want to take her in

[123-012]the said boat, and in her exultation at this unlooked-for relief, she

[123-013]had wild, contradictory fancies of what she might do with her

[123-014]freedom—that “running away” which she had already innumerable times

[123-015]seen to be a worse evil than any actual endurance, now finding new

[123-016]arguments as an escape from her worse self. Also, visionary relief on a

[123-017]par with the fancy of a prisoner that the night wind may blow down the

[123-018]wall of his prison and save him from desperate devices, insinuated

[123-019]itself as a better alternative, lawful to wish for.

[123-020]The fresh current of expectation revived her energies, and enabled her

[123-021]to take all things with an air of cheerfulness and alacrity that made a

[123-022]change marked enough to be noticed by her husband. She watched through

[123-023]the evening lights to the sinking of the moon with less of awed

[123-024]loneliness than was habitual to her—nay, with a vague impression that

[123-025]in this mighty frame of things there might be some preparation of

[123-026]rescue for her. Why not?—since the weather had just been on her side.

[123-027]This possibility of hoping, after her long fluctuation amid fears, was

[123-028]like a first return of hunger to the long-languishing patient.

[123-029]She was waked the next morning by the casting of the anchor in the port

[123-030]of Genoa—waked from a strangely-mixed dream in which she felt herself

[123-031]escaping over the Mont Cenis, and wondering to find it warmer even in

[123-032]the moonlight on the snow, till suddenly she met [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], who told her

[123-033]to go back.

[123-034]In an hour or so from that dream she actually met Deronda. But it was

[123-035]on the palatial staircase of the _Italia_, where she was feeling warm

[123-036]in her light woolen dress and straw hat; and her husband was by her

[123-037]side.

[123-038]There was a start of surprise in Deronda before he could raise his hat

[123-039]and pass on. The moment did not seem to favor any closer greeting, and

[123-040]the circumstances under which they had last parted made him doubtful

[123-041]whether Grandcourt would be civilly inclined to him.

[123-042]The doubt might certainly have been changed into a disagreeable

[123-043]certainty, for Grandcourt on this unaccountable appearance of Deronda

[123-044]at Genoa of all places, immediately tried to conceive how there could

[123-045]have been an arrangement between him and Gwendolen. It is true that

[123-046]before they were well in their rooms, he had seen how difficult it was

[123-047]to shape such an arrangement with any probability, being too

[123-048]cool-headed to find it at once easily credible that Gwendolen had not

[123-049]only while in [[london|London]] hastened to inform Deronda of the yachting

[123-050]project, but had posted a letter to him from Marseilles or Barcelona,

[123-051]advising him to travel to Genoa in time for the chance of meeting her

[123-052]there, or of receiving a letter from her telling of some other

[123-053]destination—all which must have implied a miraculous foreknowledge in

[123-054]her, and in Deronda a bird-like facility in flying about and perching

[123-055]idly. Still he was there, and though Grandcourt would not make a fool

[123-056]of himself by fabrications that others might call preposterous, he was

[123-057]not, for all that, disposed to admit fully that Deronda’s presence was,

[123-058]so far as Gwendolen was concerned, a mere accident. It was a disgusting

[123-059]fact; that was enough; and no doubt she was well pleased. A man out of

[123-060]temper does not wait for proofs before feeling toward all things

[123-061]animate and inanimate as if they were in a conspiracy against him, but

[123-062]at once threshes his horse or kicks his dog in consequence. Grandcourt

[123-063]felt toward Gwendolen and Deronda as if he knew them to be in a

[123-064]conspiracy against him, and here was an event in league with them. What

[123-065]he took for clearly certain—and so far he divined the truth—was that

[123-066]Gwendolen was now counting on an interview with Deronda whenever her

[123-067]husband’s back was turned.

[123-068]As he sat taking his coffee at a convenient angle for observing her, he

[123-069]discerned something which he felt sure was the effect of a secret

[123-070]delight—some fresh ease in moving and speaking, some peculiar meaning

[123-071]in her eyes, whatever she looked on. Certainly her troubles had not

[123-072]marred her beauty. Mrs. Grandcourt was handsomer than Gwendolen

[123-073]Harleth: her grace and expression were informed by a greater variety of

[123-074]inward experience, giving new play to her features, new attitudes in

[123-075]movement and repose; her whole person and air had the nameless

[123-076]something which often makes a woman more interesting after marriage

[123-077]than before, less confident that all things are according to her

[123-078]opinion, and yet with less of deer-like shyness—more fully a human

[123-079]being.

[123-080]This morning the benefits of the voyage seemed to be suddenly revealing

[123-081]themselves in a new elasticity of mien. As she rose from the table and

[123-082]put her two heavily-jewelled hands on each side of her neck, according

[123-083]to her wont, she had no art to conceal that sort of joyous expectation

[123-084]which makes the present more bearable than usual, just as when a man

[123-085]means to go out he finds it easier to be amiable to the family for a

[123-086]quarter of an hour beforehand. It is not impossible that a terrier

[123-087]whose pleasure was concerned would perceive those amiable signs and

[123-088]know their meaning—know why his master stood in a peculiar way, talked

[123-089]with alacrity, and even had a peculiar gleam in his eye, so that on the

[123-090]least movement toward the door, the terrier would scuttle to be in

[123-091]time. And, in dog fashion, Grandcourt discerned the signs of

[123-092]Gwendolen’s expectation, interpreting them with the narrow correctness

[123-093]which leaves a world of unknown feeling behind.

[123-094]“A—just ring, please, and tell Gibbs to order some dinner for us at

[123-095]three,” said Grandcourt, as he too rose, took out a cigar, and then

[123-096]stretched his hand toward the hat that lay near. “I’m going to send

[123-097]Angus to find a little sailing-boat for us to go out in; one that I can

[123-098]manage, with you at the tiller. It’s uncommonly pleasant these fine

[123-099]evenings—the least boring of anything we can do.”

[123-100]Gwendolen turned cold. There was not only the cruel disappointment;

[123-101]there was the immediate conviction that her husband had determined to

[123-102]take her because he would not leave her out of his sight; and probably

[123-103]this dual solitude in a boat was the more attractive to him because it

[123-104]would be wearisome to her. They were not on the plank-island; she felt

[123-105]it the more possible to begin a contest. But the gleaming content had

[123-106]died out of her. There was a change in her like that of a glacier after

[123-107]sunset.

[123-108]“I would rather not go in the boat,” she said. “Take some one else with

[123-109]you.”

[123-110]“Very well; if you don’t go, I shall not go,” said Grandcourt. “We

[123-111]shall stay suffocating here, that’s all.”

[123-112]“I can’t bear to go in a boat,” said Gwendolen, angrily.

[123-113]“That is a sudden change,” said Grandcourt, with a slight sneer. “But,

[123-114]since you decline, we shall stay indoors.”

[123-115]He laid down his hat again, lit his cigar, and walked up and down the

[123-116]room, pausing now and then to look out of the windows. Gwendolen’s

[123-117]temper told her to persist. She knew very well now that Grandcourt

[123-118]would not go without her; but if he must tyrannize over her, he should

[123-119]not do it precisely in the way he would choose. She would oblige him to

[123-120]stay in the hotel. Without speaking again, she passed into the

[123-121]adjoining bedroom and threw herself into a chair with her anger, seeing

[123-122]no purpose or issue—only feeling that the wave of evil had rushed back

[123-123]upon her, and dragged her away from her momentary breathing-place.

[123-124]Presently Grandcourt came in with his hat on, but threw it off and sat

[123-125]down sideways on a chair nearly in front of her, saying, in his

[123-126]superficial drawl,

[123-127]“Have you come round yet? or do you find it agreeable to be out of

[123-128]temper. You make things uncommonly pleasant for me.”

[123-129]“Why do you want to make them unpleasant for _me_?” said Gwendolen,

[123-130]getting helpless again, and feeling the hot tears rise.

[123-131]“Now, will you be good enough to say what it is you have to complain

[123-132]of?” said Grandcourt, looking into her eyes, and using his most inward

[123-133]voice. “Is it that I stay indoors when you stay?”

[123-134]She could give no answer. The sort of truth that made any excuse for

[123-135]her anger could not be uttered. In the conflict of despair and

[123-136][[shame|humiliation]] she began to sob, and the tears rolled down her cheeks—a

[123-137]form of agitation which she had never shown before in her husband’s

[123-138]presence.

[123-139]“I hope this is useful,” said Grandcourt, after a moment or two. “All I

[123-140]can say is, it’s most confoundedly unpleasant. What the devil women can

[123-141]see in this kind of thing, I don’t know. _You_ see something to be got

[123-142]by it, of course. All I can see is, that we shall be shut up here when

[123-143]we might have been having a pleasant sail.”

[123-144]“Let us go, then,” said Gwendolen, impetuously. “Perhaps we shall be

[123-145]drowned.” She began to sob again.

[123-146]This extraordinary behavior, which had evidently some relation to

[123-147]Deronda, gave more definiteness to Grandcourt’s conclusions. He drew

[123-148]his chair quite close in front of her, and said, in a low tone, “Just

[123-149]be quiet and listen, will you?”

[123-150]There seemed to be a magical effect in this close vicinity. Gwendolen

[123-151]shrank and ceased to sob. She kept her eyelids down and clasped her

[123-152]hands tightly.

[123-153]“Let us understand each other,” said Grandcourt, in the same tone. “I

[123-154]know very well what this nonsense means. But if you suppose I am going

[123-155]to let you make a fool of me, just dismiss that notion from your mind.

[123-156]What are you looking forward to, if you can’t behave properly as my

[123-157]wife? There is disgrace for you, if you like to have it, but I don’t

[123-158]know anything else; and as to Deronda, it’s quite clear that he hangs

[123-159]back from you.”

[123-160]“It’s all false!” said Gwendolen, bitterly. “You don’t in the least

[123-161]imagine what is in my mind. I have seen enough of the disgrace that

[123-162]comes in that way. And you had better leave me at [[freedom|liberty]] to speak with

[123-163]any one I like. It will be better for you.”

[123-164]“You will allow me to judge of that,” said Grandcourt, rising and

[123-165]moving to a little distance toward the window, but standing there

[123-166]playing with his whiskers as if he were awaiting something.

[123-167]Gwendolen’s words had so clear and tremendous a meaning for herself

[123-168]that she thought they must have expressed it to Grandcourt, and had no

[123-169]sooner uttered them than she dreaded their effect. But his soul was

[123-170]garrisoned against presentiments and fears: he had the courage and

[123-171]confidence that belong to domination, and he was at that moment feeling

[123-172]perfectly satisfied that he held his wife with bit and bridle. By the

[123-173]time they had been married a year she would cease to be restive. He

[123-174]continued standing with his air of indifference, till she felt her

[123-175]habitual stifling consciousness of having an immovable obstruction in

[123-176]her life, like the nightmare of beholding a single form that serves to

[123-177]arrest all passage though the wide country lies open.
