---
id: ch122
label: "Section 122"
type: chapter
description: "Had Grandcourt the least conception of what was going on in the breast"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[122-001]Had [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] the least conception of what was going on in the breast

[122-002]of his wife? He conceived that she did not love him; but was that

[122-003]necessary? She was under his power, and he was not accustomed to soothe

[122-004]himself, as some cheerfully-disposed persons are, with the conviction

[122-005]that he was very generally and justly beloved. But what lay quite away

[122-006]from his conception was, that she could have any special repulsion for

[122-007]him personally. How could she? He himself knew what personal repulsion

[122-008]was—nobody better; his mind was much furnished with a sense of what

[122-009]brutes his fellow-creatures were, both masculine and feminine; what

[122-010]odious familiarities they had, what smirks, what modes of flourishing

[122-011]their handkerchiefs, what costume, what lavender water, what bulging

[122-012]eyes, and what foolish notions of making themselves agreeable by

[122-013]remarks which were not wanted. In this critical view of mankind there

[122-014]was an affinity between him and [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] before their marriage, and we

[122-015]know that she had been attractingly wrought upon by the refined

[122-016]negations he presented to her. Hence he understood her repulsion for

[122-017][[Lush]]. But how was he to understand or conceive her present repulsion

[122-018]for Henleigh Grandcourt? Some men bring themselves to believe, and not

[122-019]merely maintain, the non-existence of an external world; a few others

[122-020]believe themselves objects of repulsion to a woman without being told

[122-021]so in plain language. But Grandcourt did not belong to this eccentric

[122-022]body of thinkers. He had all his life had reason to take a flattering

[122-023]view of his own attractiveness, and to place himself in fine antithesis

[122-024]to the men who, he saw at once, must be revolting to a woman of taste.

[122-025]He had no idea of moral repulsion, and could not have believed, if he

[122-026]had been told it, that there may be a resentment and disgust which will

[122-027]gradually make beauty more detestable than ugliness, through

[122-028]exasperation at that outward virtue in which hateful things can flaunt

[122-029]themselves or find a supercilious advantage.

[122-030]How, then, could Grandcourt divine what was going on in Gwendolen’s

[122-031]breast?

[122-032]For their behavior to each other scandalized no observer—not even the

[122-033]foreign maid, warranted against sea-sickness; nor Grandcourt’s own

[122-034]experienced valet: still less the picturesque crew, who regarded them

[122-035]as a model couple in high life. Their companionship consisted chiefly

[122-036]in a well-bred silence. Grandcourt had no humorous observations at

[122-037]which Gwendolen could refuse to smile, no chit-chat to make small

[122-038]occasions of dispute. He was perfectly polite in arranging an

[122-039]additional garment over her when needful, and in handing her any object

[122-040]that he perceived her to need, and she could not fall into the

[122-041]vulgarity of accepting or rejecting such politeness rudely.

[122-042]Grandcourt put up his telescope and said, “There’s a plantation of

[122-043]sugar-canes at the foot of that rock; should you like to look?”

[122-044]Gwendolen said, “Yes, please,” remembering that she must try and

[122-045]interest herself in sugar-canes as something outside her personal

[122-046]affairs. Then Grandcourt would walk up and down and smoke for a long

[122-047]while, pausing occasionally to point out a sail on the horizon, and at

[122-048]last would seat himself and look at Gwendolen with his narrow immovable

[122-049]gaze, as if she were part of the complete yacht; while she, conscious

[122-050]of being looked at was exerting her ingenuity not to meet his eyes. At

[122-051]dinner he would remark that the fruit was getting stale, and they must

[122-052]put in somewhere for more; or, observing that she did not drink the

[122-053]wine, he asked her if she would like any other kind better. A lady was

[122-054]obliged to respond to these things suitably; and even if she had not

[122-055]shrunk from quarrelling on other grounds, quarreling with Grandcourt

[122-056]was impossible; she might as well have made angry remarks to a

[122-057]dangerous serpent ornamentally coiled in her cabin without invitation.

[122-058]And what sort of dispute could a woman of any pride and dignity begin

[122-059]on a yacht?

[122-060]Grandcourt had intense satisfaction in leading his wife captive after

[122-061]this fashion; it gave their life on a small scale a royal

[122-062]representation and publicity in which every thing familiar was got rid

[122-063]of, and every body must do what was expected of them whatever might be

[122-064]their private protest—the protest (kept strictly private) adding to

[122-065]the piquancy of despotism.

[122-066]To Gwendolen, who even in the freedom of her maiden time, had had very

[122-067]faint glimpses of any heroism or sublimity, the medium that now thrust

[122-068]itself everywhere before her view was this husband and her relation to

[122-069]him. The beings closest to us, whether in love or hate, are often

[122-070]virtually our interpreters of the world, and some feather-headed

[122-071]gentleman or lady whom in passing we regret to take as legal tender for

[122-072]a human being, may be acting as a melancholy theory of life in the

[122-073]minds of those who live with them—like a piece of yellow and wavy

[122-074]glass that distorts form and makes color an affliction. Their trivial

[122-075]sentences, their petty standards, their low suspicions, their loveless

[122-076]_ennui_, may be making somebody else’s life no better than a promenade

[122-077]through a pantheon of ugly idols. Gwendolen had that kind of window

[122-078]before her, affecting the distant equally with the near. Some unhappy

[122-079]wives are soothed by the possibility that they may become mothers; but

[122-080]Gwendolen felt that to desire a child for herself would have been a

[122-081]consenting to the completion of the injury she had been guilty of. She

[122-082]was reduced to dread lest she should become a mother. It was not the

[122-083]image of a new sweetly-budding life that came as a vision of

[122-084]deliverance from the monotony of distaste: it was an image of another

[122-085]sort. In the irritable, fluctuating stages of despair, gleams of hope

[122-086]came in the form of some possible accident. To dwell on the benignity

[122-087]of accident was a refuge from worse temptation.

[122-088]The embitterment of hatred is often as unaccountable to onlookers as

[122-089]the growth of devoted love, and it not only seems but is really out of

[122-090]direct relation with any outward causes to be alleged. Passion is of

[122-091]the nature of seed, and finds nourishment within, tending to a

[122-092]predominance which determines all currents toward itself, and makes the

[122-093]whole life its tributary. And the intensest form of hatred is that

[122-094]rooted in fear, which compels to silence and drives vehemence into a

[122-095]constructive vindictiveness, an imaginary annihilation of the detested

[122-096]object, something like the hidden rites of vengeance with which the

[122-097]persecuted have made a dark vent for their rage, and soothed their

[122-098]suffering into dumbness. Such hidden rites went on in the secrecy of

[122-099]Gwendolen’s mind, but not with soothing effect—rather with the effect

[122-100]of a struggling terror. Side by side with the dread of her husband had

[122-101]grown the self-dread, which urged her to flee from the pursuing images

[122-102]wrought by her pent-up impulse. The vision of her past wrong-doing, and

[122-103]what it had brought on her, came with a pale ghastly illumination over

[122-104]every imagined deed that was a rash effort at freedom, such as she had

[122-105]made in her marriage. Moreover, she had learned to see all her acts

[122-106]through the impression they would make on [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]: whatever relief

[122-107]might come to her, she could not sever it from the judgment of her that

[122-108]would be created in his mind. Not one word of flattery, of indulgence,

[122-109]of dependence on her favor, could be fastened on by her in all their

[122-110]intercourse, to weaken his restraining power over her (in this way

[122-111]Deronda’s effort over himself was repaid); and amid the dreary

[122-112]uncertainties of her spoiled life the possible remedies that lay in his

[122-113]mind, nay, the remedy that lay in her feeling for him, made her only

[122-114]hope. He seemed to her a terrible-browed angel, from whom she could not

[122-115]think of concealing any deed so as to win an ignorant regard from him:

[122-116]it belonged to the nature of their relation that she should be

[122-117]truthful, for his power over her had begun in the raising of a

[122-118]self-discontent which could be satisfied only by genuine change. But in

[122-119]no [[secrecy|concealment]] had she now any confidence: her vision of what she had

[122-120]to dread took more decidedly than ever the form of some fiercely

[122-121]impulsive deed, committed as in a dream that she would instantaneously

[122-122]wake from to find the effects real though the images had been false: to

[122-123]find death under her hands, but instead of darkness, daylight; instead

[122-124]of satisfied hatred, the dismay of guilt; instead of freedom, the palsy

[122-125]of a new terror—a white dead face from which she was forever trying to

[122-126]flee and forever held back. She remembered Deronda’s words: they were

[122-127]continually recurring in her thought,

[122-128]“Turn your fear into a safeguard. Keep your dread fixed on the idea of

[122-129]increasing your [[conscience|remorse]]. * * * Take your fear as a safeguard. It is

[122-130]like quickness of hearing. It may make consequences passionately

[122-131]present to you.”

[122-132]And so it was. In Gwendolen’s consciousness temptation and dread met

[122-133]and stared like two pale phantoms, each seeing itself in the

[122-134]other—each obstructed by its own image; and all the while her fuller

[122-135]self beheld the apparitions and sobbed for deliverance from them.

[122-136]Inarticulate prayers, no more definite than a cry, often swept out from

[122-137]her into the vast silence, unbroken except by her husband’s breathing

[122-138]or the plash of the wave or the creaking of the masts; but if ever she

[122-139]thought of definite help, it took the form of Deronda’s presence and

[122-140]words, of the sympathy he might have for her, of the direction he might

[122-141]give her. It was sometimes after a white-lipped fierce-eyed temptation

[122-142]with murdering fingers had made its demon-visit that these best moments

[122-143]of inward crying and clinging for rescue would come to her, and she

[122-144]would lie with wide-open eyes in which the rising tears seemed a

[122-145]blessing, and the thought, “I will not mind if I can keep from getting

[122-146]wicked,” seemed an answer to the indefinite prayer.

[122-147]So the days passed, taking with them light breezes beyond and about the

[122-148]Balearic Isles, and then to Sardinia, and then with gentle change

[122-149]persuading them northward again toward Corsica. But this floating,

[122-150]gentle-wafted existence, with its apparently peaceful influences, was

[122-151]becoming as bad as a nightmare to Gwendolen.

[122-152]“How long are we to be yachting?” she ventured to ask one day after

[122-153]they had been touching at Ajaccio, and the mere fact of change in going

[122-154]ashore had given her a relief from some of the thoughts which seemed

[122-155]now to cling about the very rigging of the vessel, mix with the air in

[122-156]the red silk cabin below, and make the smell of the sea odious.

[122-157]“What else should we do?” said Grandcourt. “I’m not tired of it. I

[122-158]don’t see why we shouldn’t stay out any length of time. There’s less to

[122-159]bore one in this way. And where would you go to? I’m sick of foreign

[122-160]places. And we shall have enough of [[ryelands|Ryelands]]. Would you rather be at

[122-161]Ryelands?”

[122-162]“Oh, no,” said Gwendolen, indifferently, finding all places alike

[122-163]indescribable as soon as she imagined herself and her husband in them.

[122-164]“I only wondered how long you would like this.”

[122-165]“I like yachting longer than anything else,” said Grandcourt; “and I

[122-166]had none last year. I suppose you are beginning to tire of it. Women

[122-167]are so confoundedly whimsical. They expect everything to give way to

[122-168]them.”

[122-169]“Oh, dear, no!” said Gwendolen, letting out her scorn in a flute-like

[122-170]tone. “I never expect you to give way.”

[122-171]“Why should I?” said Grandcourt, with his inward voice, looking at her,

[122-172]and then choosing an orange—for they were at table.

[122-173]She made up her mind to a length of yachting that she could not see

[122-174]beyond; but the next day, after a squall which had made her rather ill

[122-175]for the first time, he came down to her and said,

[122-176]“There’s been the devil’s own work in the night. The skipper says we

[122-177]shall have to stay at [[genoa|Genoa]] for a week while things are set right.”
