---
id: ch138
label: "Section 138"
type: chapter
description: "“When a young man makes his will in health, he usually counts on living"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[138-001]“When a young man makes his will in health, he usually counts on living

[138-002]a long while. Probably [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Mr. Grandcourt]] did not believe that this will

[138-003]would ever have its present effect.” After a moment, he added, “The

[138-004]effect is painful in more ways than one. Female morality is likely to

[138-005]suffer from this marked advantage and prominence being given to

[138-006]illegitimate offspring.”

[138-007]“Well, in point of fact,” said [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], in his comfortable way, “since

[138-008]the boy is there, this was really the best alternative for the disposal

[138-009]of the estates. Grandcourt had nobody nearer than his cousin. And it’s

[138-010]a chilling thought that you go out of this life only for the benefit of

[138-011]a cousin. A man gets a little pleasure in making his will, if it’s for

[138-012]the good of his own curly heads; but it’s a nuisance when you’re giving

[138-013]the bequeathing to a used-up fellow like yourself, and one you don’t

[138-014]care two straws for. It’s the next worse thing to having only a life

[138-015]interest in your estates. No; I forgive Grandcourt for that part of his

[138-016]will. But, between ourselves, what I don’t forgive him for, is the

[138-017]shabby way he has provided for your niece—_our_ niece, I will say—no

[138-018]better a position than if she had been a doctor’s widow. Nothing grates

[138-019]on me more than that posthumous grudgingness toward a wife. A man ought

[138-020]to have some pride and fondness for his widow. _I_ should, I know. I

[138-021]take it as a test of a man, that he feels the easier about his death

[138-022]when he can think of his wife and daughters being comfortable after it.

[138-023]I like that story of the fellows in the Crimean war, who were ready to

[138-024]go to the bottom of the sea if their widows were provided for.”

[138-025]“It has certainly taken me by surprise,” said [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]], “all the

[138-026]more because, as the one who stood in the place of father to my niece,

[138-027]I had shown my reliance on Mr. Grandcourt’s apparent liberality in

[138-028]money matters by making no claims for her beforehand. That seemed to me

[138-029]due to him under the circumstances. Probably you think me blamable.”

[138-030]“Not blamable exactly. I respect a man for trusting another. But take

[138-031]my advice. If you marry another niece, though it may be to the

[138-032]Archbishop of Canterbury, bind him down. Your niece can’t be married

[138-033]for the first time twice over. And if he’s a good fellow, he’ll wish to

[138-034]be bound. But as to [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Mrs. Grandcourt]], I can only say that I feel my

[138-035]relation to her all the nearer because I think that she has not been

[138-036]well treated. And I hope you will urge her to rely on me as a friend.”

[138-037]Thus spake the chivalrous Sir Hugo, in his disgust at the young and

[138-038]beautiful widow of a Mallinger Grandcourt being left with only two

[138-039]thousand a year and a house in a coal-mining district. To the rector

[138-040]that income naturally appeared less shabby and less accompanied with

[138-041]mortifying privations; but in this conversation he had devoured a much

[138-042]keener sense than the baronet’s of the [[shame|humiliation]] cast over his niece,

[138-043]and also over her nearest friends, by the conspicuous publishing of her

[138-044]husband’s relation to [[Lydia-Glasher|Mrs. Glasher]]. And like all men who are good

[138-045]husbands and fathers, he felt the humiliation through the minds of the

[138-046]women who would be chiefly affected by it; so that the annoyance of

[138-047]first hearing the facts was far slighter than what he felt in

[138-048]communicating them to [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], and in anticipating Gwendolen’s

[138-049]feeling whenever her mother saw fit to tell her of them. For the good

[138-050]rector had an innocent conviction that his niece was unaware of Mrs.

[138-051]Glasher’s existence, arguing with masculine soundness from what maidens

[138-052]and wives were likely to know, do, and suffer, and having had a most

[138-053]imperfect observation of the particular maiden and wife in question.

[138-054]Not so Gwendolen’s mother, who now thought that she saw an explanation

[138-055]of much that had been enigmatic in her child’s conduct and words before

[138-056]and after her engagement, concluding that in some inconceivable way

[138-057]Gwendolen had been informed of this left-handed marriage and the

[138-058]existence of the children. She trusted to opportunities that would

[138-059]arise in moments of affectionate confidence before and during their

[138-060]journey to England, when she might gradually learn how far the actual

[138-061]state of things was clear to Gwendolen, and prepare her for anything

[138-062]that might be a disappointment. But she was spared from devices on the

[138-063]subject.

[138-064]“I hope you don’t expect that I am going to be rich and grand, mamma,”

[138-065]said Gwendolen, not long after the rector’s communication; “perhaps I

[138-066]shall have nothing at all.”

[138-067]She was dressed, and had been sitting long in quiet meditation. Mrs.

[138-068]Davilow was startled, but said, after a moment’s reflection,

[138-069]“Oh yes, dear, you will have something. Sir Hugo knows all about the

[138-070]will.”

[138-071]“That will not decide,” said Gwendolen, abruptly.

[138-072]“Surely, dear: Sir Hugo says you are to have two thousand a year and

[138-073]the house at [[gadsmere|Gadsmere]].”

[138-074]“What I have will depend on what I accept,” said Gwendolen. “You and my

[138-075]uncle must not attempt to cross me and persuade me about this. I will

[138-076]do everything I can do to make you happy, but in anything about my

[138-077]husband I must not be interfered with. Is eight hundred a year enough

[138-078]for you, mamma?”

[138-079]“More than enough, dear. You must not think of giving me so much.” Mrs.

[138-080]Davilow paused a little, and then said, “Do you know who is to have the

[138-081]estates and the rest of the money?”

[138-082]“Yes,” said Gwendolen, waving her hand in dismissal of the subject. “I

[138-083]know everything. It is all perfectly right, and I wish never to have it

[138-084]mentioned.”

[138-085]The mother was silent, looked away, and rose to fetch a fan-screen,

[138-086]with a slight flush on her delicate cheeks. Wondering, imagining, she

[138-087]did not like to meet her daughter’s eyes, and sat down again under a

[138-088]sad constraint. What wretchedness her child had perhaps gone through,

[138-089]which yet must remain as it always had been, locked away from their

[138-090]mutual speech. But Gwendolen was watching her mother with that new

[138-091]divination which experience had given her; and in tender relenting at

[138-092]her own peremptoriness, said, “Come and sit nearer to me, mamma, and

[138-093]don’t be unhappy.”

[138-094]Mrs. Davilow did as she was told, but bit her lips in the vain attempt

[138-095]to hinder smarting tears. Gwendolen leaned toward her caressingly and

[138-096]said, “I mean to be very wise; I do, really. And good—oh, so good to

[138-097]you, dear, old, sweet mamma, you won’t know me. Only you must not cry.”

[138-098]The resolve that Gwendolen had in her mind was that she would ask

[138-099][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] whether she ought to accept any of her husband’s money—whether

[138-100]she might accept what would enable her to provide for her mother. The

[138-101]poor thing felt strong enough to do anything that would give her a

[138-102]higher place in Deronda’s mind.

[138-103]An invitation that Sir Hugo pressed on her with kind urgency was that

[138-104]she and Mrs. Davilow should go straight with him to Park Lane, and make

[138-105]his house their abode as long as mourning and other details needed

[138-106]attending to in [[london|London]]. Town, he insisted, was just then the most

[138-107]retired of places; and he proposed to exert himself at once in getting

[138-108]all articles belonging to Gwendolen away from the house in Grosvenor

[138-109]Square. No proposal could have suited her better than this of staying a

[138-110]little while in Park Lane. It would be easy for her there to have an

[138-111]interview with Deronda, if she only knew how to get a letter into his

[138-112]hands, asking him to come to her. During the journey, Sir Hugo, having

[138-113]understood that she was acquainted with the purport of her husband’s

[138-114]will, ventured to talk before her and to her about her future

[138-115]arrangements, referring here and there to mildly agreeable prospects as

[138-116]matters of course, and otherwise shedding a decorous cheerfulness over

[138-117]her widowed position. It seemed to him really the more graceful course

[138-118]for a widow to recover her spirits on finding that her husband had not

[138-119]dealt as handsomely by her as he might have done; it was the testator’s

[138-120]fault if he compromised all her grief at his departure by giving a

[138-121]testamentary reason for it, so that she might be supposed to look sad,

[138-122]not because he had left her, but because he had left her poor. The

[138-123]baronet, having his kindliness doubly fanned by the favorable wind on

[138-124]his fortunes and by [[sympathy|compassion]] for Gwendolen, had become quite fatherly

[138-125]in his behavior to her, called her “my dear,” and in mentioning

[138-126]Gadsmere to Mr. Gascoigne, with its various advantages and

[138-127]disadvantages, spoke of what “we” might do to make the best of that

[138-128]property. Gwendolen sat by in pale silence while Sir Hugo, with his

[138-129]face turned toward Mrs. Davilow or Mr. Gascoigne, conjectured that Mrs.

[138-130]Grandcourt might perhaps prefer letting Gadsmere to residing there

[138-131]during any part of the year, in which case he thought that it might be

[138-132]leased on capital terms to one of the fellows engaged with the coal:

[138-133]Sir Hugo had seen enough of the place to know that it was as

[138-134]comfortable and picturesque a box as any man need desire, providing his

[138-135]desires were circumscribed within a coal area.

[138-136]“_I_ shouldn’t mind about the soot myself,” said the baronet, with that

[138-137]dispassionateness which belongs to the potential mood. “Nothing is more

[138-138]healthy. And if one’s business lay there, Gadsmere would be a paradise.

[138-139]It makes quite a feature in Scrogg’s history of the county, with the

[138-140]little tower and the fine piece of water—the prettiest print in the

[138-141]book.”

[138-142]“A more important place than [[Offendene]], I suppose?” said Mr. Gascoigne.

[138-143]“Much,” said the baronet, decisively. “I was there with my poor

[138-144]brother—it is more than a quarter of a century ago, but I remember it

[138-145]very well. The rooms may not be larger, but the grounds are on a

[138-146]different scale.”

[138-147]“Our poor dear Offendene is empty after all,” said Mrs. Davilow. “When

[138-148]it came to the point, Mr. Haynes declared off, and there has been no

[138-149]one to take it since. I might as well have accepted Lord Brackenshaw’s

[138-150]kind offer that I should remain in it another year rent-free: for I

[138-151]should have kept the place aired and warmed.”

[138-152]“I hope you’ve something snug instead,” said Sir Hugo.

[138-153]“A little too snug,” said Mr. Gascoigne, smiling at his sister-in-law.

[138-154]“You are rather thick upon the ground.”

[138-155]Gwendolen had turned with a changed glance when her mother spoke of

[138-156]Offendene being empty. This conversation passed during one of the long

[138-157]unaccountable pauses often experienced in foreign trains at some

[138-158]country station. There was a dreamy, sunny stillness over the hedgeless

[138-159]fields stretching to the boundary of poplars; and to Gwendolen the talk

[138-160]within the carriage seemed only to make the dreamland larger with an

[138-161]indistinct region of coal-pits, and a purgatorial Gadsmere which she

[138-162]would never visit; till at her mother’s words, this mingled, dozing

[138-163]view seemed to dissolve and give way to a more wakeful vision of

[138-164]Offendene and [[pennicote-rectory|Pennicote]] under their cooler lights. She saw the gray

[138-165]shoulders of the downs, the cattle-specked fields, the shadowy

[138-166]plantations with rutted lanes where the barked timber lay for a wayside

[138-167]seat, the neatly-clipped hedges on the road from the parsonage to

[138-168]Offendene, the avenue where she was gradually discerned from the

[138-169]window, the hall-door opening, and her mother or one of the troublesome

[138-170]sisters coming out to meet her. All that brief experience of a quiet

[138-171]home which had once seemed a dullness to be fled from, now came back to

[138-172]her as a restful escape, a station where she found the breath of

[138-173]morning and the unreproaching voice of birds after following a lure

[138-174]through a long Satanic masquerade, which she had entered on with an

[138-175]intoxicated belief in its disguises, and had seen the end of in

[138-176]shrieking fear lest she herself had become one of the evil spirits who

[138-177]were dropping their human mummery and hissing around her with serpent

[138-178]tongues.
