---
id: ch139
label: "Section 139"
type: chapter
description: "In this way Gwendolen’s mind paused over Offendene and made it the"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[139-001]In this way [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s mind paused over [[Offendene]] and made it the

[139-002]scene of many thoughts; but she gave no further outward sign of

[139-003]interest in this conversation, any more than in [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]]’s opinion on

[139-004]the telegraphic cable or her uncle’s views of the Church Rate Abolition

[139-005]Bill. What subjects will not our talk embrace in leisurely

[139-006]day-journeying from [[genoa|Genoa]] to [[london|London]]? Even strangers, after glancing

[139-007]from China to Peru and opening their mental stores with a liberality

[139-008]threatening a mutual impression of poverty on any future meeting, are

[139-009]liable to become excessively confidential. But the baronet and the

[139-010]rector were under a still stronger pressure toward cheerful

[139-011]communication: they were like acquaintances compelled to a long [[ambition|drive]]

[139-012]in a mourning-coach who having first remarked that the occasion is a

[139-013]melancholy one, naturally proceed to enliven it by the most

[139-014]miscellaneous discourse. “I don’t mind telling _you_,” said Sir Hugo to

[139-015]the rector, in mentioning some private details; while the rector,

[139-016]without saying so, did not mind telling the baronet about his sons, and

[139-017]the difficulty of placing them in the world. By the dint of discussing

[139-018]all persons and things within driving-reach of [[diplow-hall|Diplow]], Sir Hugo got

[139-019]himself wrought to a pitch of interest in that former home, and of

[139-020]conviction that it was his pleasant duty to regain and strengthen his

[139-021]personal influence in the neighborhood, that made him declare his

[139-022]intention of taking his family to the place for a month or two before

[139-023]the autumn was over; and [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]] cordially rejoiced in that

[139-024]prospect. Altogether, the journey was continued and ended with mutual

[139-025]liking between the male fellow-travellers.

[139-026]Meanwhile Gwendolen sat by like one who had visited the spirit-world

[139-027]and was full to the lips of an unutterable experience that threw a

[139-028]strange unreality over all the talk she was hearing of her own and the

[139-029]world’s business; and [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]] was chiefly occupied in imagining

[139-030]what her daughter was feeling, and in wondering what was signified by

[139-031]her hinted doubt whether she would accept her husband’s bequest.

[139-032]Gwendolen in fact had before her the unsealed wall of an immediate

[139-033]purpose shutting off every other resolution. How to scale the wall? She

[139-034]wanted again to see and consult [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], that she might secure herself

[139-035]against any act he would disapprove. Would her [[conscience|remorse]] have maintained

[139-036]its power within her, or would she have felt absolved by secrecy, if it

[139-037]had not been for that outer conscience which was made for her by

[139-038]Deronda? It is hard to say how much we could forgive ourselves if we

[139-039]were secure from judgment by another whose opinion is the

[139-040]breathing-medium of all our joy—who brings to us with close pressure

[139-041]and immediate sequence that judgment of the Invisible and Universal

[139-042]which self-flattery and the world’s tolerance would easily melt and

[139-043]disperse. In this way our brother may be in the stead of God to us, and

[139-044]his opinion which has pierced even to the joints and marrow, may be our

[139-045]virtue in the making. That mission of Deronda to Gwendolen had begun

[139-046]with what she had felt to be his judgment of her at the [[gambling|gaming]]-table.

[139-047]He might easily have spoiled it:—much of our lives is spent in marring

[139-048]our own influence and turning others’ belief in us into a widely

[139-049]concluding unbelief which they call knowledge of the world, while it is

[139-050]really disappointment in you or me. Deronda had not spoiled his mission.

[139-051]But Gwendolen had forgotten to ask him for his address in case she

[139-052]wanted to write, and her only way of reaching him was through Sir Hugo.

[139-053]She was not in the least blind to the construction that all witnesses

[139-054]might put on her giving signs of dependence on Deronda, and her seeking

[139-055]him more than he sought her: [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]’s rebukes had sufficiently

[139-056]enlightened her pride. But the force, the tenacity of her nature had

[139-057]thrown itself into that dependence, and she would no more let go her

[139-058]hold on Deronda’s help, or deny herself the interview her soul needed,

[139-059]because of witnesses, than if she had been in prison in danger of being

[139-060]condemned to death. When she was in Park Lane and knew that the baronet

[139-061]would be going down to the Abbey immediately (just to see his family

[139-062]for a couple of days and then return to transact needful business for

[139-063]Gwendolen), she said to him without any air of hesitation, while her

[139-064]mother was present,

[139-065]“Sir Hugo, I wish to see Mr. Deronda again as soon as possible. I don’t

[139-066]know his address. Will you tell it me, or let him know that I want to

[139-067]see him?”

[139-068]A quick thought passed across Sir Hugo’s face, but made no difference

[139-069]to the ease with which he said, “Upon my word, I don’t know whether

[139-070]he’s at his chambers or the Abbey at this moment. But I’ll make sure of

[139-071]him. I’ll send a note now to his chambers telling him to come, and if

[139-072]he’s at the Abbey I can give him your message and send him up at once.

[139-073]I am sure he will want to obey your wish,” the baronet ended, with

[139-074]grave kindness, as if nothing could seem to him more in the appropriate

[139-075]course of things than that she should send such a message.

[139-076]But he was convinced that Gwendolen had a passionate attachment to

[139-077]Deronda, the seeds of which had been laid long ago, and his former

[139-078]suspicion now recurred to him with more strength than ever, that her

[139-079]feeling was likely to lead her into imprudences—in which kind-hearted

[139-080]Sir Hugo was determined to screen and defend her as far as lay in his

[139-081]power. To him it was as pretty a story as need be that this fine

[139-082]creature and his favorite Dan should have turned out to be formed for

[139-083]each other, and that the unsuitable husband should have made his exit

[139-084]in such excellent time. Sir Hugo liked that a charming woman should be

[139-085]made as happy as possible. In truth, what most vexed his mind in this

[139-086]matter at present was a doubt whether the too lofty and inscrutable Dan

[139-087]had not got some scheme or other in his head, which would prove to be

[139-088]dearer to him than the lovely Mrs. Grandcourt, and put that

[139-089]neatly-prepared marriage with her out of the question. It was among the

[139-090]usual paradoxes of feeling that Sir Hugo, who had given his fatherly

[139-091]cautions to Deronda against too much tenderness in his relations with

[139-092]the bride, should now feel rather irritated against him by the

[139-093]suspicion that he had not fallen in love as he ought to have done. Of

[139-094]course all this thinking on Sir Hugo’s part was eminently premature,

[139-095]only a fortnight or so after Grandcourt’s death. But it is the trick of

[139-096]thinking to be either premature or behind-hand.

[139-097]However, he sent the note to Deronda’s chambers, and it found him there.

[139-098]CHAPTER LXV.

[139-099]“O, welcome, pure-eyed Faith, white-handed Hope,

[139-100]Thou hovering angel, girt with golden wings!”

[139-101]—MILTON.

[139-102]Deronda did not obey Gwendolen’s new summons without some agitation.

[139-103]Not his [[pride|vanity]], but his keen sympathy made him susceptible to the

[139-104]danger that another’s heart might feel larger demands on him than he

[139-105]would be able to fulfill; and it was no longer a matter of argument

[139-106]with him, but of penetrating consciousness, that Gwendolen’s soul clung

[139-107]to his with a passionate need. We do not argue the existence of the

[139-108]anger or the scorn that thrills through us in a voice; we simply feel

[139-109]it, and it admits of no disproof. Deronda felt this woman’s destiny

[139-110]hanging on his over a precipice of despair. Any one who knows him

[139-111]cannot wonder at his inward confession, that if all this had happened

[139-112]little more than a year ago, he would hardly have asked himself whether

[139-113]he loved her; the impetuous determining impulse which would have moved

[139-114]him would have been to save her from sorrow, to shelter her life

[139-115]forevermore from the dangers of loneliness, and carry out to the last

[139-116]the rescue he had begun in that monitory redemption of the necklace.

[139-117]But now, love and duty had thrown other bonds around him, and that

[139-118]impulse could no longer determine his life; still, it was present in

[139-119]him as a compassionate yearning, a painful quivering at the very

[139-120]imagination of having again and again to meet the appeal of her eyes

[139-121]and words. The very strength of the bond, the certainty of the resolve,

[139-122]that kept him asunder from her, made him gaze at her lot apart with the

[139-123]more aching pity.

[139-124]He awaited her coming in the back drawing-room—part of that white and

[139-125]crimson space where they had sat together at the musical party, where

[139-126]Gwendolen had said for the first time that her lot depended on his not

[139-127]forsaking her, and her appeal had seemed to melt into the melodic

[139-128]cry—_Per pietà non dirmi addio_. But the melody had come from [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]]’s

[139-129]dear voice.

[139-130]Deronda walked about this room, which he had for years known by heart,

[139-131]with a strange sense of metamorphosis in his own life. The familiar

[139-132]objects around him, from Lady Mallinger’s gently smiling portrait to

[139-133]the also human and urbane faces of the lions on the pilasters of the

[139-134]chimney-piece, seemed almost to belong to a previous state of existence

[139-135]which he was revisiting in memory only, not in reality; so deep and

[139-136]transforming had been the impressions he had lately experienced, so new

[139-137]were the conditions under which he found himself in the house he had

[139-138]been accustomed to think of as a home—standing with his hat in his

[139-139]hand awaiting the entrance of a young creature whose life had also been

[139-140]undergoing a transformation—a tragic transformation toward a wavering

[139-141]result, in which he felt with apprehensiveness that his own action was

[139-142]still bound up.

[139-143]But Gwendolen was come in, looking changed; not only by her mourning

[139-144]dress, but by a more satisfied quietude of expression than he had seen

[139-145]in her face at Genoa. Her satisfaction was that Deronda was there; but

[139-146]there was no smile between them as they met and clasped hands; each was

[139-147]full of remembrance—full of anxious prevision. She said, “It was good

[139-148]of you to come. Let us sit down,” immediately seating herself in the

[139-149]nearest chair. He placed himself opposite to her.

[139-150]“I asked you to come because I want you to tell me what I ought to do,”

[139-151]she began, at once. “Don’t be afraid of telling me what you think is

[139-152]right, because it seems hard. I have made up my mind to do it. I was

[139-153]afraid once of being poor; I could not bear to think of being under

[139-154]other people; and that was why I did something—why I married. I have

[139-155]borne worse things now. I think I could bear to be poor, if you think I

[139-156]ought. Do you know about my husband’s will?”

[139-157]“Yes, Sir Hugo told me,” said Deronda, already guessing the question

[139-158]she had to ask.

[139-159]“Ought I to take anything he has left me? I will tell you what I have

[139-160]been thinking,” said Gwendolen, with a more nervous eagerness. “Perhaps

[139-161]you may not quite know that I really did think a good deal about my

[139-162]mother when I married. I _was_ selfish, but I did love her, and feel

[139-163]about her poverty; and what comforted me most at first, when I was

[139-164]miserable, was her being better off because I had married. The thing

[139-165]that would be hardest to me now would be to see her in poverty again;

[139-166]and I have been thinking that if I took enough to provide for her, and

[139-167]no more—nothing for myself—it would not be wrong; for I was very

[139-168]precious to my mother—and he took me from her—and he meant—and if

[139-169]she had known—”

[139-170]Gwendolen broke off. She had been preparing herself for this interview

[139-171]by thinking of hardly anything else than this question of right toward

[139-172]her mother; but the question had carried with it thoughts and reasons

[139-173]which it was impossible for her to utter, and these perilous

[139-174]remembrances swarmed between her words, making her speech more and more

[139-175]agitated and tremulous. She looked down helplessly at her hands, now

[139-176]unladen of all rings except her wedding-ring.
