---
id: ch137
label: "Section 137"
type: chapter
description: "“You must not ask me to promise that,” said Deronda, smiling. “I must"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[137-001]“You must not ask me to promise that,” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], smiling. “I must

[137-002]be convinced first of special reasons for it in the writings

[137-003]themselves. And I am too backward a pupil yet. That blent transmission

[137-004]must go on without any choice of ours; but what we can’t hinder must

[137-005]not make our rule for what we ought to choose. I think our duty is

[137-006]faithful tradition where we can attain it. And so you would insist for

[137-007]any one but yourself. Don’t ask me to deny my spiritual parentage, when

[137-008]I am finding the clue of my life in the recognition of natural

[137-009]parentage.”

[137-010]“I will ask for no promise till you see the reason,” said [[Mordecai]].

[137-011]“You have said the truth: I would obey the Master’s rule for another.

[137-012]But for years my hope, nay, my confidence, has been, not that the

[137-013]imperfect image of my thought, which is an ill-shaped work of the

[137-014]youthful carver who has seen a heavenly pattern, and trembles in

[137-015]imitating the vision—not that this should live, but that my vision and

[137-016]passion should enter into yours—yea, into yours; for he whom I longed

[137-017]for afar, was he not you whom I discerned as mine when you came near?

[137-018]Nevertheless, you shall judge. For my soul is satisfied.” Mordecai

[137-019]paused, and then began in a changed tone, reverting to previous

[137-020]suggestions from Deronda’s disclosure: “What moved your parents——?”

[137-021]but he immediately checked himself, and added, “Nay, I ask not that you

[137-022]should tell me aught concerning others, unless it is your pleasure.”

[137-023]“Some time—gradually—you will know all,” said Deronda. “But now tell

[137-024]me more about yourselves, and how the time has passed since I went

[137-025]away. I am sure there has been some trouble. [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] has been in distress

[137-026]about something.”

[137-027]He looked at Mirah, but she immediately turned to her brother,

[137-028]appealing to him to give the difficult answer. She hoped he would not

[137-029]think it necessary to tell Deronda the facts about her father on such

[137-030]an evening as this. Just when Deronda had brought himself so near, and

[137-031]identified himself with her brother, it was cutting to her that he

[137-032]should hear of this [[shame|disgrace]] clinging about them, which seemed to have

[137-033]become partly his. To relieve herself she rose to take up her hat and

[137-034]cloak, thinking she would go to her own room: perhaps they would speak

[137-035]more easily when she had left them. But meanwhile Mordecai said,

[137-036]“To-day there has been a grief. A duty which seemed to have gone far

[137-037]into the distance, has come back and turned its face upon us, and

[137-038]raised no gladness—has raised a dread that we must submit to. But for

[137-039]the moment we are delivered from any visible yoke. Let us defer

[137-040]speaking of it as if this evening which is deepening about us were the

[137-041]beginning of the festival in which we must offer the first fruits of

[137-042]our joy, and mingle no mourning with them.”

[137-043]Deronda divined the hinted grief, and left it in silence, rising as he

[137-044]saw Mirah rise, and saying to her, “Are you going? I must leave almost

[137-045]immediately—when I and Mrs. Adam have mounted the precious chest, and

[137-046]I have delivered the key to Mordecai—no, Ezra,—may I call him Ezra

[137-047]now? I have learned to think of him as Ezra since I have heard you call

[137-048]him so.”

[137-049]“Please call him Ezra,” said Mirah, faintly, feeling a new timidity

[137-050]under Deronda’s glance and near presence. Was there really something

[137-051]different about him, or was the difference only in her feeling? The

[137-052]strangely various emotions of the last few hours had exhausted her; she

[137-053]was faint with fatigue and want of food. Deronda, observing her pallor

[137-054]and tremulousness, longed to show more feeling, but dared not. She put

[137-055]out her hand with an effort to smile, and then he opened the door for

[137-056]her. That was all.

[137-057]A man of refined pride shrinks from making a lover’s approaches to a

[137-058]woman whose wealth or rank might make them appear presumptuous or

[137-059]low-motived; but Deronda was finding a more delicate difficulty in a

[137-060]position which, superficially taken, was the reverse of that—though to

[137-061]an ardent reverential love, the loved woman has always a kind of wealth

[137-062]and rank which makes a man keenly susceptible about the aspect of his

[137-063]addresses. Deronda’s difficulty was what any generous man might have

[137-064]felt in some degree; but it affected him peculiarly through his

[137-065]imaginative sympathy with a mind in which gratitude was strong. Mirah,

[137-066]he knew, felt herself bound to him by deep obligations, which to her

[137-067]sensibilities might give every wish of his the aspect of a claim; and

[137-068]an inability to fulfill it would cause her a pain continually revived

[137-069]by their inevitable communion in care of Ezra. Here were fears not of

[137-070]pride only, but of extreme tenderness. Altogether, to have the

[137-071]character of a benefactor seemed to Deronda’s anxiety an insurmountable

[137-072]obstacle to confessing himself a lover, unless in some inconceivable

[137-073]way it could be revealed to him that Mirah’s heart had accepted him

[137-074]beforehand. And the agitation on his own account, too, was not small.

[137-075]Even a man who has practised himself in love-making till his own

[137-076]glibness has rendered him sceptical, may at last be overtaken by the

[137-077]lover’s awe—may tremble, stammer, and show other signs of recovered

[137-078]sensibility no more in the range of his acquired talents than pins and

[137-079]needles after numbness: how much more may that energetic timidity

[137-080]possess a man whose inward history has cherished his susceptibilities

[137-081]instead of dulling them, and has kept all the language of passion fresh

[137-082]and rooted as the lovely leafage about the hill-side spring!

[137-083]As for Mirah her dear head lay on its pillow that night with its former

[137-084]suspicions thrown out of shape but still present, like an ugly story

[137-085]which had been discredited but not therefore dissipated. All that she

[137-086]was certain of about Deronda seemed to prove that he had no such

[137-087]fetters upon him as she had been allowing herself to believe in. His

[137-088]whole manner as well as his words implied that there were no hidden

[137-089]bonds remaining to have any effect in determining his future. But

[137-090]notwithstanding this plainly reasonable inference, uneasiness still

[137-091]clung about Mirah’s heart. Deronda was not to blame, but he had an

[137-092]importance for [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Mrs. Grandcourt]] which must give her some hold on him.

[137-093]And the thought of any close confidence between them stirred the little

[137-094]biting snake that had long lain curled and harmless in Mirah’s gentle

[137-095]bosom.

[137-096]But did she this evening feel as completely as before that her jealousy

[137-097]was no less remote from any possibility for herself personally than if

[137-098]her human soul had been lodged in the body of a fawn that Deronda had

[137-099]saved from the archers? Hardly. Something indefinable had happened and

[137-100]made a difference. The soft warm rain of blossoms which had fallen just

[137-101]where she was—did it really come because she was there? What spirit

[137-102]was there among the boughs?

[137-103]CHAPTER LXIV.

[137-104]“Questa montagna è tale,

[137-105]Che sempre al cominciar di sotto è grave.

[137-106]E quanto uom più va su e men fa male.”

[137-107]—DANTE: _Il Purgatorio_.

[137-108]It was not many days after her mother’s arrival that Gwendolen would

[137-109]consent to remain at [[genoa|Genoa]]. Her desire to get away from that gem of the

[137-110]sea, helped to rally her strength and courage. For what place, though

[137-111]it were the flowery vale of Enna, may not the inward sense turn into a

[137-112]circle of punishment where the flowers are no better than a crop of

[137-113]flame-tongues burning the soles of our feet?

[137-114]“I shall never like to see the Mediterranean again,” said Gwendolen, to

[137-115]her mother, who thought that she quite understood her child’s

[137-116]feeling—even in her tacit prohibition of any express reference to her

[137-117]late husband.

[137-118][[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]], indeed, though compelled formally to regard this time as

[137-119]one of severe calamity, was virtually enjoying her life more than she

[137-120]had ever done since her daughter’s marriage. It seemed that her darling

[137-121]was brought back to her not merely with all the old affection, but with

[137-122]a conscious cherishing of her mother’s nearness, such as we give to a

[137-123]possession that we have been on the brink of losing.

[137-124]“Are you there, mamma?” cried Gwendolen, in the middle of the night (a

[137-125]bed had been made for her mother in the same room with hers), very much

[137-126]as she would have done in her early girlhood, if she had felt

[137-127]frightened in lying awake.

[137-128]“Yes, dear; can I do anything for you?”

[137-129]“No, thank you; only I like so to know you are there. Do you mind my

[137-130]waking you?” (This question would hardly have been Gwendolen’s in her

[137-131]early girlhood.)

[137-132]“I was not asleep, darling.”

[137-133]“It seemed not real that you were with me. I wanted to make it real. I

[137-134]can bear things if you are with me. But you must not lie awake, anxious

[137-135]about me. You must be happy now. You must let me make you happy now at

[137-136]last—else what shall I do?”

[137-137]“God bless you, dear; I have the best happiness I can have, when you

[137-138]make much of me.”

[137-139]But the next night, hearing that she was sighing and restless Mrs.

[137-140]Davilow said, “Let me give you your sleeping-draught, Gwendolen.”

[137-141]“No, mamma, thank you; I don’t want to sleep.”

[137-142]“It would be so good for you to sleep more, my darling.”

[137-143]“Don’t say what would be good for me, mamma,” Gwendolen answered,

[137-144]impetuously. “You don’t know what would be good for me. You and my

[137-145]uncle must not contradict me and tell me anything is good for me when I

[137-146]feel it is not good.”

[137-147]Mrs. Davilow was silent, not wondering that the poor child was

[137-148]irritable. Presently Gwendolen said,

[137-149]“I was always naughty to you, mamma.”

[137-150]“No, dear, no.”

[137-151]“Yes, I was,” said Gwendolen insistently. “It is because I was always

[137-152]wicked that I am miserable now.”

[137-153]She burst into sobs and cries. The determination to be silent about all

[137-154]the facts of her married life and its close, reacted in these escapes

[137-155]of enigmatic excitement.

[137-156]But dim lights of interpretation were breaking on the mother’s mind

[137-157]through the information that came from [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] to [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]], and,

[137-158]with some omissions, from Mr. Gascoigne to herself. The good-natured

[137-159]baronet, while he was attending to all decent measures in relation to

[137-160]his nephew’s death, and the possible washing ashore of the body,

[137-161]thought it the kindest thing he could do to use his present friendly

[137-162]intercourse with the rector as an opportunity for communicating with

[137-163]him, in the mildest way, the purport of [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]’s will, so as to

[137-164]save him the additional shock that would be in store for him if he

[137-165]carried his illusions all the way home. Perhaps Sir Hugo would have

[137-166]been communicable enough without that kind motive, but he really felt

[137-167]the motive. He broke the unpleasant news to the rector by degrees: at

[137-168]first he only implied his fear that the widow was not so splendidly

[137-169]provided for as Mr. Gascoigne, nay, as the baronet himself had

[137-170]expected; and only at last, after some previous vague reference to

[137-171]large claims on Grandcourt, he disclosed the prior relations which, in

[137-172]the unfortunate absence of a legitimate heir, had determined all the

[137-173]splendor in another direction.

[137-174]The rector was deeply hurt, and remembered, more vividly than he had

[137-175]ever done before, how offensively proud and repelling the manners of

[137-176]the deceased had been toward him—remembered also that he himself, in

[137-177]that interesting period just before the arrival of the new occupant at

[137-178][[diplow-hall|Diplow]], had received hints of former entangling dissipations, and an

[137-179]undue addiction to pleasure, though he had not foreseen that the

[137-180]pleasure which had probably, so to speak, been swept into private

[137-181]rubbish-heaps, would ever present itself as an array of live

[137-182]caterpillars, disastrous to the green meat of respectable people. But

[137-183]he did not make these retrospective thoughts audible to Sir Hugo, or

[137-184]lower himself by expressing any indignation on merely personal grounds,

[137-185]but behaved like a man of the world who had become a conscientious

[137-186]clergyman. His first remark was,
