---
id: ch131
label: "Section 131"
type: chapter
description: "“Good! It is now you who seek me, young man.”"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[131-001]“Good! It is now you who seek me, young man.”

[131-002]“Yes; I seek you with gratitude, as a friend of my grandfather’s,” said

[131-003][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], “and I am under an [[duty|obligation]] to you for giving yourself much

[131-004]trouble on my account.” He spoke without difficulty in that liberal

[131-005]German tongue which takes many strange accents to its maternal bosom.

[131-006]Kalonymos now put out his hand and said cordially, “So you are no

[131-007]longer angry at being something more than an Englishman?”

[131-008]“On the contrary. I thank you heartily for helping to save me from

[131-009]remaining in ignorance of my parentage, and for taking care of the

[131-010]chest that my grandfather left in trust for me.”

[131-011]“Sit down, sit down,” said Kalonymos, in a quick undertone, seating

[131-012]himself again, and pointing to a chair near him. Then deliberately

[131-013]laying aside his hat and showing a head thickly covered, with white

[131-014]hair, he stroked and clutched his beard while he looked examiningly at

[131-015]the young face before him. The moment wrought strongly on Deronda’s

[131-016]imaginative susceptibility: in the presence of one linked still in

[131-017]zealous friendship with the grandfather whose hope had yearned toward

[131-018]him when he was unborn, and who, though dead, was yet to speak with him

[131-019]in those written memorials which, says [[miltons-paradise-lost|Milton]], “contain a potency of

[131-020]life in them to be as active as that soul whose progeny they are,” he

[131-021]seemed to himself to be touching the electric chain of his own

[131-022]ancestry; and he bore the scrutinizing look of Kalonymos with a

[131-023]delighted awe, something like what one feels in the solemn

[131-024]commemoration of acts done long ago but still telling markedly on the

[131-025]life of to-day. Impossible for men of duller fibre—men whose

[131-026]affection is not ready to diffuse itself through the wide travel of

[131-027]imagination, to comprehend, perhaps even to credit this sensibility of

[131-028]Deronda’s; but it subsisted, like their own dullness, notwithstanding

[131-029]their lack of belief in it—and it gave his face an expression which

[131-030]seemed very satisfactory to the observer.

[131-031]He said in Hebrew, quoting from one of the fine hymns in the Hebrew

[131-032]liturgy, “As thy goodness has been great to the former generations,

[131-033]even so may it be to the latter.” Then after pausing a little he began,

[131-034]“Young man, I rejoice that I was not yet set off again on my travels,

[131-035]and that you are come in time for me to see the image of my friend as

[131-036]he was in his youth—no longer perverted from the fellowship of your

[131-037]people—no longer shrinking in proud wrath from the touch of him who

[131-038]seemed to be claiming you as a Jew. You come with thankfulness yourself

[131-039]to claim the kindred and [[inheritance|heritage]] that wicked contrivance would have

[131-040]robbed you of. You come with a willing soul to declare, ‘I am the

[131-041]grandson of Daniel Charisi.’ Is it not so?”

[131-042]“Assuredly it is,” said Deronda. “But let me say that I should at no

[131-043]time have been inclined to treat a Jew with incivility simply because

[131-044]he was a Jew. You can understand that I shrank from saying to a

[131-045]stranger, ‘I know nothing of my mother.’”

[131-046]“A sin, a sin!” said Kalonymos, putting up his hand and closing his

[131-047]eyes in disgust. “A robbery of our people—as when our youths and

[131-048]maidens were reared for the Roman Edom. But it is frustrated. I have

[131-049]frustrated it. When Daniel Charisi—may his Rock and his Redeemer guard

[131-050]him!—when Daniel Charisi was a stripling and I was a lad little above

[131-051]his shoulder, we made a solemn vow always to be friends. He said, ‘Let

[131-052]us bind ourselves with duty, as if we were sons of the same mother.’

[131-053]That was his bent from first to last—as he said, to fortify his soul

[131-054]with bonds. It was a saying of his, ‘Let us bind love with duty; for

[131-055]duty is the love of law; and law is the nature of the Eternal.’ So we

[131-056]bound ourselves. And though we were much apart in our later life, the

[131-057]bond has never been broken. When he was dead, they sought to rob him;

[131-058]but they could not rob him of me. I rescued that remainder of him which

[131-059]he had prized and preserved for his offspring. And I have restored to

[131-060]him the offspring they had robbed him of. I will bring you the chest

[131-061]forthwith.”

[131-062]Kalonymos left the room for a few minutes, and returned with a clerk

[131-063]who carried the chest, set it down on the floor, drew off a leather

[131-064]cover, and went out again. It was not very large, but was made heavy by

[131-065]ornamental bracers and handles of gilt iron. The wood was beautifully

[131-066]incised with Arabic lettering.

[131-067]“So!” said Kalonymos, returning to his seat. “And here is the curious

[131-068]key,” he added, taking it from a small leathern bag. “Bestow it

[131-069]carefully. I trust you are methodic and wary.” He gave Deronda the

[131-070]monitory and slightly suspicious look with which age is apt to commit

[131-071]any object to the keeping of youth.

[131-072]“I shall be more careful of this than of any other property,” said

[131-073]Deronda, smiling and putting the key in his breast-pocket. “I never

[131-074]before possessed anything that was a sign to me of so much cherished

[131-075]hope and effort. And I shall never forget that the effort was partly

[131-076]yours. Have you time to tell me more of my grandfather? Or shall I be

[131-077]trespassing in staying longer?”

[131-078]“Stay yet a while. In an hour and eighteen minutes I start for

[131-079]Trieste,” said Kalonymos, looking at his watch, “and presently my sons

[131-080]will expect my attention. Will you let me make you known to them, so

[131-081]that they may have the pleasure of showing hospitality to my friend’s

[131-082]grandson? They dwell here in ease and luxury, though I choose to be a

[131-083]wanderer.”

[131-084]“I shall be glad if you will commend me to their acquaintance for some

[131-085]future opportunity,” said Deronda. “There are pressing claims calling

[131-086]me to England—friends who may be much in need of my presence. I have

[131-087]been kept away from them too long by unexpected circumstances. But to

[131-088]know more of you and your family would be motive enough to bring me

[131-089]again to [[mainz|Mainz]].”

[131-090]“Good! Me you will hardly find, for I am beyond my threescore years and

[131-091]ten, and I am a wanderer, carrying my shroud with me. But my sons and

[131-092]their children dwell here in wealth and unity. The days are changed for

[131-093]us since Karl the Great fetched my ancestors from Italy to bring some

[131-094]tincture of knowledge to our rough German brethren. I and my

[131-095]contemporaries have had to fight for it too. Our youth fell on evil

[131-096]days; but this we have won; we increase our wealth in safety, and the

[131-097]learning of all Germany is fed and fattened by Jewish brains—though

[131-098]they keep not always their Jewish hearts. Have you been left altogether

[131-099]ignorant of your people’s life, young man?”

[131-100]“No,” said Deronda, “I have lately, before I had any true suspicion of

[131-101]my parentage, been led to study everything belonging to their history

[131-102]with more interest than any other subject. It turns out that I have

[131-103]been making myself ready to understand my grandfather a little.” He was

[131-104]anxious less the time should be consumed before this circuitous course

[131-105]of talk could lead them back to the topic he most cared about. Age does

[131-106]not easily distinguish between what it needs to express and what youth

[131-107]needs to know—distance seeming to level the objects of memory; and

[131-108]keenly active as Joseph Kalonymos showed himself, an inkstand in the

[131-109]wrong place would have hindered his imagination from getting to

[131-110]Beyrout: he had been used to unite restless travel with punctilious

[131-111]observation. But Deronda’s last sentence answered its purpose.

[131-112]“So—you would perhaps have been such a man as he if your education had

[131-113]not hindered; for you are like him in features:—yet not altogether,

[131-114]young man. He had an iron will in his face: it braced up everybody

[131-115]about him. When he was quite young he had already got one deep upright

[131-116]line in his brow. I see none of that in you. Daniel Charisi used to

[131-117]say, ‘Better, a wrong will than a wavering; better a steadfast enemy

[131-118]than an uncertain friend; better a false belief than no belief at all.’

[131-119]What he despised most was indifference. He had longer reasons than I

[131-120]can give you.”

[131-121]“Yet his knowledge was not narrow?” said Deronda, with a tacit

[131-122]reference to the usual excuse for indecision—that it comes from

[131-123]knowing too much.

[131-124]“Narrow? no,” said Kalonymos, shaking his head with a compassionate

[131-125]smile “From his childhood upward, he drank in learning as easily as the

[131-126]plant sucks up water. But he early took to medicine and theories about

[131-127]life and health. He traveled to many countries, and spent much of his

[131-128]substance in seeing and knowing. What he used to insist on was that the

[131-129]strength and wealth of mankind depended on the balance of separateness

[131-130]and communication, and he was bitterly against our people losing

[131-131]themselves among the Gentiles; ‘It’s no better,’ said he, ‘than the

[131-132]many sorts of grain going back from their variety into sameness.’ He

[131-133]mingled all sorts of learning; and in that he was like our Arabic

[131-134]writers in the golden time. We studied together, but he went beyond me.

[131-135]Though we were bosom friends, and he poured himself out to me, we were

[131-136]as different as the inside and outside of the bowl. I stood up for two

[131-137]notions of my own: I took Charisi’s sayings as I took the shape of the

[131-138]trees: they were there, not to be disputed about. It came to the same

[131-139]thing in both of us; we were both faithful Jews, thankful not to be

[131-140]Gentiles. And since I was a ripe man, I have been what I am now, for

[131-141]all but age—loving to wander, loving transactions, loving to behold all

[131-142]things, and caring nothing about hardship. Charisi thought continually

[131-143]of our people’s future: he went with all his soul into that part of our

[131-144]religion: I, not. So we have freedom, I am content. Our people wandered

[131-145]before they were driven. Young man when I am in the East, I lie much on

[131-146]deck and watch the greater stars. The sight of them satisfies me. I

[131-147]know them as they rise, and hunger not to know more. Charisi was

[131-148]satisfied with no sight, but pieced it out with what had been before

[131-149]and what would come after. Yet we loved each other, and as he said, he

[131-150]bound our love with duty; we solemnly pledged ourselves to help and

[131-151]defend each other to the last. I have fulfilled my pledge.” Here

[131-152]Kalonymos rose, and Deronda, rising also, said,

[131-153]“And in being faithful to him you have caused justice to be done to me.

[131-154]It would have been a robbery of me too that I should never have known

[131-155]of the inheritance he had prepared for me. I thank you with my whole

[131-156]soul.”

[131-157]“Be worthy of him, young man. What is your vocation?” This question was

[131-158]put with a quick abruptness which embarrassed Deronda, who did not feel

[131-159]it quite honest to allege his law-reading as a vocation. He answered,

[131-160]“I cannot say that I have any.”

[131-161]“Get one, get one. The Jew must be diligent. You will call yourself a

[131-162]Jew and profess the [[religion|faith]] of your fathers?” said Kalonymos, putting his

[131-163]hand on Deronda’s shoulder and looking sharply in his face.

[131-164]“I shall call myself a Jew,” said Deronda, deliberately, becoming

[131-165]slightly paler under the piercing eyes of his questioner. “But I will

[131-166]not say that I shall profess to believe exactly as my fathers have

[131-167]believed. Our fathers themselves changed the horizon of their belief

[131-168]and learned of other races. But I think I can maintain my grandfather’s

[131-169]notion of separateness with communication. I hold that my first duty is

[131-170]to my own people, and if there is anything to be done toward restoring

[131-171]or perfecting their common life, I shall make that my vocation.”
