---
id: ch130
label: "Section 130"
type: chapter
description: "“Well, Dan,” said Sir Hugo, with a serious fervor, grasping Deronda’s"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[130-001]“Well, Dan,” said [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], with a serious fervor, grasping [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]’s

[130-002]hand. He uttered no other words of greeting; there was too strong a

[130-003]rush of mutual consciousness. The next thing was to give orders to the

[130-004]courier, and then to propose walking slowly in the mild evening, there

[130-005]being no hurry to get to the hotel.

[130-006]“I have taken my journey easily, and am in excellent condition,” he

[130-007]said, as he and Deronda came out under the starlight, which was still

[130-008]faint with the lingering sheen of day. “I didn’t hurry in setting off,

[130-009]because I wanted to inquire into things a little, and so I got sight of

[130-010]your letter to Lady Mallinger before I started. But now, how is the

[130-011]widow?”

[130-012]“Getting calmer,” said Deronda. “She seems to be escaping the bodily

[130-013]illness that one might have feared for her, after her plunge and

[130-014]terrible excitement. Her uncle and mother came two days ago, and she is

[130-015]being well taken care of.”

[130-016]“Any prospect of an heir being born?”

[130-017]“From what [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]] said to me, I conclude not. He spoke as if it

[130-018]were a question whether the widow would have the estates for her life.”

[130-019]“It will not be much of a wrench to her affections, I fancy, this loss

[130-020]of the husband?” said Sir Hugo, looking round at Deronda.

[130-021]“The suddenness of the death has been a great blow to her,” said

[130-022]Deronda, quietly evading the question.

[130-023]“I wonder whether [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]] gave her any notion what were the

[130-024]provisions of his will?” said Sir Hugo.

[130-025]“Do you know what they are, sir?” parried Deronda.

[130-026]“Yes, I do,” said the baronet, quickly. “Gad! if there is no prospect

[130-027]of a legitimate heir, he has left everything to a boy he had by a Mrs.

[130-028]Glasher; you know nothing about the affair, I suppose, but she was a

[130-029]sort of wife to him for a good many years, and there are three older

[130-030]children—girls. The boy is to take his father’s name; he is Henleigh

[130-031]already, and he is to be Henleigh Mallinger Grandcourt. The Mallinger

[130-032]will be of no use to him, I am happy to say; but the young dog will

[130-033]have more than enough with his fourteen years’ minority—no need to

[130-034]have had holes filled up with my fifty thousand for [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] that he had

[130-035]no right to: and meanwhile my beauty, the young widow, is to put up

[130-036]with a poor two thousand a year and the house at [[gadsmere|Gadsmere]]—a nice kind

[130-037]of [[exile|banishment]] for her if she chose to shut herself up there, which I

[130-038]don’t think she will. The boy’s mother has been living there of late

[130-039]years. I’m perfectly disgusted with Grandcourt. I don’t know that I’m

[130-040]obliged to think the better of him because he’s drowned, though, so far

[130-041]as my affairs are concerned, nothing in his life became him like the

[130-042]leaving it.”

[130-043]“In my opinion he did wrong when he married this wife—not in leaving

[130-044]his estates to the son,” said Deronda, rather dryly.

[130-045]“I say nothing against his leaving the land to the lad,” said Sir Hugo;

[130-046]“but since he had married this girl he ought to have given her a

[130-047]handsome provision, such as she could live on in a style fitted to the

[130-048]rank he had raised her to. She ought to have had four or five thousand

[130-049]a year and the [[london|London]] house for her life; that’s what I should have

[130-050]done for her. I suppose, as she was penniless, her friends couldn’t

[130-051]stand out for a settlement, else it’s ill trusting to the will a man

[130-052]may make after he’s married. Even a wise man generally lets some folly

[130-053]ooze out of him in his will—my father did, I know; and if a fellow has

[130-054]any spite or tyranny in him, he’s likely to bottle off a good deal for

[130-055]keeping in that sort of document. It’s quite clear Grandcourt meant

[130-056]that his death should put an extinguisher on his wife, if she bore him

[130-057]no heir.”

[130-058]“And, in the other case, I suppose everything would have been

[130-059]reversed—illegitimacy would have had the extinguisher?” said Deronda,

[130-060]with some scorn.

[130-061]“Precisely—Gadsmere and the two thousand. It’s queer. One nuisance is

[130-062]that Grandcourt has made me an executor; but seeing he was the son of

[130-063]my only brother, I can’t refuse to act. And I shall mind it less if I

[130-064]can be of any use to the widow. [[Lush]] thinks she was not in ignorance

[130-065]about the family under the rose, and the purport of the will. He hints

[130-066]that there was no very good understanding between the couple. But I

[130-067]fancy you are the man who knew most about what [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Mrs. Grandcourt]] felt or

[130-068]did not feel—eh, Dan?” Sir Hugo did not put this question with his

[130-069]usual jocoseness, but rather with a lowered tone of interested inquiry;

[130-070]and Deronda felt that any evasion would be misinterpreted. He answered

[130-071]gravely,

[130-072]“She was certainly not happy. They were unsuited to each other. But as

[130-073]to the disposal of the property—from all I have seen of her, I should

[130-074]predict that she will be quite contented with it.”

[130-075]“Then she is not much like the rest of her sex; that’s all I can say,”

[130-076]said Sir Hugo, with a slight shrug. “However, she ought to be something

[130-077]extraordinary, for there must be an entanglement between your horoscope

[130-078]and hers—eh? When that tremendous telegram came, the first thing Lady

[130-079]Mallinger said was, ‘How very strange that it should be Daniel who

[130-080]sends it!’ But I have had something of the same sort in my own life. I

[130-081]was once at a foreign hotel where a lady had been left by her husband

[130-082]without money. When I heard of it, and came forward to help her, who

[130-083]should she be but an early flame of mine, who had been fool enough to

[130-084]marry an Austrian baron with a long mustache and short affection? But

[130-085]it was an affair of my own that called me there—nothing to do with

[130-086]knight-errantry, any more than you coming to [[genoa|Genoa]] had to do with the

[130-087]Grandcourts.”

[130-088]There was silence for a little while. Sir Hugo had begun to talk of the

[130-089]Grandcourts as the less difficult subject between himself and Deronda;

[130-090]but they were both wishing to overcome a reluctance to perfect

[130-091]frankness on the events which touched their relation to each other.

[130-092]Deronda felt that his letter, after the first interview with his

[130-093]mother, had been rather a thickening than a breaking of the ice, and

[130-094]that he ought to wait for the first opening to come from Sir Hugo. Just

[130-095]when they were about to lose sight of the port, the baronet turned, and

[130-096]pausing as if to get a last view, said in a tone of more serious

[130-097]feeling—“And about the main business of your coming to Genoa, Dan? You

[130-098]have not been deeply pained by anything you have learned, I hope? There

[130-099]is nothing that you feel need change your position in any way? You

[130-100]know, whatever happens to you must always be of importance to me.”

[130-101]“I desire to meet your goodness by perfect confidence, sir,” said

[130-102]Deronda. “But I can’t answer those questions truly by a simple yes or

[130-103]no. Much that I have heard about the past has pained me. And it has

[130-104]been a pain to meet and part with my mother in her suffering state, as

[130-105]I have been compelled to do. But it is no pain—it is rather a clearing

[130-106]up of doubts for which I am thankful, to know my parentage. As to the

[130-107]effect on my position, there will be no change in my gratitude to you,

[130-108]sir, for the fatherly care and affection you have always shown me. But

[130-109]to know that I was born a Jew, may have a momentous influence on my

[130-110]life, which I am hardly able to tell you of at present.”

[130-111]Deronda spoke the last sentence with a resolve that overcame some

[130-112]diffidence. He felt that the differences between Sir Hugo’s nature and

[130-113]his own would have, by-and-by, to disclose themselves more markedly

[130-114]than had ever yet been needful. The baronet gave him a quick glance,

[130-115]and turned to walk on. After a few moments’ silence, in which he had

[130-116]reviewed all the material in his memory which would enable him to

[130-117]interpret Deronda’s words, he said,

[130-118]“I have long expected something remarkable from you, Dan; but, for

[130-119]God’s sake, don’t go into any eccentricities! I can tolerate any man’s

[130-120]difference of opinion, but let him tell it me without getting himself

[130-121]up as a lunatic. At this stage of the world, if a man wants to be taken

[130-122]seriously, he must keep clear of melodrama. Don’t misunderstand me. I

[130-123]am not suspecting you of setting up any lunacy on your own account. I

[130-124]only think you might easily be led arm in arm with a lunatic,

[130-125]especially if he wanted defending. You have a passion for people who

[130-126]are pelted, Dan. I’m sorry for them too; but so far as company goes,

[130-127]it’s a bad ground of selection. However, I don’t ask you to anticipate

[130-128]your inclination in anything you have to tell me. When you make up your

[130-129]mind to a course that requires money, I have some sixteen thousand

[130-130]pounds that have been accumulating for you over and above what you have

[130-131]been having the interest of as income. And now I am come, I suppose you

[130-132]want to get back to England as soon as you can?”

[130-133]“I must go first to [[mainz|Mainz]] to get away a chest of my grandfather’s, and

[130-134]perhaps to see a friend of his,” said Deronda. “Although the chest has

[130-135]been lying there these twenty years, I have an unreasonable sort of

[130-136]nervous eagerness to get it away under my care, as if it were more

[130-137]likely now than before that something might happen to it. And perhaps I

[130-138]am the more uneasy, because I lingered after my mother left, instead of

[130-139]setting out immediately. Yet I can’t regret that I was here—else Mrs.

[130-140]Grandcourt would have had none but servants to act for her.”

[130-141]“Yes, yes,” said Sir Hugo, with a flippancy which was an escape of some

[130-142]vexation hidden under his more serious speech; “I hope you are not

[130-143]going to set a dead Jew above a living Christian.”

[130-144]Deronda colored, and repressed a retort. They were just turning into

[130-145]the _Italia_.

[130-146]CHAPTER LX.

[130-147]“But I shall say no more of this at this time; for this is to be felt

[130-148]and not to be talked of; and they who never touched it with their

[130-149]fingers may secretly perhaps laugh at it in their hearts and be never

[130-150]the wiser.”—JEREMY TAYLOR.

[130-151]The Roman Emperor in the legend put to death ten learned Israelites to

[130-152]avenge the sale of Joseph by his brethren. And there have always been

[130-153]enough of his kidney, whose piety lies in punishing who can see the

[130-154]justice of grudges but not of gratitude. For you shall never convince

[130-155]the stronger feeling that it hath not the stronger reason, or incline

[130-156]him who hath no love to believe that there is good ground for loving.

[130-157]As we may learn from the order of word-making, wherein _love_

[130-158]precedeth _lovable_.

[130-159]When Deronda presented his letter at the banking-house in the _Schuster

[130-160]Strasse_ at Mainz, and asked for Joseph Kalonymos, he was presently

[130-161]shown into an inner room, where, seated at a table arranging open

[130-162]letters, was the white-bearded man whom he had seen the year before in

[130-163]the [[the-synagogue|synagogue]] at Frankfort. He wore his hat—it seemed to be the same

[130-164]old felt hat as before—and near him was a packed portmanteau with a

[130-165]wrap and overcoat upon it. On seeing Deronda enter he rose, but did not

[130-166]advance or put out his hand. Looking at him with small penetrating eyes

[130-167]which glittered like black gems in the midst of his yellowish face and

[130-168]white hair, he said in German,
