---
id: ch145
label: "Section 145"
type: chapter
description: "And Sir Hugo, though not altogether surprised, was thoroughly vexed."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[145-001]And [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]], though not altogether surprised, was thoroughly vexed.

[145-002]His immediate resource was to take the letter to Lady Mallinger, who

[145-003]would be sure to express an astonishment which her husband could argue

[145-004]against as unreasonable, and in this way divide the stress of his

[145-005]discontent. And in fact when she showed herself astonished and

[145-006]distressed that all Daniel’s wonderful talents, and the comfort of

[145-007]having him in the house, should have ended in his going mad in this way

[145-008]about the Jews, the baronet could say,

[145-009]“Oh, nonsense, my dear! depend upon it, Dan will not make a fool of

[145-010]himself. He has large notions about [[religion|Judaism]]—political views which you

[145-011]can’t understand. No fear but Dan will keep himself head uppermost.”

[145-012]But with regard to the prospective marriage she afforded him no

[145-013]counter-irritant. The gentle lady observed, without rancor, that she

[145-014]had little dreamed of what was coming when she had [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] to sing at her

[145-015]musical party and give lessons to Amabel. After some hesitation,

[145-016]indeed, she confessed it _had_ passed through her mind that after a

[145-017]proper time Daniel might marry [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Mrs. Grandcourt]]—because it seemed so

[145-018]remarkable that he should be at [[genoa|Genoa]] just at that time—and although

[145-019]she herself was not fond of widows she could not help thinking that

[145-020]such a marriage would have been better than his going altogether with

[145-021]the Jews. But Sir Hugo was so strongly of the same opinion that he

[145-022]could not correct it as a feminine mistake; and his ill-humor at the

[145-023]disproof of his disagreeable conclusions on behalf of Gwendolen was

[145-024]left without vent. He desired Lady Mallinger not to breathe a word

[145-025]about the affair till further notice, saying to himself, “If it is an

[145-026]unkind cut to the poor thing (meaning Gwendolen), the longer she is

[145-027]without knowing it the better, in her present nervous state. And she

[145-028]will best learn it from Dan himself.” Sir Hugo’s conjectures had worked

[145-029]so industriously with his knowledge, that he fancied himself well

[145-030]informed concerning the whole situation.

[145-031]Meanwhile his residence with his family at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]] enabled him to

[145-032]continue his fatherly attentions to Gwendolen; and in these Lady

[145-033]Mallinger, notwithstanding her small liking for widows, was quite

[145-034]willing to second him.

[145-035]The plan of removal to [[Offendene]] had been carried out; and Gwendolen,

[145-036]in settling there, maintained a calm beyond her mother’s hopes. She was

[145-037]experiencing some of that peaceful melancholy which comes from the

[145-038]renunciation of demands for self, and from taking the ordinary good of

[145-039]existence, and especially kindness, even from a dog, as a gift above

[145-040]expectation. Does one who has been all but lost in a pit of darkness

[145-041]complain of the sweet air and the daylight? There is a way of looking

[145-042]at our life daily as an escape, and taking the quiet return of morn and

[145-043]evening—still more the star-like out-glowing of some pure

[145-044][[sympathy|fellow-feeling]], some generous impulse breaking our inward darkness—as

[145-045]a salvation that reconciles us to hardship. Those who have a

[145-046]self-knowledge prompting such self-accusation as Hamlet’s, can

[145-047]understand this habitual feeling of rescue. And it was felt by

[145-048]Gwendolen as she lived through and through again the terrible history

[145-049]of her temptations, from their first form of illusory self-pleasing

[145-050]when she struggled away from the hold of conscience, to their latest

[145-051]form of an urgent hatred dragging her toward its satisfaction, while

[145-052]she prayed and cried for the help of that conscience which she had once

[145-053]forsaken. She was now dwelling on every word of [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]’s that pointed

[145-054]to her past deliverance from the worst evil in herself, and the worst

[145-055]infliction of it on others, and on every word that carried a force to

[145-056]resist self-despair.

[145-057]But she was also upborne by the prospect of soon seeing him again: she

[145-058]did not imagine him otherwise than always within her reach, her supreme

[145-059]need of him blinding her to the separateness of his life, the whole

[145-060]scene of which she filled with his relation to her—no unique

[145-061]preoccupation of Gwendolen’s, for we are all apt to fall into this

[145-062]passionate egoism of imagination, not only toward our fellow-men, but

[145-063]toward God. And the future which she turned her face to with a willing

[145-064]step was one where she would be continually assimilating herself to

[145-065]some type that he would hold before her. Had he not first risen on her

[145-066]vision as a corrective presence which she had recognized in the

[145-067]beginning with resentment, and at last with entire love and trust? She

[145-068]could not spontaneously think of an end to that reliance, which had

[145-069]become to her imagination like the firmness of the earth, the only

[145-070]condition of her walking.

[145-071]And Deronda was not long before he came to Diplow, which was a more

[145-072]convenient distance from town than the Abbey. He had wished to carry

[145-073]out a plan for taking [[Mordecai|Ezra]] and Mirah to a mild spot on the coast, while

[145-074]he prepared another home which Mirah might enter as his bride, and

[145-075]where they might unitedly watch over her brother. But Ezra begged not

[145-076]to be removed, unless it were to go with them to the East. All outward

[145-077]solicitations were becoming more and more of a burden to him; but his

[145-078]mind dwelt on the possibility of this voyage with a visionary joy.

[145-079]Deronda, in his preparations for the marriage, which he hoped might not

[145-080]be deferred beyond a couple of months, wished to have fuller

[145-081]consultation as to his resources and affairs generally with Sir Hugo,

[145-082]and here was a reason for not delaying his visit to Diplow. But he

[145-083]thought quite as much of another reason—his promise to Gwendolen. The

[145-084]sense of blessedness in his own lot had yet an aching anxiety at his

[145-085]heart: this may be held paradoxical, for the beloved lover is always

[145-086]called happy, and happiness is considered as a well-fleshed

[145-087]indifference to sorrow outside it. But human experience is usually

[145-088]paradoxical, if that means incongruous with the phrases of current talk

[145-089]or even current philosophy. It was no treason to Mirah, but a part of

[145-090]that full nature which made his love for her the more worthy, that his

[145-091]joy in her could hold by its side the care for another. For what is

[145-092]love itself, for the one we love best?—an enfolding of immeasurable

[145-093]cares which yet are better than any joys outside our love.

[145-094]Deronda came twice to Diplow, and saw Gwendolen twice—and yet he went

[145-095]back to town without having told her anything about the change in his

[145-096]lot and prospects. He blamed himself; but in all momentous

[145-097]communication likely to give pain we feel dependent on some preparatory

[145-098]turn of words or associations, some agreement of the other’s mood with

[145-099]the probable effect of what we have to impart. In the first interview

[145-100]Gwendolen was so absorbed in what she had to say to him, so full of

[145-101]questions which he must answer, about the arrangement of her life, what

[145-102]she could do to make herself less ignorant, how she could be kindest to

[145-103]everybody, and make amends for her selfishness and try to be rid of it,

[145-104]that Deronda utterly shrank from waiving her immediate wants in order

[145-105]to speak of himself, nay, from inflicting a wound on her in these

[145-106]moments when she was leaning on him for help in her path. In the second

[145-107]interview, when he went with new resolve to command the conversation

[145-108]into some preparatory track, he found her in a state of deep

[145-109]depression, overmastered by some distasteful miserable memories which

[145-110]forced themselves on her as something more real and ample than any new

[145-111]material out of which she could mould her future. She cried

[145-112]hysterically, and said that he would always despise her. He could only

[145-113]seek words of soothing and encouragement: and when she gradually

[145-114]revived under them, with that pathetic look of renewed childlike

[145-115]interest which we see in eyes where the lashes are still beaded with

[145-116]tears, it was impossible to lay another burden on her.

[145-117]But time went on, and he felt it a pressing duty to make the difficult

[145-118]disclosure. Gwendolen, it was true, never recognized his having any

[145-119]affairs; and it had never even occurred to her to ask him why he

[145-120]happened to be at Genoa. But this unconsciousness of hers would make a

[145-121]sudden revelation of affairs that were determining his course in life

[145-122]all the heavier blow to her; and if he left the revelation to be made

[145-123]by different persons, she would feel that he had treated her with cruel

[145-124]inconsiderateness. He could not make the communication in writing: his

[145-125]tenderness could not bear to think of her reading his virtual farewell

[145-126]in solitude, and perhaps feeling his words full of a hard gladness for

[145-127]himself and indifference for her. He went down to Diplow again, feeling

[145-128]that every other peril was to be incurred rather than that of returning

[145-129]and leaving her still in ignorance.

[145-130]On this third visit Deronda found [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans Meyrick]] installed with his easel

[145-131]at Diplow, beginning his picture of the three daughters sitting on a

[145-132]bank, “in the Gainsborough style,” and varying his work by rambling to

[145-133][[pennicote-rectory|Pennicote]] to sketch the village children and improve his acquaintance

[145-134]with the Gascoignes. Hans appeared to have recovered his vivacity, but

[145-135]Deronda detected some feigning in it, as we detect the artificiality of

[145-136]a lady’s bloom from its being a little too high-toned and steadily

[145-137]persistent (a “Fluctuating Rouge” not having yet appeared among the

[145-138]advertisements). Also with all his grateful friendship and admiration

[145-139]for Deronda, Hans could not help a certain irritation against him, such

[145-140]as extremely incautious, open natures are apt to feel when the breaking

[145-141]of a friend’s reserve discloses a state of things not merely

[145-142]unsuspected but the reverse of what had been hoped and ingeniously

[145-143]conjectured. It is true that poor Hans had always cared chiefly to

[145-144]confide in Deronda, and had been quite incurious as to any confidence

[145-145]that might have been given in return; but what outpourer of his own

[145-146]affairs is not tempted to think any hint of his friend’s affairs is an

[145-147]egotistic irrelevance? That was no reason why it was not rather a sore

[145-148]reflection to Hans that while he had been all along naively opening his

[145-149]heart about Mirah, Deronda had kept secret a feeling of rivalry which

[145-150]now revealed itself as the important determining fact. Moreover, it is

[145-151]always at their peril that our friends turn out to be something more

[145-152]than we were aware of. Hans must be excused for these promptings of

[145-153]bruised sensibility, since he had not allowed them to govern his

[145-154]substantial conduct: he had the consciousness of having done right by

[145-155]his fortunate friend; or, as he told himself, “his metal had given a

[145-156]better ring than he would have sworn to beforehand.” For Hans had

[145-157]always said that in point of virtue he was a _dilettante_: which meant

[145-158]that he was very fond of it in other people, but if he meddled with it

[145-159]himself he cut a poor figure. Perhaps in reward of his good behavior he

[145-160]gave his tongue the more freedom; and he was too fully possessed by the

[145-161]notion of Deronda’s happiness to have a conception of what he was

[145-162]feeling about Gwendolen, so that he spoke of her without hesitation.

[145-163]“When did you come down, Hans?” said Deronda, joining him in the

[145-164]grounds where he was making a study of the requisite bank and trees.

[145-165]“Oh, ten days ago; before the time Sir Hugo fixed. I ran down with [[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]]

[145-166]Gascoigne and stayed at the rectory a day or two. I’m up in all the

[145-167]gossip of these parts; I know the state of the wheelwright’s interior,

[145-168]and have assisted at an infant school examination. Sister Anna, with

[145-169]the good upper lip, escorted me, else I should have been mobbed by

[145-170]three urchins and an idiot, because of my long hair and a general

[145-171]appearance which departs from the Pennicote type of the beautiful.

[145-172]Altogether, the village is idyllic. Its only fault is a dark curate

[145-173]with broad shoulders and broad trousers who ought to have gone into the

[145-174]heavy drapery line. The Gascoignes are perfect—besides being related

[145-175]to the Vandyke duchess. I caught a glimpse of her in her black robes at

[145-176]a distance, though she doesn’t show to visitors.”
