---
id: ch140
label: "Section 140"
type: chapter
description: "“Do not hurt yourself by speaking of that,” said Deronda, tenderly."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[140-001]“Do not hurt yourself by speaking of that,” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], tenderly.

[140-002]“There is no need; the case is very simple. I think I can hardly judge

[140-003]wrongly about it. You consult me because I am the only person to whom

[140-004]you have confided the most painful part of your experience: and I can

[140-005]understand your scruples.” He did not go on immediately, waiting for

[140-006]her to recover herself. The silence seemed to [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] full of the

[140-007]tenderness that she heard in his voice, and she had courage to lift up

[140-008]her eyes and look at him as he said, “You are conscious of something

[140-009]which you feel to be a crime toward one who is dead. You think that you

[140-010]have forfeited all claim as a wife. You shrink from taking what was

[140-011]his. You want to keep yourself from profiting by his death. Your

[140-012]feeling even urges you to some self-punishment—some scourging of the

[140-013]self that disobeyed your better will—the will that struggled against

[140-014]temptation. I have known something of that myself. Do I understand you?”

[140-015]“Yes—at least, I want to be good—not like what I have been,” said

[140-016]Gwendolen. “I will try to bear what you think I ought to bear. I have

[140-017]tried to tell you the worst about myself. What ought I to do?”

[140-018]“If no one but yourself were concerned in this question of income,”

[140-019]said Deronda, “I should hardly dare to urge you against any remorseful

[140-020]prompting; but I take as a guide now, your feeling about [[Mrs-Davilow|Mrs. Davilow]],

[140-021]which seems to me quite just. I cannot think that your husband’s dues

[140-022]even to yourself are nullified by any act you have committed. He

[140-023]voluntarily entered into your life, and affected its course in what is

[140-024]always the most momentous way. But setting that aside, it was due from

[140-025]him in his position that he should provide for your mother, and he of

[140-026]course understood that if this will took effect she would share the

[140-027]provision he had made for you.”

[140-028]“She has had eight hundred a year. What I thought of was to take that

[140-029]and leave the rest,” said Gwendolen. She had been so long inwardly

[140-030]arguing for this as a permission, that her mind could not at once take

[140-031]another attitude.

[140-032]“I think it is not your duty to fix a limit in that way,” said Deronda.

[140-033]“You would be making a painful enigma for Mrs. Davilow; an income from

[140-034]which you shut yourself out must be embittered to her. And your own

[140-035]course would become too difficult. We agreed at [[genoa|Genoa]] that the burden

[140-036]on your conscience is one what no one ought to be admitted to the

[140-037]knowledge of. The future beneficence of your life will be best

[140-038]furthered by your saving all others from the pain of that knowledge. In

[140-039]my opinion you ought simply to abide by the provisions of your

[140-040]husband’s will, and let your [[conscience|remorse]] tell only on the use that you will

[140-041]make of your monetary [[freedom|independence]].”

[140-042]In uttering the last sentence Deronda automatically took up his hat

[140-043]which he had laid on the floor beside him. Gwendolen, sensitive to his

[140-044]slightest movement, felt her heart giving a great leap, as if it too

[140-045]had a consciousness of its own, and would hinder him from going: in the

[140-046]same moment she rose from her chair, unable to reflect that the

[140-047]movement was an acceptance of his apparent intention to leave her; and

[140-048]Deronda, of course, also rose, advancing a little.

[140-049]“I will do what you tell me,” said Gwendolen, hurriedly; “but what else

[140-050]shall I do?” No other than these simple words were possible to her; and

[140-051]even these were too much for her in a state of emotion where her proud

[140-052]secrecy was disenthroned: as the childlike sentences fell from her

[140-053]lips they reacted on her like a picture of her own helplessness, and

[140-054]she could not check the sob which sent the large tears to her eyes.

[140-055]Deronda, too, felt a crushing pain; but imminent consequences were

[140-056]visible to him, and urged him to the utmost exertion of conscience.

[140-057]When she had pressed her tears away, he said, in a gently questioning

[140-058]tone,

[140-059]“You will probably be soon going with Mrs. Davilow into the country.”

[140-060]“Yes, in a week or ten days.” Gwendolen waited an instant, turning her

[140-061]eyes vaguely toward the window, as if looking at some imagined

[140-062]prospect. “I want to be kind to them all—they can be happier than I

[140-063]can. Is that the best I can do?”

[140-064]“I think so. It is a duty that cannot be doubtful,” said Deronda. He

[140-065]paused a little between his sentences, feeling a weight of anxiety on

[140-066]all his words. “Other duties will spring from it. Looking at your life

[140-067]as a debt may seem the dreariest view of things at a distance; but it

[140-068]cannot really be so. What makes life dreary is the want of motive: but

[140-069]once beginning to act with that penitential, loving purpose you have in

[140-070]your mind, there will be unexpected satisfactions—there will be

[140-071]newly-opening needs—continually coming to carry you on from day to

[140-072]day. You will find your life growing like a plant.”

[140-073]Gwendolen turned her eyes on him with the look of one athirst toward

[140-074]the sound of unseen waters. Deronda felt the look as if she had been

[140-075]stretching her arms toward him from a forsaken shore. His voice took an

[140-076]affectionate imploringness when he said,

[140-077]“This sorrow, which has cut down to the root, has come to you while you

[140-078]are so young—try to think of it not as a spoiling of your life, but as

[140-079]a preparation for it. Let it be a preparation——” Any one overhearing

[140-080]his tones would have thought he was entreating for his own happiness.

[140-081]“See! you have been saved from the worst evils that might have come

[140-082]from your marriage, which you feel was wrong. You have had a vision of

[140-083]injurious, selfish action—a vision of possible degradation; think that

[140-084]a severe angel, seeing you along the road of error, grasped you by the

[140-085]wrist and showed you the horror of the life you must avoid. And it has

[140-086]come to you in your spring-time. Think of it as a preparation. You can,

[140-087]you will, be among the best of women, such as make others glad that

[140-088]they were born.”

[140-089]The words were like the touch of a miraculous hand to Gwendolen.

[140-090]Mingled emotions streamed through her frame with a strength that seemed

[140-091]the beginning of a new existence, having some new power or other which

[140-092]stirred in her vaguely. So pregnant is the divine hope of moral

[140-093]recovery with the energy that fulfills it. So potent in us is the

[140-094]infused action of another soul, before which we bow in complete love.

[140-095]But the new existence seemed inseparable from Deronda: the hope seemed

[140-096]to make his presence permanent. It was not her thought, that he loved

[140-097]her, and would cling to her—a thought would have tottered with

[140-098]improbability; it was her spiritual breath. For the first time since

[140-099]that terrible moment on the sea a flush rose and spread over her cheek,

[140-100]brow and neck, deepened an instant or two, and then gradually

[140-101]disappeared. She did not speak.

[140-102]Deronda advanced and put out his hand, saying, “I must not weary you.”

[140-103]She was startled by the sense that he was going, and put her hand in

[140-104]his, still without speaking.

[140-105]“You look ill yet—unlike yourself,” he added, while he held her hand.

[140-106]“I can’t sleep much,” she answered, with some return of her dispirited

[140-107]manner. “Things repeat themselves in me so. They come back—they will

[140-108]all come back,” she ended, shudderingly, a chill fear threatening her.

[140-109]“By degrees they will be less insistent,” said Deronda. He could not

[140-110]drop her hand or move away from her abruptly.

[140-111]“[[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] says he shall come to stay at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]],” said Gwendolen,

[140-112]snatching at previously intended words which had slipped away from her.

[140-113]“You will come too.”

[140-114]“Probably,” said Deronda, and then feeling that the word was cold, he

[140-115]added, correctively, “Yes, I shall come,” and then released her hand,

[140-116]with the final friendly pressure of one who has virtually said good-bye.

[140-117]“And not again here, before I leave town?” said Gwendolen, with timid

[140-118]sadness, looking as pallid as ever.

[140-119]What could Deronda say? “If I can be of any use—if you wish

[140-120]me—certainly I will.”

[140-121]“I must wish it,” said Gwendolen, impetuously; “you know I must wish

[140-122]it. What strength have I? Who else is there?” Again a sob was rising.

[140-123]Deronda felt a pang, which showed itself in his face. He looked

[140-124]miserable as he said, “I will certainly come.”

[140-125]Gwendolen perceived the change in his face; but the intense relief of

[140-126]expecting him to come again could not give way to any other feeling,

[140-127]and there was a recovery of the inspired hope and courage in her.

[140-128]“Don’t be unhappy about me,” she said, in a tone of affectionate

[140-129]assurance. “I shall remember your words—every one of them. I shall

[140-130]remember what you believe about me; I shall try.”

[140-131]She looked at him firmly, and put out her hand again as if she had

[140-132]forgotten what had passed since those words of his which she promised

[140-133]to remember. But there was no approach to a smile on her lips. She had

[140-134]never smiled since her husband’s death. When she stood still and in

[140-135]silence, she looked like a melancholy statue of the Gwendolen whose

[140-136]laughter had once been so ready when others were grave.

[140-137]It is only by remembering the searching anguish which had changed the

[140-138]aspect of the world for her that we can understand her behavior to

[140-139]Deronda—the unreflecting openness, nay, the importunate pleading, with

[140-140]which she expressed her dependence on him. Considerations such as would

[140-141]have filled the minds of indifferent spectators could not occur to her,

[140-142]any more than if flames had been mounting around her, and she had flung

[140-143]herself into his open arms and clung about his neck that he might carry

[140-144]her into safety. She identified him with the struggling regenerative

[140-145]process in her which had begun with his action. Is it any wonder that

[140-146]she saw her own necessity reflected in his feeling? She was in that

[140-147]state of unconscious reliance and expectation which is a common

[140-148]experience with us when we are preoccupied with our own trouble or our

[140-149]own purposes. We diffuse our feeling over others, and count on their

[140-150]acting from our motives. Her imagination had not been turned to a

[140-151]future union with Deronda by any other than the spiritual tie which had

[140-152]been continually strengthening; but also it had not been turned toward

[140-153]a future separation from him. Love-making and marriage—how could they

[140-154]now be the imagery in which poor Gwendolen’s deepest attachment could

[140-155]spontaneously clothe itself? Mighty Love had laid his hand upon her;

[140-156]but what had he demanded of her? Acceptance of rebuke—the hard task of

[140-157]self-change—confession—endurance. If she cried toward him, what then?

[140-158]She cried as the child cries whose little feet have fallen

[140-159]backward—cried to be taken by the hand, lest she should lose herself.

[140-160]The cry pierced Deronda. What position could have been more difficult

[140-161]for a man full of tenderness, yet with clear foresight? He was the only

[140-162]creature who knew the real nature of Gwendolen’s trouble: to withdraw

[140-163]himself from any appeal of hers would be to consign her to a dangerous

[140-164]loneliness. He could not reconcile himself to the cruelty of apparently

[140-165]rejecting her dependence on him; and yet in the nearer or farther

[140-166]distance he saw a coming wrench, which all present strengthening of

[140-167]their bond would make the harder.

[140-168]He was obliged to risk that. He went once and again to Park Lane before

[140-169]Gwendolen left; but their interviews were in the presence of Mrs.

[140-170]Davilow, and were therefore less agitating. Gwendolen, since she had

[140-171]determined to accept her income, had conceived a project which she

[140-172]liked to speak of: it was to place her mother and sisters with herself

[140-173]in [[Offendene]] again, and, as she said, piece back her life unto that

[140-174]time when they first went there, and when everything was happiness

[140-175]about her, only she did not know it. The idea had been mentioned to Sir

[140-176]Hugo, who was going to exert himself about the letting of [[gadsmere|Gadsmere]] for

[140-177]a rent which would more than pay the rent of Offendene. All this was

[140-178]told to Deronda, who willingly dwelt on a subject that seemed to give

[140-179]some soothing occupation to Gwendolen. He said nothing and she asked

[140-180]nothing, of what chiefly occupied himself. Her mind was fixed on his

[140-181]coming to Diplow before the autumn was over; and she no more thought of

[140-182]the Lapidoths—the little Jewess and her brother—as likely to make a

[140-183]difference in her destiny, than of the fermenting political and social

[140-184]leaven which was making a difference in the history of the world. In

[140-185]fact poor Gwendolen’s memory had been stunned, and all outside the

[140-186]lava-lit track of her troubled conscience, and her effort to get

[140-187]deliverance from it, lay for her in dim forgetfulness.
