---
id: ch146
label: "Section 146"
type: chapter
description: "“She was not staying at the rectory?” said Deronda."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[146-001]“She was not staying at the rectory?” said [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]].

[146-002]“No; but I was taken to [[Offendene]] to see the old house, and as a

[146-003]consequence I saw the duchess’ family. I suppose you have been there

[146-004]and know all about them?”

[146-005]“Yes, I have been there,” said Deronda, quietly.

[146-006]“A fine old place. An excellent setting for a widow with romantic

[146-007]fortunes. And she seems to have had several romances. I think I have

[146-008]found out that there was one between her and my friend [[Rex-Gascoigne|Rex]].”

[146-009]“Not long before her marriage, then?” said Deronda, really interested,

[146-010]“for they had only been a year at Offendene. How came you to know

[146-011]anything of it?”

[146-012]“Oh—not ignorant of what it is to be a miserable devil, I learn to

[146-013]gloat on the signs of misery in others. I found out that Rex never goes

[146-014]to Offendene, and has never seen the duchess since she came back; and

[146-015]Miss Gascoigne let fall something in our talk about charade-acting—for

[146-016]I went through some of my nonsense to please the young ones—something

[146-017]that proved to me that Rex was once hovering about his fair cousin

[146-018]close enough to get singed. I don’t know what was her part in the

[146-019]affair. Perhaps the duke came in and carried her off. That is always

[146-020]the way when an exceptionally worthy young man forms an attachment. I

[146-021]understand now why Gascoigne talks of making the law his mistress and

[146-022]remaining a bachelor. But these are green resolves. Since the duke did

[146-023]not get himself drowned for your sake, it may turn out to be for my

[146-024]friend Rex’s sake. Who knows?”

[146-025]“Is it absolutely necessary that [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Mrs. Grandcourt]] should marry again?”

[146-026]said Deronda, ready to add that [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]]’s success in constructing her

[146-027]fortunes hitherto had not been enough to warrant a new attempt.

[146-028]“You monster!” retorted Hans, “do you want her to wear weeds for _you_

[146-029]all her life—burn herself in perpetual suttee while you are alive and

[146-030]merry?”

[146-031]Deronda could say nothing, but he looked so much annoyed that Hans

[146-032]turned the current of his chat, and when he was alone shrugged his

[146-033]shoulders a little over the thought that there really had been some

[146-034]stronger feeling between Deronda and the duchess than [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] would like

[146-035]to know of. “Why didn’t she fall in love with me?” thought Hans,

[146-036]laughing at himself. “She would have had no rivals. No woman ever

[146-037]wanted to discuss theology with me.”

[146-038]No wonder that Deronda winced under that sort of joking with a

[146-039]whip-lash. It touched sensibilities that were already quivering with

[146-040]the anticipation of witnessing some of that pain to which even Hans’s

[146-041]light words seemed to give more reality:—any sort of recognition by

[146-042]another giving emphasis to the subject of our anxiety. And now he had

[146-043]come down with the firm resolve that he would not again evade the

[146-044]trial. The next day he rode to Offendene. He had sent word that he

[146-045]intended to call and to ask if Gwendolen could receive him; and he

[146-046]found her awaiting him in the old drawing-room where some chief crises

[146-047]of her life had happened. She seemed less sad than he had seen her

[146-048]since her husband’s death; there was no smile on her face, but a placid

[146-049]self-possession, in contrast with the mood in which he had last found

[146-050]her. She was all the more alive to the sadness perceptible in Deronda;

[146-051]and they were no sooner seated—he at a little distance opposite to

[146-052]her—than she said:

[146-053]“You were afraid of coming to see me, because I was so full of grief

[146-054]and despair the last time. But I am not so to-day. I have been sorry

[146-055]ever since. I have been making it a reason why I should keep up my hope

[146-056]and be as cheerful as I can, because I would not give you any pain

[146-057]about me.”

[146-058]There was an unwonted sweetness in Gwendolen’s tone and look as she

[146-059]uttered these words that seemed to Deronda to infuse the utmost cruelty

[146-060]into the task now laid upon him. But he felt obliged to make his answer

[146-061]a beginning of the task.

[146-062]“I _am_ in some trouble to-day,” he said, looking at her rather

[146-063]mournfully; “but it is because I have things to tell you which you will

[146-064]almost think it a want of confidence on my part not to have spoken of

[146-065]before. They are things affecting my own life—my own future. I shall

[146-066]seem to have made an ill return to you for the trust you have placed in

[146-067]me—never to have given you an idea of events that make great changes

[146-068]for me. But when we have been together we have hardly had time to enter

[146-069]into subjects which at the moment were really less pressing to me than

[146-070]the trials you have been going through.” There was a sort of timid

[146-071]tenderness in Deronda’s deep tones, and he paused with a pleading look,

[146-072]as if it had been Gwendolen only who had conferred anything in her

[146-073]scenes of beseeching and confession.

[146-074]A thrill of surprise was visible in her. Such meaning as she found in

[146-075]his words had shaken her, but without causing fear. Her mind had flown

[146-076]at once to some change in his position with regard to [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] and Sir

[146-077]Hugo’s property. She said, with a sense of comfort from Deronda’s way

[146-078]of asking her pardon,

[146-079]“You never thought of anything but what you could do to help me; and I

[146-080]was so troublesome. How could you tell me things?”

[146-081]“It will perhaps astonish you,” said Deronda, “that I have only quite

[146-082]lately known who were my parents.”

[146-083]Gwendolen was not astonished: she felt the more assured that her

[146-084]expectations of what was coming were right. Deronda went on without

[146-085]check.

[146-086]“The reason why you found me in Italy was that I had gone there to

[146-087]learn that—in fact, to meet my mother. It was by her wish that I was

[146-088]brought up in ignorance of my parentage. She parted with me after my

[146-089]father’s death, when I was a little creature. But she is now very ill,

[146-090]and she felt that the secrecy ought not to be any longer maintained.

[146-091]Her chief reason had been that she did not wish me to know I was a Jew.”

[146-092]“_A Jew_!” Gwendolen exclaimed, in a low tone of amazement, with an

[146-093]utterly frustrated look, as if some confusing potion were creeping

[146-094]through her system.

[146-095]Deronda colored, and did not speak, while Gwendolen, with her eyes

[146-096]fixed on the floor, was struggling to find her way in the dark by the

[146-097]aid of various reminiscences. She seemed at last to have arrived at

[146-098]some judgment, for she looked up at Deronda again and said, as if

[146-099]remonstrating against the mother’s conduct,

[146-100]“What difference need that have made?”

[146-101]“It has made a great difference to me that I have known it,” said

[146-102]Deronda, emphatically; but he could not go on easily—the distance

[146-103]between her ideas and his acted like a difference of native language,

[146-104]making him uncertain what force his words would carry.

[146-105]Gwendolen meditated again, and then said feelingly, “I hope there is

[146-106]nothing to make you mind. _You_ are just the same as if you were not a

[146-107]Jew.”

[146-108]She meant to assure him that nothing of that external sort could affect

[146-109]the way in which she regarded him, or the way in which he could

[146-110]influence her. Deronda was a little helped by this misunderstanding.

[146-111]“The discovery was far from being painful to me,” he said, “I had been

[146-112]gradually prepared for it, and I was glad of it. I had been prepared

[146-113]for it by becoming intimate with a very remarkable Jew, whose ideas

[146-114]have attracted me so much that I think of devoting the best part of my

[146-115]life to some effort at giving them effect.”

[146-116]Again Gwendolen seemed shaken—again there was a look of frustration,

[146-117]but this time it was mingled with alarm. She looked at Deronda with

[146-118]lips childishly parted. It was not that she had yet connected his words

[146-119]with Mirah and her brother, but that they had inspired her with a

[146-120]dreadful presentiment of mountainous travel for her mind before it

[146-121]could reach Deronda’s. Great ideas in general which she had attributed

[146-122]to him seemed to make no great practical difference, and were not

[146-123]formidable in the same way as these mysteriously-shadowed particular

[146-124]ideas. He could not quite divine what was going on within her; he could

[146-125]only seek the least abrupt path of disclosure.

[146-126]“That is an object,” he said, after a moment, “which will by-and-by

[146-127]force me to leave England for some time—for some years. I have

[146-128]purposes which will take me to the East.”

[146-129]Here was something clearer, but all the more immediately agitating.

[146-130]Gwendolen’s lips began to tremble. “But you will come back?” she said,

[146-131]tasting her own tears as they fell, before she thought of drying them.

[146-132]Deronda could not sit still. He rose, and went to prop himself against

[146-133]the corner of the mantel-piece, at a different angle from her face. But

[146-134]when she had pressed her handkerchief against her cheeks, she turned

[146-135]and looked up at him, awaiting an answer.

[146-136]“If I live,” said Deronda—“_some time_.”

[146-137]They were both silent. He could not persuade himself to say more unless

[146-138]she led up to it by a question; and she was apparently meditating

[146-139]something that she had to say.

[146-140]“What are you going to do?” she asked, at last, very mildly. “Can I

[146-141]understand the ideas, or am I too ignorant?”

[146-142]“I am going to the East to become better acquainted with the condition

[146-143]of my race in various countries there,” said Deronda, gently—anxious

[146-144]to be as explanatory as he could on what was the impersonal part of

[146-145]their separateness from each other. “The idea that I am possessed with

[146-146]is that of restoring a political existence to my people, making them a

[146-147]nation again, giving them a national center, such as the English have,

[146-148]though they too are scattered over the face of the globe. That is a

[146-149]task which presents itself to me as a duty; I am resolved to begin it,

[146-150]however feebly. I am resolved to devote my life to it. At the least, I

[146-151]may awaken a movement in other minds, such as has been awakened in my

[146-152]own.”

[146-153]There was a long silence between them. The world seemed getting larger

[146-154]round poor Gwendolen, and she more solitary and helpless in the midst.

[146-155]The thought that he might come back after going to the East, sank

[146-156]before the bewildering vision of these wild-stretching purposes in

[146-157]which she felt herself reduced to a mere speck. There comes a terrible

[146-158]moment to many souls when the great movements of the world, the larger

[146-159]destinies of mankind, which have lain aloof in newspapers and other

[146-160]neglected reading, enter like an earthquake into their own lives—where

[146-161]the slow urgency of growing generations turns into the tread of an

[146-162]invading army or the dire clash of civil war, and gray fathers know

[146-163]nothing to seek for but the corpses of their blooming sons, and girls

[146-164]forget all [[pride|vanity]] to make lint and bandages which may serve for the

[146-165]shattered limbs of their betrothed husbands. Then it is as if the

[146-166]Invisible Power that had been the object of lip-worship and

[146-167]lip-resignation became visible, according to the imagery of the Hebrew

[146-168]poet, making the flames his chariot, and riding on the wings of the

[146-169]wind, till the mountains smoke and the plains shudder under the rolling

[146-170]fiery visitations. Often the good cause seems to lie prostrate under

[146-171]the thunder of unrelenting force, the martyrs live reviled, they die, and

[146-172]no angel is seen holding forth the crown and the palm branch. Then it

[146-173]is that the submission of the soul to the Highest is tested, and even

[146-174]in the eyes of frivolity life looks out from the scene of human

[146-175]struggle with the awful face of duty, and a religion shows itself which

[146-176]is something else than a private consolation.
