---
id: ch147
label: "Section 147"
type: chapter
description: "That was the sort of crisis which was at this moment beginning in"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[147-001]That was the sort of crisis which was at this moment beginning in

[147-002][[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]]’s small life: she was for the first time feeling the pressure

[147-003]of a vast mysterious movement, for the first time being dislodged from

[147-004]her supremacy in her own world, and getting a sense that her horizon

[147-005]was but a dipping onward of an existence with which her own was

[147-006]revolving. All the troubles of her wifehood and widowhood had still

[147-007]left her with the implicit impression which had accompanied her from

[147-008]childhood, that whatever surrounded her was somehow specially for her,

[147-009]and it was because of this that no personal jealousy had been roused in

[147-010]her relation to [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]]: she could not spontaneously think of him as

[147-011]rightfully belonging to others more than to her. But here had come a

[147-012]shock which went deeper than personal jealousy—something spiritual and

[147-013]vaguely tremendous that thrust her away, and yet quelled all her anger

[147-014]into self-[[shame|humiliation]].

[147-015]There had been a long silence. Deronda had stood still, even thankful

[147-016]for an interval before he needed to say more, and Gwendolen had sat

[147-017]like a statue with her wrists lying over each other and her eyes

[147-018]fixed—the intensity of her mental action arresting all other

[147-019]excitation. At length something occurred to her that made her turn her

[147-020]face to Deronda and say in a trembling voice,

[147-021]“Is that all you can tell me?”

[147-022]The question was like a dart to him. “The Jew whom I mentioned just

[147-023]now,” he answered, not without a certain tremor in his tones too, “the

[147-024]remarkable man who has greatly influenced my mind, has not perhaps been

[147-025]totally unheard of by you. He is the brother of [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Miss Lapidoth]], whom you

[147-026]have often heard sing.”

[147-027]A great wave of remembrance passed through Gwendolen and spread as a

[147-028]deep, painful flush over neck and face. It had come first at the scene

[147-029]of that morning when she had called on Mirah, and heard Deronda’s voice

[147-030]reading, and been told, without then heeding it, that he was reading

[147-031]Hebrew with Mirah’s brother.

[147-032]“He is very ill—very near death now,” Deronda went on, nervously, and

[147-033]then stopped short. He felt that he must wait. Would she divine the

[147-034]rest?

[147-035]“Did she tell you that I went to her?” said Gwendolen, abruptly,

[147-036]looking up at him.

[147-037]“No,” said Deronda. “I don’t understand you.”

[147-038]She turned away her eyes again, and sat thinking. Slowly the color

[147-039]dried out of face and neck, and she was as pale as before—with that

[147-040]almost withered paleness which is seen after a painful flush. At last

[147-041]she said—without turning toward him—in a low, measured voice, as if

[147-042]she were only thinking aloud in preparation for future speech,

[147-043]“But _can_ you marry?”

[147-044]“Yes,” said Deronda, also in a low voice. “I am going to marry.”

[147-045]At first there was no change in Gwendolen’s attitude: she only began to

[147-046]tremble visibly; then she looked before her with dilated eyes, as at

[147-047]something lying in front of her, till she stretched her arms out

[147-048]straight, and cried with a smothered voice,

[147-049]“I said I should be forsaken. I have been a cruel woman. And I am

[147-050]forsaken.”

[147-051]Deronda’s anguish was intolerable. He could not help himself. He seized

[147-052]her outstretched hands and held them together, and kneeled at her feet.

[147-053]She was the victim of his happiness.

[147-054]“I am cruel, too, I am cruel,” he repeated, with a sort of groan,

[147-055]looking up at her imploringly.

[147-056]His presence and touch seemed to dispel a horrible vision, and she met

[147-057]his upward look of sorrow with something like the return of

[147-058]consciousness after fainting. Then she dwelt on it with that growing

[147-059]pathetic movement of the brow which accompanies the revival of some

[147-060]tender recollection. The look of sorrow brought back what seemed a very

[147-061]far-off moment—the first time she had ever seen it, in the library at

[147-062]the Abbey. Sobs rose, and great tears fell fast. Deronda would not let

[147-063]her hands go—held them still with one of his, and himself pressed her

[147-064]handkerchief against her eyes. She submitted like a half-soothed child,

[147-065]making an effort to speak, which was hindered by struggling sobs. At

[147-066]last she succeeded in saying, brokenly,

[147-067]“I said—I said—it should be better—better with me—for having known

[147-068]you.”

[147-069]His eyes too were larger with tears. She wrested one of her hands from

[147-070]his, and returned his action, pressing his tears away.

[147-071]“We shall not be quite parted,” he said. “I will write to you always,

[147-072]when I can, and you will answer?”

[147-073]He waited till she said in a whisper, “I will try.”

[147-074]“I shall be more with you than I used to be,” Deronda said with gentle

[147-075]urgency, releasing her hands and rising from his kneeling posture. “If

[147-076]we had been much together before, we should have felt our differences

[147-077]more, and seemed to get farther apart. Now we can perhaps never see

[147-078]each other again. But our minds may get nearer.”

[147-079]Gwendolen said nothing, but rose too, automatically. Her withered look

[147-080]of grief, such as the sun often shines on when the blinds are drawn up

[147-081]after the burial of life’s joy, made him hate his own words: they

[147-082]seemed to have the hardness of easy consolation in them. She felt that

[147-083]he was going, and that nothing could hinder it. The sense of it was

[147-084]like a dreadful whisper in her ear, which dulled all other

[147-085]consciousness; and she had not known that she was rising.

[147-086]Deronda could not speak again. He thought that they must part in

[147-087]silence, but it was difficult to move toward the parting, till she

[147-088]looked at him with a sort of intention in her eyes, which helped him.

[147-089]He advanced to put out his hand silently, and when she had placed hers

[147-090]within it, she said what her mind had been laboring with,

[147-091]“You have been very good to me. I have deserved nothing. I will

[147-092]try—try to live. I shall think of you. What good have I been? Only

[147-093]harm. Don’t let me be harm to _you_. It shall be the better for me—”

[147-094]She could not finish. It was not that she was sobbing, but that the

[147-095]intense effort with which she spoke made her too tremulous. The burden

[147-096]of that difficult rectitude toward him was a weight her frame tottered

[147-097]under.

[147-098]She bent forward to kiss his cheek, and he kissed hers. Then they

[147-099]looked at each other for an instant with clasped hands, and he turned

[147-100]away.

[147-101]When he was quite gone, her mother came in and found her sitting

[147-102]motionless.

[147-103]“Gwendolen, dearest, you look very ill,” she said, bending over her and

[147-104]touching her cold hands.

[147-105]“Yes, mamma. But don’t be afraid. I am going to live,” said Gwendolen,

[147-106]bursting out hysterically.

[147-107]Her mother persuaded her to go to bed, and watched by her. Through the

[147-108]day and half the night she fell continually into fits of shrieking, but

[147-109]cried in the midst of them to her mother, “Don’t be afraid. I shall

[147-110]live. I mean to live.”

[147-111]After all, she slept; and when she waked in the morning light, she

[147-112]looked up fixedly at her mother and said tenderly, “Ah, poor mamma! You

[147-113]have been sitting up with me. Don’t be unhappy. I shall live. I shall

[147-114]be better.”

[147-115]CHAPTER LXX.

[147-116]In the checkered area of human experience the seasons are all mingled

[147-117]as in the golden age: fruit and blossom hang together; in the same

[147-118]moment the sickle is reaping and the seed is sprinkled; one tends the

[147-119]green cluster and another treads the winepress. Nay, in each of our

[147-120]lives harvest and spring-time are continually one, until himself

[147-121]gathers us and sows us anew in his invisible fields.

[147-122]Among the blessings of love there is hardly one more exquisite than the

[147-123]sense that in uniting the beloved life to ours we can watch over its

[147-124]happiness, bring comfort where hardship was, and over memories of

[147-125]privation and suffering open the sweetest fountains of joy. Deronda’s

[147-126]love for Mirah was strongly imbued with that blessed protectiveness.

[147-127]Even with infantine feet she had begun to tread among thorns; and the

[147-128]first time he had beheld her face it had seemed to him the girlish

[147-129]image of despair.

[147-130]But now she was glowing like a dark-tipped yet delicate ivory-tinted

[147-131]flower in the warm sunlight of content, thinking of any possible grief

[147-132]as part of that life with Deronda, which she could call by no other

[147-133]name than good. And he watched the sober gladness which gave new beauty

[147-134]to her movements; and her habitual attitudes of repose, with a delight

[147-135]which made him say to himself that it was enough of personal joy for

[147-136]him to save her from pain. She knew nothing of [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans]]’s struggle or of

[147-137]Gwendolen’s pang; for after the assurance that Deronda’s hidden love

[147-138]had been for her, she easily explained Gwendolen’s eager solicitude

[147-139]about him as part of a grateful dependence on his goodness, such as she

[147-140]herself had known. And all Deronda’s words about Mrs. [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]

[147-141]confirmed that view of their relation, though he never touched on it

[147-142]except in the most distant manner. Mirah was ready to believe that he

[147-143]had been a rescuing angel to many besides herself. The only wonder was,

[147-144]that she among them all was to have the bliss of being continually by

[147-145]his side.

[147-146]So, when the bridal veil was around Mirah it hid no doubtful

[147-147]tremors—only a thrill of awe at the acceptance of a great gift which

[147-148]required great uses. And the velvet canopy never covered a more goodly

[147-149]bride and bridegroom, to whom their people might more wisely wish

[147-150]offspring; more truthful lips never touched the sacrament

[147-151]marriage-wine; the marriage-blessing never gathered stronger promise of

[147-152]fulfillment than in the integrity of their mutual pledge. Naturally,

[147-153]they were married according to the Jewish rite. And since no religion

[147-154]seems yet to have demanded that when we make a feast we should invite

[147-155]only the highest rank of our acquaintances, few, it is to be hoped,

[147-156]will be offended to learn that among the guests at Deronda’s little

[147-157]wedding-feast was the entire Cohen family, with the one exception of

[147-158]the baby who carried on her teething intelligently at home. How could

[147-159][[Mordecai]] have borne that those friends of his adversity should have

[147-160]been shut out from rejoicing in common with him?

[147-161]Mrs. Meyrick so fully understood this that she had quite reconciled

[147-162]herself to meeting the Jewish pawnbroker, and was there with her three

[147-163]daughters—all of them enjoying the consciousness that Mirah’s marriage

[147-164]to Deronda crowned a romance which would always make a sweet memory to

[147-165]them. For which of them, mother or girls, had not had a generous part

[147-166]in it—giving their best in feeling and in act to her who needed? If

[147-167]Hans could have been there, it would have been better; but Mab had

[147-168]already observed that men must suffer for being so inconvenient;

[147-169]suppose she, Kate, and Amy had all fallen in love with Mr.

[147-170]Deronda?—but being women they were not so ridiculous.

[147-171]The Meyricks were rewarded for conquering their prejudices by hearing a

[147-172]speech from Mr. Cohen, which had the rare quality among speeches of not

[147-173]being quite after the usual pattern. Jacob ate beyond his years, and

[147-174]contributed several small whinnying laughs as a free accompaniment of

[147-175]his father’s speech, not irreverently, but from a lively sense that his

[147-176]family was distinguishing itself; while Adelaide Rebekah, in a new

[147-177]Sabbath frock, maintained throughout a grave air of [[duty|responsibility]].

[147-178]Mordecai’s brilliant eyes, sunken in their large sockets, dwelt on the

[147-179]scene with the cherishing benignancy of a spirit already lifted into an

[147-180]aloofness which nullified only selfish requirements and left sympathy

[147-181]alive. But continually, after his gaze had been traveling round on the

[147-182]others, it returned to dwell on Deronda with a fresh gleam of trusting

[147-183]affection.

[147-184]The wedding-feast was humble, but Mirah was not without splendid

[147-185]wedding-gifts. As soon as the betrothal had been known, there were

[147-186]friends who had entertained graceful devices. [[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] and Lady

[147-187]Mallinger had taken trouble to provide a complete equipment for Eastern

[147-188]travel, as well as a precious locket containing an inscription—“_To

[147-189]the bride of our dear Daniel Deronda all blessings. H. and L. M._” The

[147-190]Klesmers sent a perfect watch, also with a pretty inscription.
