---
id: ch144
label: "Section 144"
type: chapter
description: "“I am straitened for nothing except breath. But you, who might be in a"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[144-001]“I am straitened for nothing except breath. But you, who might be in a

[144-002]spacious palace, with the wide green country around you, find this a

[144-003]narrow prison. Nevertheless, I cannot say, ‘Go.’”

[144-004]“Oh, the country would be a [[exile|banishment]] while you are here,” said

[144-005][[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], rising and walking round the double room, which yet offered no

[144-006]long promenade, while he made a great fan of his handkerchief. “This is

[144-007]the happiest room in the world to me. Besides, I will imagine myself in

[144-008]the East, since I am getting ready to go there some day. Only I will

[144-009]not wear a cravat and a heavy ring there,” he ended emphatically,

[144-010]pausing to take off those superfluities and deposit them on a small

[144-011]table behind [[Mordecai|Ezra]], who had the table in front of him covered with books

[144-012]and papers.

[144-013]“I have been wearing my memorable ring ever since I came home,” he went

[144-014]on, as he reseated himself. “But I am such a Sybarite that I constantly

[144-015]put it off as a burden when I am doing anything. I understand why the

[144-016]Romans had summer rings—_if_ they had them. Now then, I shall get on

[144-017]better.”

[144-018]They were soon absorbed in their work again. Deronda was reading a

[144-019]piece of rabbinical Hebrew under Ezra’s correction and comment, and

[144-020]they took little notice when [[Lapidoth]] re-entered and took a seat

[144-021]somewhat in the background.

[144-022]His rambling eyes quickly alighted on the ring that sparkled on the bit

[144-023]of dark mahogany. During his walk, his mind had been occupied with the

[144-024]fiction of an advantageous opening for him abroad, only requiring a sum

[144-025]of ready money, which, on being communicated to Deronda in private,

[144-026]might immediately draw from him a question as to the amount of the

[144-027]required sum: and it was this part of his forecast that Lapidoth found

[144-028]the most debatable, there being a danger in asking too much, and a

[144-029]prospective regret in asking too little. His own desire gave him no

[144-030]limit, and he was quite without guidance as to the limit of Deronda’s

[144-031]willingness. But now, in the midst of these airy conditions preparatory

[144-032]to a receipt which remained indefinite, this ring, which on Deronda’s

[144-033]finger had become familiar to Lapidoth’s envy, suddenly shone detached

[144-034]and within easy grasp. Its value was certainly below the smallest of

[144-035]the imaginary sums that his purpose fluctuated between; but then it was

[144-036]before him as a solid fact, and his desire at once leaped into the

[144-037]thought (not yet an intention) that if he were quietly to pocket that

[144-038]ring and walk away he would have the means of comfortable escape from

[144-039]present restraint, without trouble, and also without danger; for any

[144-040]property of Deronda’s (available without his formal consent) was all

[144-041]one with his children’s property, since their father would never be

[144-042]prosecuted for taking it. The details of this thinking followed each

[144-043]other so quickly that they seemed to rise before him as one picture.

[144-044]Lapidoth had never committed larceny; but larceny is a form of

[144-045]appropriation for which people are punished by law; and, take this ring

[144-046]from a virtual relation, who would have been willing to make a much

[144-047]heavier gift, would not come under the head of larceny. Still, the

[144-048]heavier gift was to be preferred, if Lapidoth could only make haste

[144-049]enough in asking for it, and the imaginary action of taking the ring,

[144-050]which kept repeating itself like an inward tune, sank into a rejected

[144-051]idea. He satisfied his urgent longing by resolving to go below, and

[144-052]watch for the moment of Deronda’s departure, when he would ask leave to

[144-053]join him in his walk and boldly carry out his meditated plan. He rose

[144-054]and stood looking out of the window, but all the while he saw what lay

[144-055]beyond him—the brief passage he would have to make to the door close

[144-056]by the table where the ring was. However he was resolved to go down;

[144-057]but—by no distinct change of resolution, rather by a dominance of

[144-058]desire, like the thirst of the drunkard—it so happened that in passing

[144-059]the table his fingers fell noiselessly on the ring, and he found

[144-060]himself in the passage with the ring in his hand. It followed that he

[144-061]put on his hat and quitted the house. The possibility of again throwing

[144-062]himself on his children receded into the indefinite distance, and

[144-063]before he was out on the square his sense of haste had concentrated

[144-064]itself on selling the ring and getting on shipboard.

[144-065]Deronda and Ezra were just aware of his exit; that was all. But,

[144-066]by-and-by, [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] came in and made a real interruption. She had not

[144-067]taken off her hat; and when Deronda rose and advanced to shake hands

[144-068]with her, she said, in a confusion at once unaccountable and

[144-069]troublesome to herself,

[144-070]“I only came in to see that Ezra had his new draught. I must go

[144-071]directly to Mrs. Meyrick’s to fetch something.”

[144-072]“Pray allow me to walk with you,” said Deronda urgently. “I must not

[144-073]tire Ezra any further; besides my brains are melting. I want to go to

[144-074]Mrs. Meyrick’s: may I go with you?”

[144-075]“Oh, yes,” said Mirah, blushing still more, with the vague sense of

[144-076]something new in Deronda, and turning away to pour out Ezra’s draught;

[144-077]Ezra meanwhile throwing back his head with his eyes shut, unable to get

[144-078]his mind away from the ideas that had been filling it while the reading

[144-079]was going on. Deronda for a moment stood thinking of nothing but the

[144-080]walk, till Mirah turned round again and brought the draught, when he

[144-081]suddenly remembered that he had laid aside his cravat, and

[144-082]saying—“Pray excuse my dishabille—I did not mean you to see it,” he

[144-083]went to the little table, took up his cravat, and exclaimed with a

[144-084]violent impulse of surprise, “Good heavens, where is my ring gone?”

[144-085]beginning to search about on the floor.

[144-086]Ezra looked round the corner of his chair. Mirah, quick as thought,

[144-087]went to the spot where Deronda was seeking, and said, “Did you lay it

[144-088]down?”

[144-089]“Yes,” said Deronda, still unvisited by any other explanation than that

[144-090]the ring had fallen and was lurking in shadow, indiscernable on the

[144-091]variegated carpet. He was moving the bits of furniture near, and

[144-092]searching in all possible and impossible places with hand and eyes.

[144-093]But another explanation had visited Mirah and taken the color from her

[144-094]cheeks. She went to Ezra’s ear and whispered “Was my father here?” He

[144-095]bent his head in reply, meeting her eyes with terrible understanding.

[144-096]She darted back to the spot where Deronda was still casting down his

[144-097]eyes in that hopeless exploration which we are apt to carry on over a

[144-098]space we have examined in vain. “You have not found it?” she said,

[144-099]hurriedly.

[144-100]He, meeting her frightened gaze, immediately caught alarm from it and

[144-101]answered, “I perhaps put it in my pocket,” professing to feel for it

[144-102]there.

[144-103]She watched him and said, “It is not there?—you put it on the table,”

[144-104]with a penetrating voice that would not let him feign to have found it

[144-105]in his pocket; and immediately she rushed out of the room. Deronda

[144-106]followed her—she was gone into the sitting-room below to look for her

[144-107]father—she opened the door of the bedroom to see if he were there—she

[144-108]looked where his hat usually hung—she turned with her hands clasped

[144-109]tight and her lips pale, gazing despairingly out of the window. Then

[144-110]she looked up at Deronda, who had not dared to speak to her in her

[144-111]white agitation. She looked up at him, unable to utter a word—the look

[144-112]seemed a tacit acceptance of the [[shame|humiliation]] she felt in his presence.

[144-113]But he, taking her clasped hands between both his, said, in a tone of

[144-114]reverent adoration,

[144-115]“Mirah, let me think that he is my father as well as yours—that we can

[144-116]have no sorrow, no disgrace, no joy apart. I will rather take your

[144-117]grief to be mine than I would take the brightest joy of another woman.

[144-118]Say you will not reject me—say you will take me to share all things

[144-119]with you. Say you will promise to be my wife—say it now. I have been

[144-120]in doubt so long—I have had to hide my love so long. Say that now and

[144-121]always I may prove to you that I love you with complete love.”

[144-122]The change in Mirah had been gradual. She had not passed at once from

[144-123]anguish to the full, blessed consciousness that, in this moment of

[144-124]grief and shame, Deronda was giving her the highest tribute man can

[144-125]give to woman. With the first tones and the first words, she had only a

[144-126]sense of solemn comfort, referring this goodness of Deronda’s to his

[144-127]feeling for Ezra. But by degrees the rapturous assurance of unhoped-for

[144-128]good took possession of her frame: her face glowed under Deronda’s as

[144-129]he bent over her; yet she looked up still with intense gravity, as when

[144-130]she had first acknowledged with religious gratitude that he had thought

[144-131]her “worthy of the best;” and when he had finished, she could say

[144-132]nothing—she could only lift up her lips to his and just kiss them, as

[144-133]if that were the simplest “yes.” They stood then, only looking at each

[144-134]other, he holding her hands between his—too happy to move, meeting so

[144-135]fully in their new consciousness that all signs would have seemed to

[144-136]throw them farther apart, till Mirah said in a whisper: “Let us go and

[144-137]comfort Ezra.”

[144-138]CHAPTER LXIX.

[144-139]“The human nature unto which I felt

[144-140]That I belonged, and reverenced with love,

[144-141]Was not a punctual presence, but a spirit

[144-142]Diffused through time and space, with aid derived

[144-143]Of evidence from monuments, erect,

[144-144]Prostrate, or leaning toward their common rest

[144-145]In earth, the widely scattered wreck sublime

[144-146]Of vanished nations.”

[144-147]—WORDSWORTH: _The Prelude_.

[144-148][[Sir-Hugo-Mallinger|Sir Hugo]] carried out his plan of spending part of the autumn at [[diplow-hall|Diplow]],

[144-149]and by the beginning of October his presence was spreading some

[144-150]cheerfulness in the neighborhood, among all ranks and persons

[144-151]concerned, from the stately home of Brackenshaw and [[quetcham-hall|Quetcham]] to the

[144-152]respectable shop-parlors in Wanchester. For Sir Hugo was a man who

[144-153]liked to show himself and be affable, a Liberal of good lineage, who

[144-154]confided entirely in reform as not likely to make any serious

[144-155]difference in English habits of feeling, one of which undoubtedly is

[144-156]the liking to behold society well fenced and adorned with hereditary

[144-157]rank. Hence he made Diplow a most agreeable house, extending his

[144-158]invitations to old Wanchester solicitors and young village curates, but

[144-159]also taking some care in the combination of the guests, and not feeding

[144-160]all the common poultry together, so that they should think their meal

[144-161]no particular compliment. Easy-going Lord Brackenshaw, for example,

[144-162]would not mind meeting Robinson the attorney, but Robinson would have

[144-163]been naturally piqued if he had been asked to meet a set of people who

[144-164]passed for his equals. On all these points Sir Hugo was well informed

[144-165]enough at once to gain popularity for himself and give pleasure to

[144-166]others—two results which eminently suited his disposition. The rector

[144-167]of [[pennicote-rectory|Pennicote]] now found a reception at Diplow very different from the

[144-168]haughty tolerance he had undergone during the reign of [[Henleigh-Grandcourt|Grandcourt]]. It

[144-169]was not that the baronet liked [[Rex-Gascoigne|Mr. Gascoigne]]; it was that he desired to

[144-170]keep up a marked relation of friendliness with him on account of Mrs.

[144-171]Grandcourt, for whom Sir Hugo’s chivalry had become more and more

[144-172]engaged. Why? The chief reason was one that he could not fully

[144-173]communicate, even to Lady Mallinger—for he would not tell what he

[144-174]thought one woman’s secret to another, even though the other was his

[144-175]wife—which shows that his chivalry included a rare reticence.

[144-176]Deronda, after he had become engaged to Mirah, felt it right to make a

[144-177]full statement of his position and purposes to Sir Hugo, and he chose

[144-178]to make it by letter. He had more than a presentiment that his fatherly

[144-179]friend would feel some dissatisfaction, if not pain, at this turn of

[144-180]his destiny. In reading unwelcome news, instead of hearing it, there is

[144-181]the advantage that one avoids a hasty expression of impatience which

[144-182]may afterward be repented of. Deronda dreaded that verbal collision

[144-183]which makes otherwise pardonable feeling lastingly offensive.
