---
id: ch142
label: "Section 142"
type: chapter
description: "He rose from the chair as he said the last “good-bye.” Mirah had put"
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[142-001]He rose from the chair as he said the last “good-bye.” [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]] had put

[142-002]her hand in his and held him. She was not tearful and grieving, but

[142-003]frightened and awe-struck, as she cried out,

[142-004]“No, father, no!” Then turning to her brother, “[[Mordecai|Ezra]], you have not

[142-005]forbidden him?—Stay, father, and leave off wrong things. Ezra, I

[142-006]cannot bear it. How can I say to my father, ‘Go and die!’”

[142-007]“I have not said it,” Ezra answered, with great effort. “I have said,

[142-008]stay and be sheltered.”

[142-009]“Then you will stay, father—and be taken care of—and come with me,”

[142-010]said Mirah, drawing him toward the door.

[142-011]This was really what [[Lapidoth]] wanted. And for the moment he felt a sort

[142-012]of comfort in recovering his daughter’s dutiful attendance, that made a

[142-013]change of habits seem possible to him. She led him down to the parlor

[142-014]below, and said,

[142-015]“This is my sitting-room when I am not with Ezra, and there is a

[142-016]bedroom behind which shall be yours. You will stay and be good,

[142-017]father. Think that you are come back to my mother, and that she has

[142-018]forgiven you—she speaks to you through me.” Mirah’s tones were

[142-019]imploring, but she could not give one of her former caresses.

[142-020]Lapidoth quickly recovered his composure, began to speak to Mirah of

[142-021]the improvement in her voice, and other easy subjects, and when Mrs.

[142-022]Adam came to lay out his supper, entered into converse with her in

[142-023]order to show her that he was not a common person, though his clothes

[142-024]were just now against him.

[142-025]But in his usual wakefulness at night, he fell to wondering what money

[142-026]Mirah had by her, and went back over old Continental hours at

[142-027]_Roulette_, reproducing the method of his play, and the chances that

[142-028]had frustrated it. He had had his reasons for coming to England, but

[142-029]for most things it was a cursed country.

[142-030]These were the stronger visions of the night with Lapidoth, and not the

[142-031]worn frame of his ireful son uttering a terrible judgment. Ezra did

[142-032]pass across the [[gambling|gaming]]-table, and his words were audible; but he passed

[142-033]like an insubstantial ghost, and his words had the heart eaten out of

[142-034]them by numbers and movements that seemed to make the very tissue of

[142-035]Lapidoth’s consciousness.

[142-036]CHAPTER LXVII.

[142-037]The godhead in us wrings our noble deeds

[142-038]From our reluctant selves.

[142-039]It was an unpleasant surprise to [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]] when he returned from the

[142-040]Abbey to find the undesirable father installed in the lodgings at

[142-041]Brompton. Mirah had felt it necessary to speak of Deronda to her

[142-042]father, and even to make him as fully aware as she could of the way in

[142-043]which the friendship with Ezra had begun, and of the sympathy which had

[142-044]cemented it. She passed more lightly over what Deronda had done for

[142-045]her, omitting altogether the rescue from drowning, and speaking of the

[142-046]shelter she had found in Mrs. Meyrick’s family so as to leave her

[142-047]father to suppose that it was through these friends Deronda had become

[142-048]acquainted with her. She could not persuade herself to more

[142-049]completeness in her narrative: she could not let the breath of her

[142-050]father’s soul pass over her relation to Deronda. And Lapidoth, for

[142-051]reasons, was not eager in his questioning about the circumstances of

[142-052]her flight and arrival in England. But he was much interested in the

[142-053]fact of his children having a beneficent friend apparently high in the

[142-054]world.

[142-055]It was the brother who told Deronda of this new condition added to

[142-056]their life. “I am become calm in beholding him now,” Ezra ended, “and I

[142-057]try to think it possible that my sister’s tenderness, and the daily

[142-058]tasting a life of peace, may win him to remain aloof from temptation. I

[142-059]have enjoined her, and she has promised, to trust him with no money. I

[142-060]have convinced her that he will buy with it his own destruction.”

[142-061]Deronda first came on the third day from Lapidoth’s arrival. The new

[142-062]clothes for which he had been measured were not yet ready, and wishing

[142-063]to make a favorable impression, he did not choose to present himself in

[142-064]the old ones. He watched for Deronda’s departure, and, getting a view

[142-065]of him from the window, was rather surprised at his youthfulness, which

[142-066]Mirah had not mentioned, and which he had somehow thought out of the

[142-067]question in a personage who had taken up a grave friendship and hoary

[142-068]studies with the sepulchral Ezra. Lapidoth began to imagine that

[142-069]Deronda’s real or chief motive must be that he was in love with Mirah.

[142-070]And so much the better; for a tie to Mirah had more promise of

[142-071]indulgence for her father than a tie to Ezra: and Lapidoth was not

[142-072]without the hope of recommending himself to Deronda, and of softening

[142-073]any hard prepossessions. He was behaving with much amiability, and

[142-074]trying in all ways at his command to get himself into easy

[142-075]domestication with his children—entering into Mirah’s [[art|music]], showing

[142-076]himself docile about smoking, which Mrs. Adam could not tolerate in her

[142-077]parlor, and walking out in the square with his German pipe, and the

[142-078]tobacco with which Mirah supplied him. He was too acute to offer any

[142-079]present remonstrance against the refusal of money, which Mirah told him

[142-080]that she must persist in as a solemn duty promised to her brother. He

[142-081]was comfortable enough to wait.

[142-082]The next time Deronda came, Lapidoth, equipped in his new clothes, and

[142-083]satisfied with his own appearance, was in the room with Ezra, who was

[142-084]teaching himself, as a part of his severe duty, to tolerate his

[142-085]father’s presence whenever it was imposed. Deronda was cold and

[142-086]distant, the first sight of this man, who had blighted the lives of his

[142-087]wife and children, creating in him a repulsion that was even a physical

[142-088]discomfort. But Lapidoth did not let himself be discouraged, asked

[142-089]leave to stay and hear the reading of papers from the old chest, and

[142-090]actually made himself useful in helping to decipher some difficult

[142-091]German manuscript. This led him to suggest that it might be desirable

[142-092]to make a transcription of the manuscript, and he offered his services

[142-093]for this purpose, and also to make copies of any papers in Roman

[142-094]characters. Though Ezra’s young eyes he observed were getting weak, his

[142-095]own were still strong. Deronda accepted the offer, thinking that

[142-096]Lapidoth showed a sign of grace in the willingness to be employed

[142-097]usefully; and he saw a gratified expression in Ezra’s face, who,

[142-098]however, presently said, “Let all the writing be done here; for I

[142-099]cannot trust the papers out of my sight, lest there be an accident by

[142-100]burning or otherwise.” Poor Ezra felt very much as if he had a convict

[142-101]on leave under his charge. Unless he saw his father working, it was not

[142-102]possible to believe that he would work in good [[religion|faith]]. But by this

[142-103]arrangement he fastened on himself the burden of his father’s presence,

[142-104]which was made painful not only through his deepest, longest

[142-105]associations, but also through Lapidoth’s restlessness of temperament,

[142-106]which showed itself the more as he become familiarized with his

[142-107]situation, and lost any awe he had felt of his son. The fact was, he

[142-108]was putting a strong constraint on himself in confining his attention

[142-109]for the sake of winning Deronda’s favor; and like a man in an

[142-110]uncomfortable garment he gave himself relief at every opportunity,

[142-111]going out to smoke, or moving about and talking, or throwing himself

[142-112]back in his chair and remaining silent, but incessantly carrying on a

[142-113]dumb language of facial movement or gesticulation: and if Mirah were in

[142-114]the room, he would fall into his old habit of talk with her, gossiping

[142-115]about their former doings and companions, or repeating quirks and

[142-116]stories, and plots of the plays he used to adapt, in the belief that he

[142-117]could at will command the vivacity of his earlier time. All this was a

[142-118]mortal infliction to Ezra; and when Mirah was at home she tried to

[142-119]relieve him, by getting her father down into the parlor and keeping

[142-120]watch over him there. What duty is made of a single difficult resolve?

[142-121]The difficulty lies in the daily unflinching support of consequences

[142-122]that mar the blessed return of morning with the prospect of irritation

[142-123]to be suppressed or shame to be endured. And such consequences were

[142-124]being borne by these, as by many other heroic children of an unworthy

[142-125]father—with the prospect, at least to Mirah, of their stretching

[142-126]onward through the solid part of life.

[142-127]Meanwhile Lapidoth’s presence had raised a new impalpable partition

[142-128]between Deronda and Mirah—each of them dreading the soiling inferences

[142-129]of his mind, each of them interpreting mistakenly the increased reserve

[142-130]and diffidence of the other. But it was not very long before some light

[142-131]came to Deronda.

[142-132]As soon as he could, after returning from his brief visit to the Abbey,

[142-133]he had called at [[Hans-Meyrick|Hans Meyrick]]’s rooms, feeling it, on more grounds than

[142-134]one, a due of friendship that Hans should be at once acquainted with

[142-135]the reasons of his late journey, and the changes of intention it had

[142-136]brought about. Hans was not there; he was said to be in the country for

[142-137]a few days; and Deronda, after leaving a note, waited a week, rather

[142-138]expecting a note in return. But receiving no word, and fearing some

[142-139]freak of feeling in the incalculably susceptible Hans, whose proposed

[142-140]sojourn at the Abbey he knew had been deferred, he at length made a

[142-141]second call, and was admitted into the painting-room, where he found

[142-142]his friend in a light coat, without a waistcoat, his long hair still

[142-143]wet from a bath, but with a face looking worn and wizened—anything but

[142-144]country-like. He had taken up his palette and brushes, and stood before

[142-145]his easel when Deronda entered, but the equipment and attitude seemed

[142-146]to have been got up on short notice.

[142-147]As they shook hands, Deronda said, “You don’t look much as if you had

[142-148]been in the country, old fellow. Is it Cambridge you have been to?”

[142-149]“No,” said Hans, curtly, throwing down his palette with the air of one

[142-150]who has begun to feign by mistake; then pushing forward a chair for

[142-151]Deronda, he threw himself into another, and leaned backward with his

[142-152]hands behind his head, while he went on, “I’ve been to

[142-153]I-don’t-know-where—No man’s land—and a mortally unpleasant country it

[142-154]is.”

[142-155]“You don’t mean to say you have been drinking, Hans,” said Deronda, who

[142-156]had seated himself opposite, in anxious survey.

[142-157]“Nothing so good. I’ve been smoking opium. I always meant to do it some

[142-158]time or other, to try how much bliss could be got by it; and having

[142-159]found myself just now rather out of other bliss, I thought it judicious

[142-160]to seize the opportunity. But I pledge you my word I shall never tap a

[142-161]cask of that bliss again. It disagrees with my constitution.”

[142-162]“What has been the matter? You were in good spirits enough when you

[142-163]wrote to me.”

[142-164]“Oh, nothing in particular. The world began to look seedy—a sort of

[142-165]cabbage-garden with all the cabbages cut. A malady of genius, you may

[142-166]be sure,” said Hans, creasing his face into a smile; “and, in fact, I

[142-167]was tired of being virtuous without reward, especially in this hot

[142-168][[london|London]] weather.”

[142-169]“Nothing else? No real vexation?” said Deronda.

[142-170]Hans shook his head.

[142-171]“I came to tell you of my own affairs, but I can’t do it with a good

[142-172]grace if you are to hide yours.”

[142-173]“Haven’t an affair in the world,” said Hans, in a flighty way, “except

[142-174]a quarrel with a bric-à-brac man. Besides, as it is the first time in

[142-175]our lives that you ever spoke to me about your own affairs, you are

[142-176]only beginning to pay a pretty long debt.”

[142-177]Deronda felt convinced that Hans was behaving artificially, but he

[142-178]trusted to a return of the old frankness by-and-by if he gave his own

[142-179]confidence.
