---
id: ch141
label: "Section 141"
type: chapter
description: "CHAPTER LXVI."
tags: ["chapter"]
---

[141-001]CHAPTER LXVI.

[141-002]“One day still fierce ’mid many a day struck calm.”

[141-003]—BROWNING: _The King and the Book_.

[141-004]Meanwhile [[Mordecai|Ezra]] and [[Mirah-Lapidoth|Mirah]], whom [[Gwendolen-Harleth|Gwendolen]] did not include in her

[141-005]thinking about [[Daniel-Deronda|Deronda]], were having their relation to him drawn closer

[141-006]and brought into fuller light.

[141-007]The father [[Lapidoth]] had quitted his daughter at the doorstep, ruled by

[141-008]that possibility of staking something in play or betting which

[141-009]presented itself with the handling of any sum beyond the price of

[141-010]staying actual hunger, and left no care for alternative prospects or

[141-011]resolutions. Until he had lost everything he never considered whether

[141-012]he would apply to Mirah again or whether he would brave his son’s

[141-013]presence. In the first moment he had shrunk from encountering Ezra as

[141-014]he would have shrunk from any other situation of disagreeable

[141-015]constraint; and the possession of Mirah’s purse was enough to banish

[141-016]the thought of future necessities. The gambling appetite is more

[141-017]absolutely dominant than bodily hunger, which can be neutralized by an

[141-018]emotional or intellectual excitation; but the passion for watching

[141-019]chances—the habitual suspensive poise of the mind in actual or

[141-020]imaginary play—nullifies the susceptibility of other excitation. In

[141-021]its final, imperious stage, it seems the unjoyous dissipation of

[141-022]demons, seeking diversion on the burning marl of perdition.

[141-023]But every form of selfishness, however abstract and unhuman, requires

[141-024]the support of at least one meal a day; and though Lapidoth’s appetite

[141-025]for food and drink was extremely moderate, he had slipped into a

[141-026]shabby, unfriendly form of life in which the appetite could not be

[141-027]satisfied without some ready money. When, in a brief visit at a house

[141-028]which announced “Pyramids” on the window-blind, he had first doubled

[141-029]and trebled and finally lost Mirah’s thirty shillings, he went out with

[141-030]her empty purse in his pocket, already balancing in his mind whether he

[141-031]should get another immediate stake by pawning the purse, or whether he

[141-032]should go back to her giving himself a good countenance by restoring

[141-033]the purse, and declaring that he had used the money in paying a score

[141-034]that was standing against him. Besides, among the sensibilities still

[141-035]left strong in Lapidoth was the sensibility to his own claims, and he

[141-036]appeared to himself to have a claim on any property his children might

[141-037]possess, which was stronger than the justice of his son’s resentment.

[141-038]After all, to take up his lodging with his children was the best thing

[141-039]he could do; and the more he thought of meeting Ezra the less he winced

[141-040]from it, his imagination being more wrought on by the chances of his

[141-041]getting something into his pocket with safety and without exertion,

[141-042]than by the threat of a private [[shame|humiliation]]. Luck had been against him

[141-043]lately; he expected it to turn—and might not the turn begin with some

[141-044]opening of supplies which would present itself through his daughter’s

[141-045]affairs and the good friends she had spoken of? Lapidoth counted on the

[141-046]fascination of his cleverness—an old habit of mind which early

[141-047]experience had sanctioned: and it is not only women who are unaware of

[141-048]their diminished charm, or imagine that they can feign not to be worn

[141-049]out.

[141-050]The result of Lapidoth’s rapid balancing was that he went toward the

[141-051]little square in Brompton with the hope that, by walking about and

[141-052]watching, he might catch sight of Mirah going out or returning, in

[141-053]which case his entrance into the house would be made easier. But it was

[141-054]already evening—the evening of the day next to that which he had first

[141-055]seen her; and after a little waiting, weariness made him reflect that

[141-056]he might ring, and if she were not at home he might ask the time at

[141-057]which she was expected. But on coming near the house he knew that she

[141-058]was at home: he heard her [[music|singing]].

[141-059]Mirah, seated at the piano, was pouring forth “_Herz, mein Herz_,”

[141-060]while Ezra was listening with his eyes shut, when Mrs. Adam opened the

[141-061]door, and said in some embarrassment,

[141-062]“A gentleman below says he is your father, miss.”

[141-063]“I will go down to him,” said Mirah, starting up immediately and

[141-064]looking at her brother.

[141-065]“No, Mirah, not so,” said Ezra, with decision. “Let him come up, Mrs.

[141-066]Adam.”

[141-067]Mirah stood with her hands pinching each other, and feeling sick with

[141-068]anxiety, while she continued looking at Ezra, who had also risen, and

[141-069]was evidently much shaken. But there was an expression in his face

[141-070]which she had never seen before; his brow was knit, his lips seemed

[141-071]hardened with the same severity that gleamed from his eye.

[141-072]When Mrs. Adam opened the door to let in the father, she could not help

[141-073]casting a look at the group, and after glancing from the younger man to

[141-074]the elder, said to herself as she closed the door, “Father, sure

[141-075]enough.” The likeness was that of outline, which is always most

[141-076]striking at the first moment; the expression had been wrought into the

[141-077]strongest contrasts by such hidden or inconspicuous differences as can

[141-078]make the genius of a Cromwell within the outward type of a father who

[141-079]was no more than a respectable parishioner.

[141-080]Lapidoth had put on a melancholy expression beforehand, but there was

[141-081]some real wincing in his frame as he said,

[141-082]“Well, Ezra, my boy, you hardly know me after so many years.”

[141-083]“I know you—too well—father,” said Ezra, with a slow biting solemnity

[141-084]which made the word father a reproach.

[141-085]“Ah, you are not pleased with me. I don’t wonder at it. Appearances

[141-086]have been against me. When a man gets into straits he can’t do just as

[141-087]he would by himself or anybody else, _I_’ve suffered enough, I know,”

[141-088]said Lapidoth, quickly. In speaking he always recovered some glibness

[141-089]and hardihood; and now turning toward Mirah, he held out her purse,

[141-090]saying, “Here’s your little purse, my dear. I thought you’d be anxious

[141-091]about it because of that bit of writing. I’ve emptied it, you’ll see,

[141-092]for I had a score to pay for food and lodging. I knew you would like me

[141-093]to clear myself, and here I stand—without a single farthing in my

[141-094]pocket—at the mercy of my children. You can turn me out if you like,

[141-095]without getting a policeman. Say the word, Mirah; say, ‘Father, I’ve

[141-096]had enough of you; you made a pet of me, and spent your all on me, when

[141-097]I couldn’t have done without you; but I can do better without you

[141-098]now,’—say that, and I’m gone out like a spark. I shan’t spoil your

[141-099]pleasure again.” The tears were in his voice as usual, before he had

[141-100]finished.

[141-101]“You know I could never say it, father,” answered Mirah, with not the

[141-102]less anguish because she felt the falsity of everything in his speech

[141-103]except the implied wish to remain in the house.

[141-104]“Mirah, my sister, leave us!” said Ezra, in a tone of authority.

[141-105]She looked at her brother falteringly, beseechingly—in awe of his

[141-106]decision, yet unable to go without making a plea for this father who

[141-107]was like something that had grown in her flesh with pain. She went

[141-108]close to her brother, and putting her hand in his, said, in a low

[141-109]voice, but not so low as to be unheard by Lapidoth, “Remember,

[141-110]Ezra—you said my mother would not have shut him out.”

[141-111]“Trust me, and go,” said Ezra.

[141-112]She left the room, but after going a few steps up the stairs, sat down

[141-113]with a palpitating heart. If, because of anything her brother said to

[141-114]him, he went away—

[141-115]Lapidoth had some sense of what was being prepared for him in his son’s

[141-116]mind, but he was beginning to adjust himself to the situation and find

[141-117]a point of view that would give him a cool superiority to any attempt

[141-118]at humiliating him. This haggard son, speaking as from a sepulchre, had

[141-119]the incongruity which selfish levity learns to see in suffering, and

[141-120]until the unrelenting pincers of disease clutch its own flesh. Whatever

[141-121]preaching he might deliver must be taken for a matter of course, as a

[141-122]man finding shelter from hail in an open cathedral might take a little

[141-123]religious howling that happened to be going on there.

[141-124]Lapidoth was not born with this sort of callousness: he had achieved it.

[141-125]“This home that we have here,” Ezra began, “is maintained partly by the

[141-126]generosity of a beloved friend who supports me, and partly by the

[141-127]labors of my sister, who supports herself. While we have a home we will

[141-128]not shut you out from it. We will not cast you out to the mercy of your

[141-129]vices. For you are our father, and though you have broken your bond, we

[141-130]acknowledge ours. But I will never trust you. You absconded with money,

[141-131]leaving your debts unpaid; you forsook my mother; you robbed her of her

[141-132]little child and broke her heart; you have become a gambler, and where

[141-133]shame and conscience were there sits an insatiable desire; you were

[141-134]ready to sell my sister—you had sold her, but the price was denied

[141-135]you. The man who has done these things must never expect to be trusted

[141-136]any more. We will share our food with you—you shall have a bed, and

[141-137]clothing. We will do this duty to you, because you are our father. But

[141-138]you will never be trusted. You are an evil man: you made the misery of

[141-139]our mother. That such a man is our father is a brand on our flesh which

[141-140]will not cease smarting. But the Eternal has laid it upon us; and

[141-141]though human justice were to flog you for crimes, and your body fell

[141-142]helpless before the public scorn, we would still say, ‘This is our

[141-143]father; make way, that we may carry him out of your sight.’”

[141-144]Lapidoth, in adjusting himself to what was coming, had not been able to

[141-145]foresee the exact intensity of the lightning or the exact course it

[141-146]would take—that it would not fall outside his frame but through it. He

[141-147]could not foresee what was so new to him as this voice from the soul of

[141-148]his son. It touched that spring of hysterical excitability which Mirah

[141-149]used to witness in him when he sat at home and sobbed. As Ezra ended,

[141-150]Lapidoth threw himself into a chair and cried like a woman, burying his

[141-151]face against the table—and yet, strangely, while this hysterical

[141-152]crying was an inevitable reaction in him under the stress of his son’s

[141-153]words, it was also a conscious resource in a difficulty; just as in

[141-154]early life, when he was a bright-faced curly young man, he had been

[141-155]used to avail himself of this subtly-poised physical susceptibility to

[141-156]turn the edge of resentment or disapprobation.

[141-157]Ezra sat down again and said nothing—exhausted by the shock of his own

[141-158]irrepressible utterance, the outburst of feelings which for years he

[141-159]had borne in solitude and silence. His thin hands trembled on the arms

[141-160]of the chair; he would hardly have found voice to answer a question; he

[141-161]felt as if he had taken a step toward beckoning Death. Meanwhile

[141-162]Mirah’s quick expectant ear detected a sound which her heart

[141-163]recognized: she could not stay out of the room any longer. But on

[141-164]opening the door her immediate alarm was for Ezra, and it was to his

[141-165]side that she went, taking his trembling hand in hers, which he pressed

[141-166]and found support in; but he did not speak or even look at her. The

[141-167]father with his face buried was conscious that Mirah had entered, and

[141-168]presently lifted up his head, pressed his handkerchief against his

[141-169]eyes, put out his hand toward her, and said with plaintive hoarseness,

[141-170]“Good-bye, Mirah; your father will not trouble you again. He deserves

[141-171]to die like a dog by the roadside, and he will. If your mother had

[141-172]lived, she would have forgiven me—thirty-four years ago I put the ring

[141-173]on her finger under the _Chuppa_, and we were made one. She would have

[141-174]forgiven me, and we should have spent our old age together. But I

[141-175]haven’t deserved it. Good-bye.”
