---
description: "It was on this subject: An old lady had an Alderney cow, which she looked upon as a daughter."
id: ch02
label: "Section 2"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 2

[002-001] It was on this subject: An old lady had an [[the-cranford-cow|Alderney cow]], which she

[002-002] looked upon as a daughter. You could not pay the short quarter of an

[002-003] hour call without being told of the wonderful milk or wonderful

[002-004] intelligence of this animal. The whole town knew and kindly regarded

[002-005] Miss Betsy Barker’s Alderney; therefore great was the sympathy and

[002-006] regret when, in an unguarded moment, the poor cow tumbled into a

[002-007] lime-pit. She moaned so loudly that she was soon heard and rescued; but

[002-008] meanwhile the poor beast had lost most of her hair, and came out looking

[002-009] naked, cold, and miserable, in a bare skin. Everybody pitied the

[002-010] animal, though a few could not restrain their smiles at her droll

[002-011] appearance. Miss Betsy Barker absolutely cried with sorrow and dismay;

[002-012] and it was said she thought of trying a bath of oil. This remedy,

[002-013] perhaps, was recommended by some one of the number whose advice she

[002-014] asked; but the proposal, if ever it was made, was knocked on the head by

[002-015] [[captain-brown|Captain Brown]]’s decided “Get her a flannel waistcoat and flannel

[002-016] drawers, ma’am, if you wish to keep her alive. But my advice is, kill

[002-017] the poor creature at once.”

[002-018] Miss Betsy Barker dried her eyes, and thanked the Captain heartily; she

[002-019] set to work, and by-and-by all the town turned out to see the Alderney

[002-020] meekly going to her pasture, clad in dark grey flannel. I have watched

[002-021] her myself many a time. Do you ever see cows dressed in grey flannel in

[002-022] London?

[002-023] [Picture: Meekly going to her pasture]

[002-024] Captain Brown had taken a small house on the outskirts of the town,

[002-025] where he lived with his two daughters. He must have been upwards of

[002-026] sixty at the time of the first visit I paid to [[cranford-town|Cranford]] after I had left

[002-027] it as a residence. But he had a wiry, well-trained, elastic figure, a

[002-028] stiff military throw-back of his head, and a springing step, which made

[002-029] him appear much younger than he was. His eldest daughter looked almost

[002-030] as old as himself, and betrayed the fact that his real was more than his

[002-031] apparent age. Miss Brown must have been forty; she had a sickly,

[002-032] pained, careworn expression on her face, and looked as if the gaiety of

[002-033] youth had long faded out of sight. Even when young she must have been

[002-034] plain and hard-featured. Miss Jessie Brown was ten years younger than

[002-035] her sister, and twenty shades prettier. Her face was round and dimpled.

[002-036] [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]] once said, in a passion against Captain Brown (the cause

[002-037] of which I will tell you presently), “that she thought it was time for

[002-038] Miss Jessie to leave off her dimples, and not always to be trying to

[002-039] look like a child.” It was true there was something childlike in her

[002-040] face; and there will be, I think, till she dies, though she should live

[002-041] to a hundred. Her eyes were large blue wondering eyes, looking straight

[002-042] at you; her nose was unformed and snub, and her lips were red and dewy;

[002-043] she wore her hair, too, in little rows of curls, which heightened this

[002-044] appearance. I do not know whether she was pretty or not; but I liked

[002-045] her face, and so did everybody, and I do not think she could help her

[002-046] dimples. She had something of her father’s jauntiness of gait and

[002-047] manner; and any female observer might detect a slight difference in the

[002-048] attire of the two sisters—that of Miss Jessie being about two pounds per

[002-049] annum more expensive than Miss Brown’s. Two pounds was a large sum in

[002-050] Captain Brown’s annual disbursements.

[002-051] Such was the impression made upon me by the Brown family when I first

[002-052] saw them all together in Cranford Church. The Captain I had met

[002-053] before—on the occasion of the smoky chimney, which he had cured by some

[002-054] simple alteration in the flue. In church, he held his double eye-glass

[002-055] to his eyes during the Morning Hymn, and then lifted up his head erect

[002-056] and sang out loud and joyfully. He made the responses louder than the

[002-057] clerk—an old man with a piping feeble voice, who, I think, felt

[002-058] aggrieved at the Captain’s sonorous bass, and quivered higher and higher

[002-059] in consequence.

[002-060] On coming out of church, the brisk Captain paid the most gallant

[002-061] attention to his two daughters. He nodded and smiled to his

[002-062] acquaintances; but he shook hands with none until he had helped Miss

[002-063] Brown to unfurl her umbrella, had relieved her of her prayer-book, and

[002-064] had waited patiently till she, with trembling nervous hands, had taken

[002-065] up her gown to walk through the wet roads.

[002-066] I wonder what the Cranford ladies did with Captain Brown at their

[002-067] parties. We had often rejoiced, in former days, that there was no

[002-068] gentleman to be attended to, and to find conversation for, at the

[002-069] card-parties. We had congratulated ourselves upon the snugness of the

[002-070] evenings; and, in our love for gentility, and distaste of mankind, we

[002-071] had almost persuaded ourselves that to be a man was to be “vulgar”; so

[002-072] that when I found my friend and hostess, Miss Jenkyns, was going to have

[002-073] a party in my honour, and that Captain and the Miss Browns were invited,

[002-074] I wondered much what would be the course of the evening. Card-tables,

[002-075] with green baize tops, were set out by daylight, just as usual; it was

[002-076] the third week in November, so the evenings closed in about four.

[002-077] Candles, and clean packs of cards, were arranged on each table. The

[002-078] fire was made up; the neat maid-servant had received her last

[002-079] directions; and there we stood, dressed in our best, each with a

[002-080] candle-lighter in our hands, ready to dart at the candles as soon as the

[002-081] first knock came. Parties in Cranford were solemn festivities, making

[002-082] the ladies feel gravely elated as they sat together in their best

[002-083] dresses. As soon as three had arrived, we sat down to “Preference,” I

[002-084] being the unlucky fourth. The next four comers were put down

[002-085] immediately to another table; and presently the [[tea-drinking|tea]]-trays, which I had

[002-086] seen set out in the store-room as I passed in the morning, were placed

[002-087] each on the middle of a card-table. The china was delicate egg-shell;

[002-088] the old-fashioned silver glittered with polishing; but the eatables were

[002-089] of the slightest description. While the trays were yet on the tables,

[002-090] Captain and the Miss Browns came in; and I could see that, somehow or

[002-091] other, the Captain was a favourite with all the ladies present. Ruffled

[002-092] brows were smoothed, sharp voices lowered at his approach. Miss Brown

[002-093] looked ill, and depressed almost to gloom. Miss Jessie smiled as usual,

[002-094] and seemed nearly as popular as her father. He immediately and quietly

[002-095] assumed the man’s place in the room; attended to every one’s wants,

[002-096] lessened the pretty maid-servant’s labour by waiting on empty cups and

[002-097] bread-and-butterless ladies; and yet did it all in so easy and dignified

[002-098] a manner, and so much as if it were a matter of course for the strong to

[002-099] attend to the weak, that he was a true man throughout. He played for

[002-100] threepenny points with as grave an interest as if they had been pounds;

[002-101] and yet, in all his attention to strangers, he had an eye on his

[002-102] suffering daughter—for suffering I was sure she was, though to many eyes

[002-103] she might only appear to be irritable. Miss Jessie could not play

[002-104] cards: but she talked to the sitters-out, who, before her coming, had

[002-105] been rather inclined to be cross. She sang, too, to an old cracked

[002-106] piano, which I think had been a spinet in its youth. Miss Jessie sang,

[002-107] “Jock of Hazeldean” a little out of tune; but we were none of us

[002-108] musical, though Miss Jenkyns beat time, out of time, by way of appearing

[002-109] to be so.

[002-110] It was very good of Miss Jenkyns to do this; for I had seen that, a

[002-111] little before, she had been a good deal annoyed by Miss Jessie Brown’s

[002-112] unguarded admission (_à propos_ of Shetland wool) that she had an uncle,

[002-113] her mother’s brother, who was a shopkeeper in Edinburgh. Miss Jenkyns

[002-114] tried to drown this confession by a terrible cough—for the Honourable

[002-115] [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]] was sitting at a card-table nearest Miss Jessie, and what

[002-116] would she say or think if she found out she was in the same room with a

[002-117] shop-keeper’s niece! But Miss Jessie Brown (who had no tact, as we all

[002-118] agreed the next morning) _would_ repeat the information, and assure Miss

[002-119] Pole she could easily get her the identical Shetland wool required,

[002-120] “through my uncle, who has the best assortment of Shetland goods of any

[002-121] one in Edinbro’.” It was to take the taste of this out of our mouths,

[002-122] and the sound of this out of our ears, that Miss Jenkyns proposed music;

[002-123] so I say again, it was very good of her to beat time to the song.

[002-124] When the trays re-appeared with biscuits and wine, punctually at a

[002-125] quarter to nine, there was conversation, comparing of cards, and talking

[002-126] over tricks; but by-and-by Captain Brown sported a bit of [[reading-in-cranford|literature]].

[002-127] “Have you seen any numbers of ‘The Pickwick Papers’?” said he. (They

[002-128] were then publishing in parts.) “Capital thing!”

[002-129] Now Miss Jenkyns was daughter of a deceased rector of Cranford; and, on

[002-130] the strength of a number of manuscript sermons, and a pretty good

[002-131] library of divinity, considered herself literary, and looked upon any

[002-132] conversation about books as a challenge to her. So she answered and

[002-133] said, “Yes, she had seen them; indeed, she might say she had read them.”

[002-134] “And what do you think of them?” exclaimed Captain Brown. “Aren’t they

[002-135] famously good?”

[002-136] So urged Miss Jenkyns could not but speak.

[002-137] “I must say, I don’t think they are by any means equal to Dr Johnson.

[002-138] Still, perhaps, the author is young. Let him persevere, and who knows

[002-139] what he may become if he will take the great Doctor for his model?”

[002-140] This was evidently too much for Captain Brown to take placidly; and I

[002-141] saw the words on the tip of his tongue before Miss Jenkyns had finished

[002-142] her sentence.

[002-143] “It is quite a different sort of thing, my dear madam,” he began.

[002-144] “I am quite aware of that,” returned she. “And I make allowances,

[002-145] Captain Brown.”

[002-146] “Just allow me to read you a scene out of this month’s number,” pleaded

[002-147] he. “I had it only this morning, and I don’t think the company can have

[002-148] read it yet.”

[002-149] “As you please,” said she, settling herself with an air of resignation.

[002-150] He read the account of the “swarry” which Sam Weller gave at Bath. Some

[002-151] of us laughed heartily. _I_ did not dare, because I was staying in the

[002-152] house. Miss Jenkyns sat in patient gravity. When it was ended, she

[002-153] turned to me, and said with mild dignity—

[002-154] “Fetch me ‘Rasselas,’ my dear, out of the book-room.”

[002-155] When I had brought it to her, she turned to Captain Brown—

[002-156] “Now allow _me_ to read you a scene, and then the present company can

[002-157] judge between your favourite, Mr Boz, and Dr Johnson.”

[002-158] She read one of the conversations between Rasselas and Imlac, in a

[002-159] high-pitched, majestic voice: and when she had ended, she said, “I

[002-160] imagine I am now justified in my preference of Dr Johnson as a writer of

[002-161] fiction.” The Captain screwed his lips up, and drummed on the table,

[002-162] but he did not speak. She thought she would give him a finishing blow

[002-163] or two.

[002-164] [Picture: Endeavouring to beguile her into conversation]

[002-165] “I consider it vulgar, and below the dignity of literature, to publish

[002-166] in numbers.”

[002-167] “How was the _Rambler_ published, ma’am?” asked Captain Brown in a low

[002-168] voice, which I think Miss Jenkyns could not have heard.

[002-169] “Dr Johnson’s style is a model for young beginners. My father

[002-170] recommended it to me when I began to write [[letter-writing|letters]]—I have formed my own

[002-171] style upon it; I recommend it to your favourite.”
