---
description: "“I should be very sorry for him to exchange his style for any such pompous writing,” said Captain Brown."
id: ch03
label: "Section 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 3

[003-001] “I should be very sorry for him to exchange his style for any such

[003-002] pompous writing,” said [[captain-brown|Captain Brown]].

[003-003] [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]] felt this as a personal affront, in a way of which the

[003-004] Captain had not dreamed. Epistolary writing she and her friends

[003-005] considered as her _forte_. Many a copy of many a letter have I seen

[003-006] written and corrected on the slate, before she “seized the half-hour

[003-007] just previous to post-time to assure” her friends of this or of that;

[003-008] and Dr Johnson was, as she said, her model in these compositions. She

[003-009] drew herself up with dignity, and only replied to Captain Brown’s last

[003-010] remark by saying, with marked emphasis on every syllable, “I prefer Dr

[003-011] Johnson to Mr Boz.”

[003-012] It is said—I won’t vouch for the fact—that Captain Brown was heard to

[003-013] say, _sotto voce_, “D—n Dr Johnson!” If he did, he was penitent

[003-014] afterwards, as he showed by going to stand near Miss Jenkyns’ arm-chair,

[003-015] and endeavouring to beguile her into conversation on some more pleasing

[003-016] subject. But she was inexorable. The next day she made the remark I

[003-017] have mentioned about Miss Jessie’s dimples.

[003-018] CHAPTER II.

[003-019] THE CAPTAIN

[003-020] IT was impossible to live a month at [[cranford-town|Cranford]] and not know the daily

[003-021] habits of each resident; and long before my visit was ended I knew much

[003-022] concerning the whole Brown trio. There was nothing new to be discovered

[003-023] respecting their poverty; for they had spoken simply and openly about

[003-024] that from the very first. They made no mystery of the necessity for

[003-025] their being economical. All that remained to be discovered was the

[003-026] Captain’s infinite kindness of heart, and the various modes in which,

[003-027] unconsciously to himself, he manifested it. Some little anecdotes were

[003-028] talked about for some time after they occurred. As we did not read

[003-029] much, and as all the ladies were pretty well suited with servants, there

[003-030] was a dearth of subjects for conversation. We therefore discussed the

[003-031] circumstance of the Captain taking a poor old woman’s dinner out of her

[003-032] hands one very slippery Sunday. He had met her returning from the

[003-033] bakehouse as he came from church, and noticed her precarious footing;

[003-034] and, with the grave dignity with which he did everything, he relieved

[003-035] her of her burden, and steered along the street by her side, carrying

[003-036] her baked mutton and potatoes safely home. This was thought very

[003-037] eccentric; and it was rather expected that he would pay a round of

[003-038] calls, on the Monday morning, to explain and apologise to the Cranford

[003-039] sense of propriety: but he did no such thing: and then it was decided

[003-040] that he was ashamed, and was keeping out of sight. In a kindly pity for

[003-041] him, we began to say, “After all, the Sunday morning’s occurrence showed

[003-042] great goodness of heart,” and it was resolved that he should be

[003-043] comforted on his next appearance amongst us; but, lo! he came down upon

[003-044] us, untouched by any sense of shame, speaking loud and bass as ever, his

[003-045] head thrown back, his wig as jaunty and well-curled as usual, and we

[003-046] were obliged to conclude he had forgotten all about Sunday.

[003-047] [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] and Miss Jessie Brown had set up a kind of intimacy on the

[003-048] strength of the Shetland wool and the new knitting stitches; so it

[003-049] happened that when I went to visit Miss Pole I saw more of the Browns

[003-050] than I had done while staying with Miss Jenkyns, who had never got over

[003-051] what she called Captain Brown’s disparaging remarks upon Dr Johnson as a

[003-052] writer of light and agreeable fiction. I found that Miss Brown was

[003-053] seriously ill of some lingering, incurable complaint, the pain

[003-054] occasioned by which gave the uneasy expression to her face that I had

[003-055] taken for unmitigated crossness. Cross, too, she was at times, when the

[003-056] nervous irritability occasioned by her disease became past endurance.

[003-057] Miss Jessie bore with her at these times, even more patiently than she

[003-058] did with the bitter self-upbraidings by which they were invariably

[003-059] succeeded. Miss Brown used to accuse herself, not merely of hasty and

[003-060] irritable temper, but also of being the cause why her father and sister

[003-061] were obliged to pinch, in order to allow her the small luxuries which

[003-062] were necessaries in her condition. She would so fain have made

[003-063] sacrifices for them, and have lightened their cares, that the original

[003-064] generosity of her disposition added acerbity to her temper. All this

[003-065] was borne by Miss Jessie and her father with more than placidity—with

[003-066] absolute tenderness. I forgave Miss Jessie her singing out of tune, and

[003-067] her juvenility of dress, when I saw her at home. I came to perceive

[003-068] that Captain Brown’s dark Brutus wig and padded coat (alas! too often

[003-069] threadbare) were remnants of the military smartness of his youth, which

[003-070] he now wore unconsciously. He was a man of infinite resources, gained

[003-071] in his barrack experience. As he confessed, no one could black his

[003-072] boots to please him except himself; but, indeed, he was not above saving

[003-073] the little maid-servant’s labours in every way—knowing, most likely,

[003-074] that his daughter’s illness made the place a hard one.

[003-075] He endeavoured to make peace with Miss Jenkyns soon after the memorable

[003-076] dispute I have named, by a present of a wooden fire-shovel (his own

[003-077] making), having heard her say how much the grating of an iron one

[003-078] annoyed her. She received the present with cool gratitude, and thanked

[003-079] him formally. When he was gone, she bade me put it away in the

[003-080] lumber-room; feeling, probably, that no present from a man who preferred

[003-081] Mr Boz to Dr Johnson could be less jarring than an iron fire-shovel.

[003-082] Such was the state of things when I left Cranford and went to Drumble.

[003-083] I had, however, several correspondents, who kept me _au fait_ as to the

[003-084] proceedings of the dear little town. There was Miss Pole, who was

[003-085] becoming as much absorbed in crochet as she had been once in knitting,

[003-086] and the burden of whose letter was something like, “But don’t you forget

[003-087] the white worsted at Flint’s” of the old song; for at the end of every

[003-088] sentence of news came a fresh direction as to some crochet commission

[003-089] which I was to execute for her. Miss [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Matilda Jenkyns]] (who did not mind

[003-090] being called Miss Matty, when Miss Jenkyns was not by) wrote nice, kind,

[003-091] rambling [[letter-writing|letters]], now and then venturing into an opinion of her own; but

[003-092] suddenly pulling herself up, and either begging me not to name what she

[003-093] had said, as Deborah thought differently, and _she_ knew, or else

[003-094] putting in a postscript to the effect that, since writing the above, she

[003-095] had been talking over the subject with Deborah, and was quite convinced

[003-096] that, etc.—(here probably followed a recantation of every opinion she

[003-097] had given in the letter). Then came Miss Jenkyns—Debōrah, as she liked

[003-098] Miss Matty to call her, her father having once said that the Hebrew name

[003-099] ought to be so pronounced. I secretly think she took the Hebrew

[003-100] prophetess for a model in character; and, indeed, she was not unlike the

[003-101] stern prophetess in some ways, making allowance, of course, for modern

[003-102] customs and difference in dress. Miss Jenkyns wore a cravat, and a

[003-103] little bonnet like a jockey-cap, and altogether had the appearance of a

[003-104] strong-minded woman; although she would have despised the modern idea of

[003-105] women being equal to men. Equal, indeed! she knew they were superior.

[003-106] But to return to her letters. Everything in them was stately and grand

[003-107] like herself. I have been looking them over (dear Miss Jenkyns, how I

[003-108] honoured her!) and I will give an extract, more especially because it

[003-109] relates to our friend Captain Brown:—

[003-110] “The Honourable [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]] has only just quitted me; and, in the

[003-111] course of conversation, she communicated to me the intelligence that she

[003-112] had yesterday received a call from her revered husband’s quondam friend,

[003-113] Lord Mauleverer. You will not easily conjecture what brought his

[003-114] lordship within the precincts of our little town. It was to see Captain

[003-115] Brown, with whom, it appears, his lordship was acquainted in the ‘plumed

[003-116] wars,’ and who had the privilege of averting destruction from his

[003-117] lordship’s head when some great peril was impending over it, off the

[003-118] misnomered Cape of Good Hope. You know our friend the Honourable Mrs

[003-119] Jamieson’s deficiency in the spirit of innocent curiosity, and you will

[003-120] therefore not be so much surprised when I tell you she was quite unable

[003-121] to disclose to me the exact nature of the peril in question. I was

[003-122] anxious, I confess, to ascertain in what manner Captain Brown, with his

[003-123] limited establishment, could receive so distinguished a guest; and I

[003-124] discovered that his lordship retired to rest, and, let us hope, to

[003-125] refreshing slumbers, at the Angel Hotel; but shared the Brunonian meals

[003-126] during the two days that he honoured Cranford with his august presence.

[003-127] Mrs Johnson, our civil butcher’s wife, informs me that Miss Jessie

[003-128] purchased a leg of lamb; but, besides this, I can hear of no preparation

[003-129] whatever to give a suitable reception to so distinguished a visitor.

[003-130] Perhaps they entertained him with ‘the feast of reason and the flow of

[003-131] soul’; and to us, who are acquainted with Captain Brown’s sad want of

[003-132] relish for ‘the pure wells of English undefiled,’ it may be matter for

[003-133] congratulation that he has had the opportunity of improving his taste by

[003-134] holding converse with an elegant and refined member of the British

[003-135] [[aristocracy-in-cranford|aristocracy]]. But from some mundane failings who is altogether free?”

[003-136] Miss Pole and Miss Matty wrote to me by the same post. Such a piece of

[003-137] news as Lord Mauleverer’s visit was not to be lost on the Cranford

[003-138] letter-writers: they made the most of it. Miss Matty humbly apologised

[003-139] for writing at the same time as her sister, who was so much more capable

[003-140] than she to describe the honour done to Cranford; but in spite of a

[003-141] little bad spelling, Miss Matty’s account gave me the best idea of the

[003-142] commotion occasioned by his lordship’s visit, after it had occurred;

[003-143] for, except the people at the Angel, the Browns, Mrs Jamieson, and a

[003-144] little lad his lordship had sworn at for driving a dirty hoop against

[003-145] the aristocratic legs, I could not hear of any one with whom his

[003-146] lordship had held conversation.

[003-147] My next visit to Cranford was in the summer. There had been neither

[003-148] births, deaths, nor marriages since I was there last. Everybody lived

[003-149] in the same house, and wore pretty nearly the same well-preserved,

[003-150] old-fashioned clothes. The greatest event was, that Miss Jenkyns had

[003-151] purchased a new carpet for the drawing-room. Oh, the busy work Miss

[003-152] Matty and I had in chasing the sunbeams, as they fell in an afternoon

[003-153] right down on this carpet through the blindless window! We spread

[003-154] newspapers over the places and sat down to our book or our work; and,

[003-155] lo! in a quarter of an hour the sun had moved, and was blazing away on a

[003-156] fresh spot; and down again we went on our knees to alter the position of

[003-157] the newspapers. We were very busy, too, one whole morning, before Miss

[003-158] Jenkyns gave her party, in following her directions, and in cutting out

[003-159] and stitching together pieces of newspaper so as to form little paths to

[003-160] every chair set for the expected visitors, lest their shoes might dirty

[003-161] or defile the purity of the carpet. Do you make paper paths for every

[003-162] guest to walk upon in London?

[003-163] Captain Brown and Miss Jenkyns were not very cordial to each other. The

[003-164] literary dispute, of which I had seen the beginning, was a “raw,” the

[003-165] slightest touch on which made them wince. It was the only difference of

[003-166] opinion they had ever had; but that difference was enough. Miss Jenkyns

[003-167] could not refrain from talking at Captain Brown; and, though he did not

[003-168] reply, he drummed with his fingers, which action she felt and resented

[003-169] as very disparaging to Dr Johnson. He was rather ostentatious in his

[003-170] preference of the writings of Mr Boz; would walk through the streets so

[003-171] absorbed in them that he all but ran against Miss Jenkyns; and though

[003-172] his apologies were earnest and sincere, and though he did not, in fact,

[003-173] do more than startle her and himself, she owned to me she had rather he

[003-174] had knocked her down, if he had only been reading a higher style of

[003-175] [[reading-in-cranford|literature]]. The poor, brave Captain! he looked older, and more worn,

[003-176] and his clothes were very threadbare. But he seemed as bright and

[003-177] cheerful as ever, unless he was asked about his daughter’s health.
