---
description: "My visit to Miss Pole was very quiet."
id: ch06
label: "Section 6"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 6

[006-001] My visit to [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] was very quiet. [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]] had so long taken

[006-002] the lead in [[cranford-town|Cranford]] that now she was gone, they hardly knew how to give

[006-003] a party. The Honourable [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]], to whom Miss Jenkyns herself had

[006-004] always yielded the post of honour, was fat and inert, and very much at

[006-005] the mercy of her old servants. If they chose that she should give a

[006-006] party, they reminded her of the necessity for so doing: if not, she let

[006-007] it alone. There was all the more time for me to hear old-world stories

[006-008] from Miss Pole, while she sat knitting, and I making my father’s shirts.

[006-009] I always took a quantity of plain sewing to Cranford; for, as we did not

[006-010] read much, or walk much, I found it a capital time to get through my

[006-011] work. One of Miss Pole’s stories related to a shadow of a love affair

[006-012] that was dimly perceived or suspected long years before.

[006-013] Presently, the time arrived when I was to remove to Miss Matilda’s

[006-014] house. I found her timid and anxious about the arrangements for my

[006-015] comfort. Many a time, while I was unpacking, did she come backwards and

[006-016] forwards to stir the fire which burned all the worse for being so

[006-017] frequently poked.

[006-018] “Have you drawers enough, dear?” asked she. “I don’t know exactly how

[006-019] my sister used to arrange them. She had capital methods. I am sure she

[006-020] would have trained a servant in a week to make a better fire than this,

[006-021] and Fanny has been with me four months.”

[006-022] This subject of servants was a standing grievance, and I could not

[006-023] wonder much at it; for if gentlemen were scarce, and almost unheard of

[006-024] in the “genteel society” of Cranford, they or their

[006-025] counterparts—handsome young men—abounded in the lower classes. The

[006-026] pretty neat servant-maids had their choice of desirable “followers”; and

[006-027] their mistresses, without having the sort of mysterious dread of men and

[006-028] matrimony that Miss Matilda had, might well feel a little anxious lest

[006-029] the heads of their comely maids should be turned by the joiner, or the

[006-030] butcher, or the gardener, who were obliged, by their callings, to come

[006-031] to the house, and who, as ill-luck would have it, were generally

[006-032] handsome and unmarried. Fanny’s lovers, if she had any—and Miss Matilda

[006-033] suspected her of so many flirtations that, if she had not been very

[006-034] pretty, I should have doubted her having one—were a constant anxiety to

[006-035] her mistress. She was forbidden, by the articles of her engagement, to

[006-036] have “followers”; and though she had answered, innocently enough,

[006-037] doubling up the hem of her apron as she spoke, “Please, ma’am, I never

[006-038] had more than one at a time,” [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]] prohibited that one. But a

[006-039] vision of a man seemed to haunt the kitchen. Fanny assured me that it

[006-040] was all fancy, or else I should have said myself that I had seen a man’s

[006-041] coat-tails whisk into the scullery once, when I went on an errand into

[006-042] the store-room at night; and another evening, when, our watches having

[006-043] stopped, I went to look at the clock, there was a very odd appearance,

[006-044] singularly like a young man squeezed up between the clock and the back

[006-045] of the open kitchen door: and I thought Fanny snatched up the candle

[006-046] very hastily, so as to throw the shadow on the clock face, while she

[006-047] very positively told me the time half-an-hour too early, as we found out

[006-048] afterwards by the church clock. But I did not add to Miss Matty’s

[006-049] anxieties by naming my suspicions, especially as Fanny said to me, the

[006-050] next day, that it was such a queer kitchen for having odd shadows about

[006-051] it, she really was almost afraid to stay; “for you know, miss,” she

[006-052] added, “I don’t see a creature from six o’clock [[tea-drinking|tea]], till Missus rings

[006-053] the bell for prayers at ten.”

[006-054] However, it so fell out that Fanny had to leave and Miss Matilda begged

[006-055] me to stay and “settle her” with the new maid; to which I consented,

[006-056] after I had heard from my father that he did not want me at home. The

[006-057] new servant was a rough, honest-looking, country girl, who had only

[006-058] lived in a farm place before; but I liked her looks when she came to be

[006-059] hired; and I promised Miss Matilda to put her in the ways of the house.

[006-060] The said ways were religiously such as Miss Matilda thought her sister

[006-061] would approve. Many a domestic rule and regulation had been a subject

[006-062] of plaintive whispered murmur to me during Miss Jenkyns’s life; but now

[006-063] that she was gone, I do not think that even I, who was a favourite,

[006-064] durst have suggested an alteration. To give an instance: we constantly

[006-065] adhered to the forms which were observed, at meal-times, in “my father,

[006-066] the rector’s house.” Accordingly, we had always wine and dessert; but

[006-067] the decanters were only filled when there was a party, and what remained

[006-068] was seldom touched, though we had two wine-glasses apiece every day

[006-069] after dinner, until the next festive occasion arrived, when the state of

[006-070] the remainder wine was examined into in a family council. The dregs

[006-071] were often given to the poor: but occasionally, when a good deal had

[006-072] been left at the last party (five months ago, it might be), it was added

[006-073] to some of a fresh bottle, brought up from the cellar. I fancy poor

[006-074] [[captain-brown|Captain Brown]] did not much like wine, for I noticed he never finished

[006-075] his first glass, and most military men take several. Then, as to our

[006-076] dessert, Miss Jenkyns used to gather currants and gooseberries for it

[006-077] herself, which I sometimes thought would have tasted better fresh from

[006-078] the trees; but then, as Miss Jenkyns observed, there would have been

[006-079] nothing for dessert in summer-time. As it was, we felt very genteel

[006-080] with our two glasses apiece, and a dish of gooseberries at the top, of

[006-081] currants and biscuits at the sides, and two decanters at the bottom.

[006-082] When oranges came in, a curious proceeding was gone through. Miss

[006-083] Jenkyns did not like to cut the fruit; for, as she observed, the juice

[006-084] all ran out nobody knew where; sucking (only I think she used some more

[006-085] recondite word) was in fact the only way of enjoying oranges; but then

[006-086] there was the unpleasant association with a [[etiquette|ceremony]] frequently gone

[006-087] through by little babies; and so, after dessert, in orange season, Miss

[006-088] Jenkyns and Miss Matty used to rise up, possess themselves each of an

[006-089] orange in silence, and withdraw to the privacy of their own rooms to

[006-090] indulge in sucking oranges.

[006-091] I had once or twice tried, on such occasions, to prevail on Miss Matty

[006-092] to stay, and had succeeded in her sister’s lifetime. I held up a

[006-093] screen, and did not look, and, as she said, she tried not to make the

[006-094] noise very offensive; but now that she was left alone, she seemed quite

[006-095] horrified when I begged her to remain with me in the warm

[006-096] dining-parlour, and enjoy her orange as she liked best. And so it was

[006-097] in everything. Miss Jenkyns’s rules were made more stringent than ever,

[006-098] because the framer of them was gone where there could be no appeal. In

[006-099] all things else Miss Matilda was meek and undecided to a fault. I have

[006-100] heard Fanny turn her round twenty times in a morning about dinner, just

[006-101] as the little hussy chose; and I sometimes fancied she worked on Miss

[006-102] Matilda’s weakness in order to bewilder her, and to make her feel more

[006-103] in the power of her clever servant. I determined that I would not leave

[006-104] her till I had seen what sort of a person [[martha|Martha]] was; and, if I found

[006-105] her trustworthy, I would tell her not to trouble her mistress with every

[006-106] little decision.

[006-107] Martha was blunt and plain-spoken to a fault; otherwise she was a brisk,

[006-108] well-meaning, but very ignorant girl. She had not been with us a week

[006-109] before Miss Matilda and I were astounded one morning by the receipt of a

[006-110] letter from a cousin of hers, who had been twenty or thirty years in

[006-111] [[india-in-cranford|India]], and who had lately, as we had seen by the “Army List,” returned

[006-112] to England, bringing with him an invalid wife who had never been

[006-113] introduced to her English relations. Major Jenkyns wrote to propose

[006-114] that he and his wife should spend a night at Cranford, on his way to

[006-115] Scotland—at the inn, if it did not suit Miss Matilda to receive them

[006-116] into her house; in which case they should hope to be with her as much as

[006-117] possible during the day. Of course it _must_ suit her, as she said; for

[006-118] all Cranford knew that she had her sister’s bedroom at liberty; but I am

[006-119] sure she wished the Major had stopped in India and forgotten his cousins

[006-120] out and out.

[006-121] “Oh! how must I manage?” asked she helplessly. “If Deborah had been

[006-122] alive she would have known what to do with a gentleman-visitor. Must I

[006-123] put razors in his dressing-room? Dear! dear! and I’ve got none.

[006-124] Deborah would have had them. And slippers, and coat-brushes?” I

[006-125] suggested that probably he would bring all these things with him. “And

[006-126] after dinner, how am I to know when to get up and leave him to his wine?

[006-127] Deborah would have done it so well; she would have been quite in her

[006-128] element. Will he want coffee, do you think?” I undertook the

[006-129] management of the coffee, and told her I would instruct Martha in the

[006-130] art of waiting—in which it must be owned she was terribly deficient—and

[006-131] that I had no doubt Major and Mrs Jenkyns would understand the quiet

[006-132] mode in which a lady lived by herself in a country town. But she was

[006-133] sadly fluttered. I made her empty her decanters and bring up two fresh

[006-134] bottles of wine. I wished I could have prevented her from being present

[006-135] at my instructions to Martha, for she frequently cut in with some fresh

[006-136] direction, muddling the poor girl’s mind as she stood open-mouthed,

[006-137] listening to us both.

[006-138] “Hand the vegetables round,” said I (foolishly, I see now—for it was

[006-139] aiming at more than we could accomplish with quietness and simplicity);

[006-140] and then, seeing her look bewildered, I added, “take the vegetables

[006-141] round to people, and let them help themselves.”

[006-142] “And mind you go first to the ladies,” put in Miss Matilda. “Always go

[006-143] to the ladies before gentlemen when you are waiting.”

[006-144] “I’ll do it as you tell me, ma’am,” said Martha; “but I like lads best.”

[006-145] We felt very uncomfortable and shocked at this speech of Martha’s, yet I

[006-146] don’t think she meant any harm; and, on the whole, she attended very

[006-147] well to our directions, except that she “nudged” the Major when he did

[006-148] not help himself as soon as she expected to the potatoes, while she was

[006-149] handing them round.

[006-150] The major and his wife were quiet unpretending people enough when they

[006-151] did come; languid, as all East Indians are, I suppose. We were rather

[006-152] dismayed at their bringing two servants with them, a Hindoo body-servant

[006-153] for the Major, and a steady elderly maid for his wife; but they slept at

[006-154] the inn, and took off a good deal of the responsibility by attending

[006-155] carefully to their master’s and mistress’s comfort. Martha, to be sure,

[006-156] had never ended her staring at the East Indian’s white turban and brown

[006-157] complexion, and I saw that Miss Matilda shrunk away from him a little as

[006-158] he waited at dinner. Indeed, she asked me, when they were gone, if he

[006-159] did not remind me of Blue Beard? On the whole, the visit was most

[006-160] satisfactory, and is a subject of conversation even now with Miss

[006-161] Matilda; at the time it greatly excited Cranford, and even stirred up

[006-162] the apathetic and Honourable Mrs Jamieson to some expression of

[006-163] interest, when I went to call and thank her for the kind answers she had

[006-164] vouchsafed to Miss Matilda’s inquiries as to the arrangement of a

[006-165] gentleman’s dressing-room—answers which I must confess she had given in

[006-166] the wearied manner of the Scandinavian prophetess—
