---
description: "I went to see Miss Pole the next day, and took her completely by surprise, for she had not been to see Miss Matilda for."
id: ch09
label: "Section 9"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 9

[009-001] I went to see [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] the next day, and took her completely by

[009-002] surprise, for she had not been to see Miss Matilda for two days.

[009-003] “And now I must go back with you, my dear, for I promised to let her

[009-004] know how [[mr-holbrook|Thomas Holbrook]] went on; and, I’m sorry to say, his housekeeper

[009-005] has sent me word to-day that he hasn’t long to live. Poor Thomas! that

[009-006] journey to Paris was quite too much for him. His housekeeper says he

[009-007] has hardly ever been round his fields since, but just sits with his

[009-008] hands on his knees in the counting-house, not reading or anything, but

[009-009] only saying what a wonderful city Paris was! Paris has much to answer

[009-010] for if it’s killed my cousin Thomas, for a better man never lived.”

[009-011] “Does Miss Matilda know of his illness?” asked I—a new light as to the

[009-012] cause of her indisposition dawning upon me.

[009-013] “Dear! to be sure, yes! Has not she told you? I let her know a

[009-014] fortnight ago, or more, when first I heard of it. How odd she shouldn’t

[009-015] have told you!”

[009-016] Not at all, I thought; but I did not say anything. I felt almost guilty

[009-017] of having spied too curiously into that tender heart, and I was not

[009-018] going to speak of its secrets—hidden, [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]] believed, from all the

[009-019] world. I ushered Miss Pole into Miss Matilda’s little drawing-room, and

[009-020] then left them alone. But I was not surprised when [[martha|Martha]] came to my

[009-021] bedroom door, to ask me to go down to dinner alone, for that missus had

[009-022] one of her bad headaches. She came into the drawing-room at [[tea-drinking|tea-time]],

[009-023] but it was evidently an effort to her; and, as if to make up for some

[009-024] reproachful feeling against her late sister, [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]], which had

[009-025] been troubling her all the afternoon, and for which she now felt

[009-026] penitent, she kept telling me how good and how clever Deborah was in her

[009-027] youth; how she used to settle what gowns they were to wear at all the

[009-028] parties (faint, ghostly ideas of grim parties, far away in the distance,

[009-029] when Miss Matty and Miss Pole were young!); and how Deborah and her

[009-030] mother had started the benefit society for the poor, and taught girls

[009-031] cooking and plain sewing; and how Deborah had once danced with a lord;

[009-032] and how she used to visit at Sir Peter Arley’s, and tried to remodel the

[009-033] quiet rectory establishment on the plans of [[arley-hall|Arley Hall]], where they kept

[009-034] thirty servants; and how she had nursed Miss Matty through a long, long

[009-035] illness, of which I had never heard before, but which I now dated in my

[009-036] own mind as following the dismissal of the suit of Mr Holbrook. So we

[009-037] talked softly and quietly of old times through the long November

[009-038] evening.

[009-039] The next day Miss Pole brought us word that Mr Holbrook was dead. Miss

[009-040] Matty heard the news in silence; in fact, from the account of the

[009-041] previous day, it was only what we had to expect. Miss Pole kept calling

[009-042] upon us for some expression of regret, by asking if it was not sad that

[009-043] he was gone, and saying—

[009-044] “To think of that pleasant day last June, when he seemed so well! And

[009-045] he might have lived this dozen years if he had not gone to that wicked

[009-046] Paris, where they are always having revolutions.”

[009-047] She paused for some demonstration on our part. I saw Miss Matty could

[009-048] not speak, she was trembling so nervously; so I said what I really felt;

[009-049] and after a call of some duration—all the time of which I have no doubt

[009-050] Miss Pole thought Miss Matty received the news very calmly—our visitor

[009-051] took her leave.

[009-052] Miss Matty made a strong effort to conceal her feelings—a concealment

[009-053] she practised even with me, for she has never alluded to Mr Holbrook

[009-054] again, although the book he gave her lies with her Bible on the little

[009-055] table by her bedside. She did not think I heard her when she asked the

[009-056] little milliner of [[cranford-town|Cranford]] to make her caps something like the

[009-057] Honourable [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s, or that I noticed the reply—

[009-058] “But she wears [[widowhood-in-cranford|widows]]’ caps, ma’am?”

[009-059] “Oh! I only meant something in that style; not widows’, of course, but

[009-060] rather like Mrs Jamieson’s.”

[009-061] This effort at concealment was the beginning of the tremulous motion of

[009-062] head and hands which I have seen ever since in Miss Matty.

[009-063] The evening of the day on which we heard of Mr Holbrook’s death, Miss

[009-064] Matilda was very silent and thoughtful; after prayers she called Martha

[009-065] back and then she stood uncertain what to say.

[009-066] “Martha!” she said, at last, “you are young”—and then she made so long a

[009-067] pause that Martha, to remind her of her half-finished sentence, dropped

[009-068] a curtsey, and said—

[009-069] “Yes, please, ma’am; two-and-twenty last third of October, please,

[009-070] ma’am.”

[009-071] “And, perhaps, Martha, you may some time meet with a young man you like,

[009-072] and who likes you. I did say you were not to have followers; but if

[009-073] you meet with such a young man, and tell me, and I find he is

[009-074] respectable, I have no objection to his coming to see you once a week.

[009-075] God forbid!” said she in a low voice, “that I should grieve any young

[009-076] hearts.” She spoke as if she were providing for some distant

[009-077] contingency, and was rather startled when Martha made her ready eager

[009-078] answer—

[009-079] “Please, ma’am, there’s Jem Hearn, and he’s a joiner making

[009-080] three-and-sixpence a-day, and six foot one in his stocking-feet, please,

[009-081] ma’am; and if you’ll ask about him to-morrow morning, every one will

[009-082] give him a character for steadiness; and he’ll be glad enough to come

[009-083] to-morrow night, I’ll be bound.”

[009-084] Though Miss Matty was startled, she submitted to Fate and Love.

[009-085] CHAPTER V.

[009-086] OLD LETTERS

[009-087] I HAVE often noticed that almost every one has his own individual small

[009-088] economies—careful habits of saving fractions of pennies in some one

[009-089] peculiar direction—any disturbance of which annoys him more than

[009-090] spending shillings or pounds on some real extravagance. An old

[009-091] gentleman of my acquaintance, who took the intelligence of the failure

[009-092] of a Joint-Stock Bank, in which some of his money was invested, with

[009-093] stoical mildness, worried his family all through a long summer’s day

[009-094] because one of them had torn (instead of cutting) out the written leaves

[009-095] of his now useless bank-book; of course, the corresponding pages at the

[009-096] other end came out as well, and this little unnecessary waste of paper

[009-097] (his private economy) chafed him more than all the loss of his money.

[009-098] Envelopes fretted his soul terribly when they first came in; the only

[009-099] way in which he could reconcile himself to such waste of his cherished

[009-100] article was by patiently turning inside out all that were sent to him,

[009-101] and so making them serve again. Even now, though tamed by age, I see

[009-102] him casting wistful glances at his daughters when they send a whole

[009-103] inside of a half-sheet of note paper, with the three lines of acceptance

[009-104] to an invitation, written on only one of the sides. I am not above

[009-105] owning that I have this human weakness myself. String is my foible. My

[009-106] pockets get full of little hanks of it, picked up and twisted together,

[009-107] ready for uses that never come. I am seriously annoyed if any one cuts

[009-108] the string of a parcel instead of patiently and faithfully undoing it

[009-109] fold by fold. How people can bring themselves to use india-rubber

[009-110] rings, which are a sort of deification of string, as lightly as they do,

[009-111] I cannot imagine. To me an india-rubber ring is a precious treasure. I

[009-112] have one which is not new—one that I picked up off the floor nearly six

[009-113] years ago. I have really tried to use it, but my heart failed me, and I

[009-114] could not commit the extravagance.

[009-115] Small pieces of butter grieve others. They cannot attend to

[009-116] conversation because of the annoyance occasioned by the habit which some

[009-117] people have of invariably taking more butter than they want. Have you

[009-118] not seen the anxious look (almost mesmeric) which such persons fix on

[009-119] the article? They would feel it a relief if they might bury it out of

[009-120] their sight by popping it into their own mouths and swallowing it down;

[009-121] and they are really made happy if the person on whose plate it lies

[009-122] unused suddenly breaks off a piece of toast (which he does not want at

[009-123] all) and eats up his butter. They think that this is not waste.

[009-124] Now Miss Matty Jenkyns was chary of candles. We had many devices to use

[009-125] as few as possible. In the winter afternoons she would sit knitting for

[009-126] two or three hours—she could do this in the dark, or by firelight—and

[009-127] when I asked if I might not ring for candles to finish stitching my

[009-128] wristbands, she told me to “keep blind man’s holiday.” They were

[009-129] usually brought in with tea; but we only burnt one at a time. As we

[009-130] lived in constant preparation for a friend who might come in any evening

[009-131] (but who never did), it required some contrivance to keep our two

[009-132] candles of the same length, ready to be lighted, and to look as if we

[009-133] burnt two always. The candles took it in turns; and, whatever we might

[009-134] be talking about or doing, Miss Matty’s eyes were habitually fixed upon

[009-135] the candle, ready to jump up and extinguish it and to light the other

[009-136] before they had become too uneven in length to be restored to equality

[009-137] in the course of the evening.

[009-138] One night, I remember this [[candlelight|candle economy]] particularly annoyed me. I

[009-139] had been very much tired of my compulsory “blind man’s holiday,”

[009-140] especially as Miss Matty had fallen asleep, and I did not like to stir

[009-141] the fire and run the risk of awakening her; so I could not even sit on

[009-142] the rug, and scorch myself with sewing by firelight, according to my

[009-143] usual custom. I fancied Miss Matty must be dreaming of her early life;

[009-144] for she spoke one or two words in her uneasy sleep bearing reference to

[009-145] persons who were dead long before. When Martha brought in the lighted

[009-146] candle and tea, Miss Matty started into wakefulness, with a strange,

[009-147] bewildered look around, as if we were not the people she expected to see

[009-148] about her. There was a little sad expression that shadowed her face as

[009-149] she recognised me; but immediately afterwards she tried to give me her

[009-150] usual smile. All through tea-time her talk ran upon the days of her

[009-151] childhood and youth. Perhaps this reminded her of the desirableness of

[009-152] looking over all the old family [[letter-writing|letters]], and destroying such as ought

[009-153] not to be allowed to fall into the hands of strangers; for she had often

[009-154] spoken of the necessity of this task, but had always shrunk from it,

[009-155] with a timid dread of something painful. To-night, however, she rose up

[009-156] after tea and went for them—in the dark; for she piqued herself on the

[009-157] precise neatness of all her chamber arrangements, and used to look

[009-158] uneasily at me when I lighted a bed-candle to go to another room for

[009-159] anything. When she returned there was a faint, pleasant smell of

[009-160] Tonquin beans in the room. I had always noticed this scent about any of

[009-161] the things which had belonged to her mother; and many of the letters

[009-162] were addressed to her—yellow bundles of love-letters, sixty or seventy

[009-163] years old.

[009-164] Miss Matty undid the packet with a sigh; but she stifled it directly, as

[009-165] if it were hardly right to regret the flight of time, or of life either.

[009-166] We agreed to look them over separately, each taking a different letter

[009-167] out of the same bundle and describing its contents to the other before

[009-168] destroying it. I never knew what sad work the reading of [[letters-and-correspondence|old letters]]

[009-169] was before that evening, though I could hardly tell why. The letters

[009-170] were as happy as letters could be—at least those early letters were.

[009-171] There was in them a vivid and intense sense of the present time, which

[009-172] seemed so strong and full, as if it could never pass away, and as if the

[009-173] warm, living hearts that so expressed themselves could never die, and be

[009-174] as nothing to the sunny earth. I should have felt less melancholy, I

[009-175] believe, if the letters had been more so. I saw the tears stealing down

[009-176] the well-worn furrows of Miss Matty’s cheeks, and her spectacles often

[009-177] wanted wiping. I trusted at last that she would light the other candle,

[009-178] for my own eyes were rather dim, and I wanted more light to see the

[009-179] pale, faded ink; but no, even through her tears, she saw and remembered

[009-180] her little economical ways.
