---
description: "“My dear, that boy’s trick, on that sunny day, when all seemed going straight and well, broke my mother’s heart, and cha."
id: ch12
label: "Section 12"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 12

[012-001] “My dear, that boy’s trick, on that sunny day, when all seemed going

[012-002] straight and well, broke my mother’s heart, and changed my father for

[012-003] life. It did, indeed. Old Clare said, Peter looked as white as my

[012-004] father; and stood as still as a statue to be flogged; and my father

[012-005] struck hard! When my father stopped to take breath, Peter said, ‘Have

[012-006] you done enough, sir?’ quite hoarsely, and still standing quite quiet.

[012-007] I don’t know what my father said—or if he said anything. But old Clare

[012-008] said, Peter turned to where the people outside the railing were, and

[012-009] made them a low bow, as grand and as grave as any gentleman; and then

[012-010] walked slowly into the house. I was in the store-room helping my mother

[012-011] to make cowslip wine. I cannot abide the wine now, nor the scent of the

[012-012] flowers; they turn me sick and faint, as they did that day, when Peter

[012-013] came in, looking as haughty as any man—indeed, looking like a man, not

[012-014] like a boy. ‘Mother!’ he said, ‘I am come to say, God bless you for

[012-015] ever.’ I saw his lips quiver as he spoke; and I think he durst not say

[012-016] anything more loving, for the purpose that was in his heart. She

[012-017] looked at him rather frightened, and wondering, and asked him what was

[012-018] to do. He did not smile or speak, but put his arms round her and kissed

[012-019] her as if he did not know how to leave off; and before she could speak

[012-020] again, he was gone. We talked it over, and could not understand it, and

[012-021] she bade me go and seek my father, and ask what it was all about. I

[012-022] found him walking up and down, looking very highly displeased.

[012-023] “‘Tell your mother I have flogged Peter, and that he richly deserved

[012-024] it.’

[012-025] “I durst not ask any more questions. When I told my mother, she sat

[012-026] down, quite faint, for a minute. I remember, a few days after, I saw

[012-027] the poor, withered cowslip flowers thrown out to the leaf heap, to decay

[012-028] and die there. There was no making of cowslip wine that year at the

[012-029] rectory—nor, indeed, ever after.

[012-030] “Presently my mother went to my father. I know I thought of Queen

[012-031] Esther and King Ahasuerus; for my mother was very pretty and

[012-032] delicate-looking, and my father looked as terrible as King Ahasuerus.

[012-033] Some time after they came out together; and then my mother told me what

[012-034] had happened, and that she was going up to Peter’s room at my father’s

[012-035] desire—though she was not to tell Peter this—to talk the matter over

[012-036] with him. But no Peter was there. We looked over the house; no Peter

[012-037] was there! Even my father, who had not liked to join in the search at

[012-038] first, helped us before long. The rectory was a very old house—steps up

[012-039] into a room, steps down into a room, all through. At first, my mother

[012-040] went calling low and soft, as if to reassure the poor boy, ‘Peter!

[012-041] Peter, dear! it’s only me;’ but, by-and-by, as the servants came back

[012-042] from the errands my father had sent them, in different directions, to

[012-043] find where Peter was—as we found he was not in the garden, nor the

[012-044] hayloft, nor anywhere about—my mother’s cry grew louder and wilder,

[012-045] ‘Peter! Peter, my darling! where are you?’ for then she felt and

[012-046] understood that that long kiss meant some sad kind of ‘good-bye.’ The

[012-047] afternoon went on—my mother never resting, but seeking again and again

[012-048] in every possible place that had been looked into twenty times before,

[012-049] nay, that she had looked into over and over again herself. My father sat

[012-050] with his head in his hands, not speaking except when his messengers came

[012-051] in, bringing no tidings; then he lifted up his face, so strong and sad,

[012-052] and told them to go again in some new direction. My mother kept passing

[012-053] from room to room, in and out of the house, moving noiselessly, but

[012-054] never ceasing. Neither she nor my father durst leave the house, which

[012-055] was the meeting-place for all the messengers. At last (and it was

[012-056] nearly dark), my father rose up. He took hold of my mother’s arm as she

[012-057] came with wild, sad pace through one door, and quickly towards another.

[012-058] She started at the touch of his hand, for she had forgotten all in the

[012-059] world but Peter.

[012-060] “‘Molly!’ said he, ‘I did not think all this would happen.’ He looked

[012-061] into her face for comfort—her poor face all wild and white; for neither

[012-062] she nor my father had dared to acknowledge—much less act upon—the terror

[012-063] that was in their hearts, lest Peter should have made away with himself.

[012-064] My father saw no conscious look in his wife’s hot, dreary eyes, and he

[012-065] missed the sympathy that she had always been ready to give him—strong

[012-066] man as he was, and at the dumb despair in her face his tears began to

[012-067] flow. But when she saw this, a gentle sorrow came over her countenance,

[012-068] and she said, ‘Dearest John! don’t cry; come with me, and we’ll find

[012-069] him,’ almost as cheerfully as if she knew where he was. And she took my

[012-070] father’s great hand in her little soft one, and led him along, the tears

[012-071] dropping as he walked on that same unceasing, weary walk, from room to

[012-072] room, through house and garden.

[012-073] “Oh, how I wished for Deborah! I had no time for crying, for now all

[012-074] seemed to depend on me. I wrote for Deborah to come home. I sent a

[012-075] message privately to that same [[mr-holbrook|Mr Holbrook]]’s house—poor Mr Holbrook;—you

[012-076] know who I mean. I don’t mean I sent a message to him, but I sent one

[012-077] that I could trust to know if Peter was at his house. For at one time

[012-078] Mr Holbrook was an occasional visitor at [[the-jenkyns-rectory|the rectory]]—you know he was

[012-079] [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]]’s cousin—and he had been very kind to Peter, and taught him

[012-080] how to fish—he was very kind to everybody, and I thought Peter might

[012-081] have gone off there. But Mr Holbrook was from home, and Peter had never

[012-082] been seen. It was night now; but the doors were all wide open, and my

[012-083] father and mother walked on and on; it was more than an hour since he

[012-084] had joined her, and I don’t believe they had ever spoken all that time.

[012-085] I was getting the parlour fire lighted, and one of the servants was

[012-086] preparing [[tea-drinking|tea]], for I wanted them to have something to eat and drink and

[012-087] warm them, when old Clare asked to speak to me.

[012-088] “‘I have borrowed the nets from the weir, [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]]. Shall we drag the

[012-089] ponds to-night, or wait for the morning?’

[012-090] “I remember staring in his face to gather his meaning; and when I did, I

[012-091] laughed out loud. The horror of that new thought—our bright, darling

[012-092] Peter, cold, and stark, and dead! I remember the ring of my own laugh

[012-093] now.

[012-094] “The next day Deborah was at home before I was myself again. She would

[012-095] not have been so weak as to give way as I had done; but my screams (my

[012-096] horrible laughter had ended in crying) had roused my sweet dear mother,

[012-097] whose poor wandering wits were called back and collected as soon as a

[012-098] child needed her care. She and Deborah sat by my bedside; I knew by the

[012-099] looks of each that there had been no news of Peter—no awful, ghastly

[012-100] news, which was what I most had dreaded in my dull state between

[012-101] sleeping and waking.

[012-102] “The same result of all the searching had brought something of the same

[012-103] relief to my mother, to whom, I am sure, the thought that Peter might

[012-104] even then be hanging dead in some of the familiar home places had caused

[012-105] that never-ending walk of yesterday. Her soft eyes never were the same

[012-106] again after that; they had always a restless, craving look, as if

[012-107] seeking for what they could not find. Oh! it was an awful time; coming

[012-108] down like a thunder-bolt on the still sunny day when the lilacs were all

[012-109] in bloom.”

[012-110] “Where was Mr Peter?” said I.

[012-111] “He had made his way to Liverpool; and there was war then; and some of

[012-112] the king’s ships lay off the mouth of the Mersey; and they were only too

[012-113] glad to have a fine likely boy such as him (five foot nine he was), come

[012-114] to offer himself. The captain wrote to my father, and Peter wrote to my

[012-115] mother. Stay! those [[letter-writing|letters]] will be somewhere here.”

[012-116] We lighted the candle, and found the captain’s letter and Peter’s too.

[012-117] And we also found a little simple begging letter from Mrs Jenkyns to

[012-118] Peter, addressed to him at the house of an old schoolfellow whither she

[012-119] fancied he might have gone. They had returned it unopened; and unopened

[012-120] it had remained ever since, having been inadvertently put by among the

[012-121] other letters of that time. This is it:—

[012-122] “MY DEAREST PETER,—You did not think we should be so sorry as we

[012-123] are, I know, or you would never have gone away. You are too good.

[012-124] Your father sits and sighs till my heart aches to hear him. He

[012-125] cannot hold up his head for grief; and yet he only did what he

[012-126] thought was right. Perhaps he has been too severe, and perhaps

[012-127] I have not been kind enough; but God knows how we love you, my

[012-128] dear only boy. Don looks so sorry you are gone. Come back, and

[012-129] make us happy, who love you so much. I know you will come back.”

[012-130] But Peter did not come back. That spring day was the last time he ever

[012-131] saw his mother’s face. The writer of the letter—the last—the only

[012-132] person who had ever seen what was written in it, was dead long ago; and

[012-133] I, a stranger, not born at the time when this occurrence took place, was

[012-134] the one to open it.

[012-135] The captain’s letter summoned the father and mother to Liverpool

[012-136] instantly, if they wished to see their boy; and, by some of the wild

[012-137] chances of life, the captain’s letter had been detained somewhere,

[012-138] somehow.

[012-139] Miss Matty went on, “And it was racetime, and all the post-horses at

[012-140] [[cranford-town|Cranford]] were gone to the races; but my father and mother set off in our

[012-141] own gig—and oh! my dear, they were too late—the ship was gone! And now

[012-142] read Peter’s letter to my mother!”

[012-143] It was full of love, and sorrow, and pride in his new profession, and a

[012-144] sore sense of his disgrace in the eyes of the people at Cranford; but

[012-145] ending with a passionate entreaty that she would come and see him before

[012-146] he left the Mersey: “Mother; we may go into battle. I hope we shall,

[012-147] and lick those French: but I must see you again before that time.”

[012-148] “And she was too late,” said Miss Matty; “too late!”

[012-149] We sat in silence, pondering on the full meaning of those sad, sad

[012-150] words. At length I asked Miss Matty to tell me how her mother bore it.

[012-151] “Oh!” she said, “she was patience itself. She had never been strong,

[012-152] and this weakened her terribly. My father used to sit looking at her:

[012-153] far more sad than she was. He seemed as if he could look at nothing

[012-154] else when she was by; and he was so humble—so very gentle now. He

[012-155] would, perhaps, speak in his old way—laying down the law, as it were—and

[012-156] then, in a minute or two, he would come round and put his hand on our

[012-157] shoulders, and ask us in a low voice, if he had said anything to hurt

[012-158] us. I did not wonder at his speaking so to Deborah, for she was so

[012-159] clever; but I could not bear to hear him talking so to me.
