---
description: "“But, you see, he saw what we did not—that it was killing my mother."
id: ch13
label: "Section 13"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 13

[013-001] “But, you see, he saw what we did not—that it was killing my mother.

[013-002] Yes! killing her (put out the candle, my dear; I can talk better in the

[013-003] dark), for she was but a frail woman, and ill-fitted to stand the fright

[013-004] and shock she had gone through; and she would smile at him and comfort

[013-005] him, not in words, but in her looks and tones, which were always

[013-006] cheerful when he was there. And she would speak of how she thought

[013-007] Peter stood a good chance of being admiral very soon—he was so brave and

[013-008] clever; and how she thought of seeing him in his navy uniform, and what

[013-009] sort of hats admirals wore; and how much more fit he was to be a sailor

[013-010] than a clergyman; and all in that way, just to make my father think she

[013-011] was quite glad of what came of that unlucky morning’s work, and the

[013-012] flogging which was always in his mind, as we all knew. But oh, my dear!

[013-013] the bitter, bitter crying she had when she was alone; and at last, as

[013-014] she grew weaker, she could not keep her tears in when Deborah or me was

[013-015] by, and would give us message after message for Peter (his ship had gone

[013-016] to the Mediterranean, or somewhere down there, and then he was ordered

[013-017] off to [[india-in-cranford|India]], and there was no overland route then); but she still said

[013-018] that no one knew where their death lay in wait, and that we were not to

[013-019] think hers was near. We did not think it, but we knew it, as we saw her

[013-020] fading away.

[013-021] “Well, my dear, it’s very foolish of me, I know, when in all likelihood

[013-022] I am so near seeing her again.

[013-023] “And only think, love! the very day after her death—for she did not live

[013-024] quite a twelvemonth after Peter went away—the very day after—came a

[013-025] parcel for her from India—from her poor boy. It was a large, soft,

[013-026] white Indian shawl, with just a little narrow border all round; just

[013-027] what my mother would have liked.

[013-028] “We thought it might rouse my father, for he had sat with her hand in

[013-029] his all night long; so Deborah took it in to him, and Peter’s letter to

[013-030] her, and all. At first, he took no notice; and we tried to make a kind

[013-031] of light careless talk about the shawl, opening it out and admiring it.

[013-032] Then, suddenly, he got up, and spoke: ‘She shall be buried in it,’ he

[013-033] said; ‘Peter shall have that comfort; and she would have liked it.’

[013-034] “Well, perhaps it was not reasonable, but what could we do or say? One

[013-035] gives people in grief their own way. He took it up and felt it: ‘It is

[013-036] just such a shawl as she wished for when she was married, and her mother

[013-037] did not give it her. I did not know of it till after, or she should

[013-038] have had it—she should; but she shall have it now.’

[013-039] “My mother looked so lovely in her death! She was always pretty, and

[013-040] now she looked fair, and waxen, and young—younger than Deborah, as she

[013-041] stood trembling and shivering by her. We decked her in the long soft

[013-042] folds; she lay smiling, as if pleased; and people came—all [[cranford-town|Cranford]]

[013-043] came—to beg to see her, for they had loved her dearly, as well they

[013-044] might; and the countrywomen brought posies; old Clare’s wife brought

[013-045] some white violets and begged they might lie on her breast.

[013-046] “Deborah said to me, the day of my mother’s funeral, that if she had a

[013-047] hundred offers she never would marry and leave my father. It was not

[013-048] very likely she would have so many—I don’t know that she had one; but it

[013-049] was not less to her credit to say so. She was such a daughter to my

[013-050] father as I think there never was before or since. His eyes failed him,

[013-051] and she read book after book, and wrote, and copied, and was always at

[013-052] his service in any parish business. She could do many more things than

[013-053] my poor mother could; she even once wrote a letter to the bishop for my

[013-054] father. But he missed my mother sorely; the whole parish noticed it.

[013-055] Not that he was less active; I think he was more so, and more patient in

[013-056] helping every one. I did all I could to set Deborah at liberty to be

[013-057] with him; for I knew I was good for little, and that my best work in the

[013-058] world was to do odd jobs quietly, and set others at liberty. But my

[013-059] father was a changed man.”

[013-060] “Did Mr Peter ever come home?”

[013-061] “Yes, once. He came home a lieutenant; he did not get to be admiral.

[013-062] And he and my father were such friends! My father took him into every

[013-063] house in the parish, he was so proud of him. He never walked out

[013-064] without Peter’s arm to lean upon. Deborah used to smile (I don’t think

[013-065] we ever laughed again after my mother’s death), and say she was quite

[013-066] put in a corner. Not but what my father always wanted her when there

[013-067] was [[letter-writing]] or reading to be done, or anything to be settled.”

[013-068] “And then?” said I, after a pause.

[013-069] “Then Peter went to sea again; and, by-and-by, my father died, blessing

[013-070] us both, and thanking Deborah for all she had been to him; and, of

[013-071] course, our circumstances were changed; and, instead of living at the

[013-072] rectory, and keeping three maids and a man, we had to come to this small

[013-073] house, and be content with a servant-of-all-work; but, as Deborah used

[013-074] to say, we have always lived genteelly, even if circumstances have

[013-075] compelled us to simplicity. Poor Deborah!”

[013-076] “And Mr Peter?” asked I.

[013-077] “Oh, there was some great war in India—I forget what they call it—and we

[013-078] have never heard of Peter since then. I believe he is dead myself; and

[013-079] it sometimes fidgets me that we have never put on mourning for him. And

[013-080] then again, when I sit by myself, and all the house is still, I think I

[013-081] hear his step coming up the street, and my heart begins to flutter and

[013-082] beat; but the sound always goes past—and Peter never comes.

[013-083] “That’s [[martha|Martha]] back? No! _I’ll_ go, my dear; I can always find my way

[013-084] in the dark, you know. And a blow of fresh air at the door will do my

[013-085] head good, and it’s rather got a trick of aching.”

[013-086] So she pattered off. I had lighted the candle, to give the room a

[013-087] cheerful appearance against her return.

[013-088] “Was it Martha?” asked I.

[013-089] “Yes. And I am rather uncomfortable, for I heard such a strange noise,

[013-090] just as I was opening the door.”

[013-091] “Where?” I asked, for her eyes were round with affright.

[013-092] “In the street—just outside—it sounded like”—

[013-093] “Talking?” I put in, as she hesitated a little.

[013-094] “No! kissing”—

[013-095] CHAPTER VII.

[013-096] VISITING

[013-097] ONE morning, as [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]] and I sat at our work—it was before twelve

[013-098] o’clock, and Miss Matty had not changed the cap with yellow ribbons that

[013-099] had been [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]]’s best, and which Miss Matty was now wearing out

[013-100] in private, putting on the one made in imitation of [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s at

[013-101] all times when she expected to be seen—Martha came up, and asked if Miss

[013-102] Betty Barker might speak to her mistress. Miss Matty assented, and

[013-103] quickly disappeared to change the yellow ribbons, while [[miss-barker|Miss Barker]] came

[013-104] upstairs; but, as she had forgotten her spectacles, and was rather

[013-105] flurried by the unusual time of the visit, I was not surprised to see

[013-106] her return with one cap on the top of the other. She was quite

[013-107] unconscious of it herself, and looked at us, with bland satisfaction.

[013-108] Nor do I think Miss Barker perceived it; for, putting aside the little

[013-109] circumstance that she was not so young as she had been, she was very

[013-110] much absorbed in her errand, which she delivered herself of with an

[013-111] oppressive modesty that found vent in endless apologies.

[013-112] Miss Betty Barker was the daughter of the old clerk at Cranford who had

[013-113] officiated in Mr Jenkyns’s time. She and her sister had had pretty good

[013-114] situations as ladies’ maids, and had saved money enough to set up a

[013-115] milliner’s shop, which had been patronised by the ladies in the

[013-116] neighbourhood. Lady Arley, for instance, would occasionally give Miss

[013-117] Barkers the pattern of an old cap of hers, which they immediately copied

[013-118] and circulated among the _élite_ of Cranford. I say the _élite_, for

[013-119] Miss Barkers had caught the trick of the place, and piqued themselves

[013-120] upon their “[[aristocracy-in-cranford|aristocratic connection]].” They would not sell their caps

[013-121] and ribbons to anyone without a pedigree. Many a farmer’s wife or

[013-122] daughter turned away huffed from Miss Barkers’ select millinery, and

[013-123] went rather to the universal shop, where the profits of brown soap and

[013-124] moist sugar enabled the proprietor to go straight to (Paris, he said,

[013-125] until he found his customers too patriotic and John Bullish to wear what

[013-126] the Mounseers wore) London, where, as he often told his customers, Queen

[013-127] Adelaide had appeared, only the very week before, in a cap exactly like

[013-128] the one he showed them, trimmed with yellow and blue ribbons, and had

[013-129] been complimented by King William on the becoming nature of her

[013-130] head-dress.

[013-131] Miss Barkers, who confined themselves to truth, and did not approve of

[013-132] miscellaneous customers, throve notwithstanding. They were

[013-133] self-denying, good people. Many a time have I seen the eldest of them

[013-134] (she that had been maid to Mrs Jamieson) carrying out some delicate mess

[013-135] to a poor person. They only aped their betters in having “nothing to

[013-136] do” with the class immediately below theirs. And when Miss Barker died,

[013-137] their profits and income were found to be such that Miss Betty was

[013-138] justified in shutting up shop and retiring from business. She also (as

[013-139] I think I have before said) set up her cow; a mark of respectability in

[013-140] Cranford almost as decided as setting up a gig is among some people.

[013-141] She dressed finer than any lady in Cranford; and we did not wonder at

[013-142] it; for it was understood that she was wearing out all the bonnets and

[013-143] caps and outrageous ribbons which had once formed her stock-in-trade.

[013-144] It was five or six years since she had given up shop, so in any other

[013-145] place than Cranford her dress might have been considered _passée_.

[013-146] And now Miss Betty Barker had called to invite Miss Matty to [[tea-drinking|tea]] at her

[013-147] house on the following Tuesday. She gave me also an impromptu

[013-148] invitation, as I happened to be a visitor—though I could see she had a

[013-149] little fear lest, since my father had gone to live in Drumble, he might

[013-150] have engaged in that “horrid cotton trade,” and so dragged his family

[013-151] down out of “aristocratic society.” She prefaced this invitation with

[013-152] so many apologies that she quite excited my curiosity. “Her

[013-153] presumption” was to be excused. What had she been doing? She seemed so

[013-154] overpowered by it I could only think that she had been writing to Queen

[013-155] Adelaide to ask for a receipt for washing lace; but the act which she so

[013-156] characterised was only an invitation she had carried to her sister’s

[013-157] former mistress, Mrs Jamieson. “Her former occupation considered, could

[013-158] Miss Matty excuse the liberty?” Ah! thought I, she has found out that

[013-159] double cap, and is going to rectify Miss Matty’s head-dress. No! it was

[013-160] simply to extend her invitation to Miss Matty and to me. Miss Matty

[013-161] bowed acceptance; and I wondered that, in the graceful action, she did

[013-162] not feel the unusual weight and extraordinary height of her head-dress.

[013-163] But I do not think she did, for she recovered her balance, and went on

[013-164] talking to Miss Betty in a kind, condescending manner, very different

[013-165] from the fidgety way she would have had if she had suspected how

[013-166] singular her appearance was. “Mrs Jamieson is coming, I think you

[013-167] said?” asked Miss Matty.
