---
description: "“It is very gratifying to me,” whispered Miss Barker at the card-table to her three opponents, whom, notwithstanding he."
id: ch15
label: "Section 15"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 15

[015-001] [Picture: The temptation of the comfortable arm-chair had been too much

[015-002] for her]

[015-003] “It is very gratifying to me,” whispered [[miss-barker|Miss Barker]] at the card-table

[015-004] to her three opponents, whom, notwithstanding her ignorance of the game,

[015-005] she was “basting” most unmercifully—“very gratifying indeed, to see how

[015-006] completely [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]] feels at home in my poor little dwelling; she

[015-007] could not have paid me a greater compliment.”

[015-008] Miss Barker provided me with some [[reading-in-cranford|literature]] in the shape of three or

[015-009] four handsomely-bound fashion-books ten or twelve years old, observing,

[015-010] as she put a little table and a candle for my especial benefit, that she

[015-011] knew young people liked to look at pictures. Carlo lay and snorted, and

[015-012] started at his mistress’s feet. He, too, was quite at home.

[015-013] The card-table was an animated scene to watch; four ladies’ heads, with

[015-014] niddle-noddling caps, all nearly meeting over the middle of the table in

[015-015] their eagerness to whisper quick enough and loud enough: and every now

[015-016] and then came Miss Barker’s “Hush, ladies! if you please, hush! Mrs

[015-017] Jamieson is asleep.”

[015-018] It was very difficult to steer clear between [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]]’s deafness

[015-019] and Mrs Jamieson’s sleepiness. But Miss Barker managed her arduous task

[015-020] well. She repeated the whisper to Mrs Forrester, distorting her face

[015-021] considerably, in order to show, by the motions of her lips, what was

[015-022] said; and then she smiled kindly all round at us, and murmured to

[015-023] herself, “Very gratifying, indeed; I wish my poor sister had been alive

[015-024] to see this day.”

[015-025] Presently the door was thrown wide open; Carlo started to his feet, with

[015-026] a loud snapping bark, and Mrs Jamieson awoke: or, perhaps, she had not

[015-027] been asleep—as she said almost directly, the room had been so light she

[015-028] had been glad to keep her eyes shut, but had been listening with great

[015-029] interest to all our amusing and agreeable conversation. Peggy came in

[015-030] once more, red with importance. Another tray! “Oh, gentility!” thought

[015-031] I, “can you endure this last shock?” For Miss Barker had ordered (nay,

[015-032] I doubt not, prepared, although she did say, “Why, Peggy, what have you

[015-033] brought us?” and looked pleasantly surprised at the unexpected pleasure)

[015-034] all sorts of good things for supper—scalloped oysters, potted lobsters,

[015-035] jelly, a dish called “little Cupids” (which was in great favour with the

[015-036] [[cranford-town|Cranford]] ladies, although too expensive to be given, except on solemn

[015-037] and state occasions—macaroons sopped in brandy, I should have called it,

[015-038] if I had not known its more refined and classical name). In short, we

[015-039] were evidently to be feasted with all that was sweetest and best; and

[015-040] we thought it better to submit graciously, even at the cost of our

[015-041] gentility—which never ate suppers in general, but which, like most

[015-042] non-supper-eaters, was particularly hungry on all special occasions.

[015-043] Miss Barker, in her former sphere, had, I daresay, been made acquainted

[015-044] with the beverage they call cherry-brandy. We none of us had ever seen

[015-045] such a thing, and rather shrank back when she proffered it us—“just a

[015-046] little, leetle glass, ladies; after the oysters and lobsters, you know.

[015-047] Shell-fish are sometimes thought not very wholesome.” We all shook our

[015-048] heads like female mandarins; but, at last, Mrs Jamieson suffered herself

[015-049] to be persuaded, and we followed her lead. It was not exactly

[015-050] unpalatable, though so hot and so strong that we thought ourselves bound

[015-051] to give evidence that we were not accustomed to such things by coughing

[015-052] terribly—almost as strangely as Miss Barker had done, before we were

[015-053] admitted by Peggy.

[015-054] “It’s very strong,” said [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]], as she put down her empty glass; “I

[015-055] do believe there’s spirit in it.”

[015-056] “Only a little drop—just necessary to make it keep,” said Miss Barker.

[015-057] “You know we put brandy-pepper over our preserves to make them keep. I

[015-058] often feel tipsy myself from eating damson tart.”

[015-059] I question whether damson tart would have opened Mrs Jamieson’s heart as

[015-060] the cherry-brandy did; but she told us of a coming event, respecting

[015-061] which she had been quite silent till that moment.

[015-062] “My sister-in-law, [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]], is coming to stay with me.”

[015-063] There was a chorus of “Indeed!” and then a pause. Each one rapidly

[015-064] reviewed her wardrobe, as to its fitness to appear in the presence of a

[015-065] baron’s [[widowhood-in-cranford|widow]]; for, of course, a series of small festivals were always

[015-066] held in Cranford on the arrival of a visitor at any of our friends’

[015-067] houses. We felt very pleasantly excited on the present occasion.

[015-068] Not long after this the maids and the lanterns were announced. Mrs

[015-069] Jamieson had the sedan-chair, which had squeezed itself into Miss

[015-070] Barker’s narrow lobby with some difficulty, and most literally “stopped

[015-071] the way.” It required some skilful manœuvring on the part of the old

[015-072] chairmen (shoemakers by day, but when summoned to carry the sedan

[015-073] dressed up in a strange old livery—long great-coats, with small capes,

[015-074] coeval with the sedan, and similar to the dress of the class in

[015-075] Hogarth’s pictures) to edge, and back, and try at it again, and finally

[015-076] to succeed in carrying their burden out of Miss Barker’s front door.

[015-077] Then we heard their quick pit-a-pat along the quiet little street as we

[015-078] put on our calashes and pinned up our gowns; Miss Barker hovering about

[015-079] us with offers of help, which, if she had not remembered her former

[015-080] occupation, and wished us to forget it, would have been much more

[015-081] pressing.

[015-082] CHAPTER VIII.

[015-083] “YOUR LADYSHIP”

[015-084] EARLY the next morning—directly after twelve—Miss Pole made her

[015-085] appearance at [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]]’s. Some very trifling piece of business was

[015-086] alleged as a reason for the call; but there was evidently something

[015-087] behind. At last out it came.

[015-088] “By the way, you’ll think I’m strangely ignorant; but, do you really

[015-089] know, I am puzzled how we ought to address Lady Glenmire. Do you say,

[015-090] ‘Your Ladyship,’ where you would say ‘you’ to a common person? I have

[015-091] been puzzling all morning; and are we to say ‘My Lady,’ instead of

[015-092] ‘Ma’am?’ Now you knew Lady Arley—will you kindly tell me the most

[015-093] correct way of speaking to the peerage?”

[015-094] Poor Miss Matty! she took off her spectacles and she put them on

[015-095] again—but how Lady Arley was addressed, she could not remember.

[015-096] “It is so long ago,” she said. “Dear! dear! how stupid I am! I don’t

[015-097] think I ever saw her more than twice. I know we used to call Sir Peter,

[015-098] ‘Sir Peter’—but he came much oftener to see us than Lady Arley did.

[015-099] Deborah would have known in a minute. ‘My lady’—‘your ladyship.’ It

[015-100] sounds very strange, and as if it was not natural. I never thought of

[015-101] it before; but, now you have named it, I am all in a puzzle.”

[015-102] It was very certain Miss Pole would obtain no wise decision from Miss

[015-103] Matty, who got more bewildered every moment, and more perplexed as to

[015-104] etiquettes of address.

[015-105] “Well, I really think,” said Miss Pole, “I had better just go and tell

[015-106] Mrs Forrester about our little difficulty. One sometimes grows nervous;

[015-107] and yet one would not have Lady Glenmire think we were quite ignorant of

[015-108] the etiquettes of high life in Cranford.”

[015-109] “And will you just step in here, dear Miss Pole, as you come back,

[015-110] please, and tell me what you decide upon? Whatever you and Mrs

[015-111] Forrester fix upon, will be quite right, I’m sure. ‘Lady Arley,’ ‘Sir

[015-112] Peter,’” said Miss Matty to herself, trying to recall the old forms of

[015-113] words.

[015-114] “Who is Lady Glenmire?” asked I.

[015-115] “Oh, she’s the widow of Mr Jamieson—that’s Mrs Jamieson’s late husband,

[015-116] you know—widow of his eldest brother. Mrs Jamieson was a Miss Walker,

[015-117] daughter of Governor Walker. ‘Your ladyship.’ My dear, if they fix on

[015-118] that way of speaking, you must just let me practice a little on you

[015-119] first, for I shall feel so foolish and hot saying it the first time to

[015-120] Lady Glenmire.”

[015-121] It was really a relief to Miss Matty when Mrs Jamieson came on a very

[015-122] unpolite errand. I notice that apathetic people have more quiet

[015-123] impertinence than others; and Mrs Jamieson came now to insinuate pretty

[015-124] plainly that she did not particularly wish that the Cranford ladies

[015-125] should call upon her sister-in-law. I can hardly say how she made this

[015-126] clear; for I grew very indignant and warm, while with slow deliberation

[015-127] she was explaining her wishes to Miss Matty, who, a true lady herself,

[015-128] could hardly understand the feeling which made Mrs Jamieson wish to

[015-129] appear to her noble sister-in-law as if she only visited “county”

[015-130] families. Miss Matty remained puzzled and perplexed long after I had

[015-131] found out the object of Mrs Jamieson’s visit.

[015-132] When she did understand the drift of the honourable lady’s call, it was

[015-133] pretty to see with what quiet dignity she received the intimation thus

[015-134] uncourteously given. She was not in the least hurt—she was of too

[015-135] gentle a spirit for that; nor was she exactly conscious of disapproving

[015-136] of Mrs Jamieson’s conduct; but there was something of this feeling in

[015-137] her mind, I am sure, which made her pass from the subject to others in a

[015-138] less flurried and more composed manner than usual. Mrs Jamieson was,

[015-139] indeed, the more flurried of the two, and I could see she was glad to

[015-140] take her leave.

[015-141] A little while afterwards Miss Pole returned, red and indignant. “Well!

[015-142] to be sure! You’ve had Mrs Jamieson here, I find from [[martha|Martha]]; and we

[015-143] are not to call on Lady Glenmire. Yes! I met Mrs Jamieson, half-way

[015-144] between here and Mrs Forrester’s, and she told me; she took me so by

[015-145] surprise, I had nothing to say. I wish I had thought of something very

[015-146] sharp and sarcastic; I dare say I shall to-night. And Lady Glenmire is

[015-147] but the widow of a Scotch baron after all! I went on to look at Mrs

[015-148] Forrester’s Peerage, to see who this lady was, that is to be kept under

[015-149] a glass case: widow of a Scotch peer—never sat in the House of Lords—and

[015-150] as poor as Job, I dare say; and she—fifth daughter of some Mr Campbell

[015-151] or other. You are the daughter of a rector, at any rate, and related to

[015-152] the Arleys; and Sir Peter might have been Viscount Arley, every one

[015-153] says.”

[015-154] Miss Matty tried to soothe Miss Pole, but in vain. That lady, usually

[015-155] so kind and good-humoured, was now in a full flow of anger.

[015-156] “And I went and ordered a cap this morning, to be quite ready,” said she

[015-157] at last, letting out the secret which gave sting to Mrs Jamieson’s

[015-158] intimation. “Mrs Jamieson shall see if it is so easy to get me to make

[015-159] fourth at a pool when she has none of her fine Scotch relations with

[015-160] her!”

[015-161] In coming out of church, the first Sunday on which Lady Glenmire

[015-162] appeared in Cranford, we sedulously talked together, and turned our

[015-163] backs on Mrs Jamieson and her guest. If we might not call on her, we

[015-164] would not even look at her, though we were dying with curiosity to know

[015-165] what she was like. We had the comfort of questioning Martha in the

[015-166] afternoon. Martha did not belong to a sphere of society whose

[015-167] observation could be an implied compliment to Lady Glenmire, and Martha

[015-168] had made good use of her eyes.

[015-169] “Well, ma’am! is it the little lady with Mrs Jamieson, you mean? I

[015-170] thought you would like more to know how young Mrs Smith was dressed; her

[015-171] being a bride.” (Mrs Smith was the butcher’s wife).

[015-172] Miss Pole said, “Good gracious me! as if we cared about a Mrs Smith;”

[015-173] but was silent as Martha resumed her speech.

[015-174] “The little lady in Mrs Jamieson’s pew had on, ma’am, rather an old

[015-175] black silk, and a shepherd’s plaid cloak, ma’am, and very bright black

[015-176] eyes she had, ma’am, and a pleasant, sharp face; not over young, ma’am,

[015-177] but yet, I should guess, younger than Mrs Jamieson herself. She looked

[015-178] up and down the church, like a bird, and nipped up her petticoats, when

[015-179] she came out, as quick and sharp as ever I see. I’ll tell you what,

[015-180] ma’am, she’s more like Mrs Deacon, at the ‘Coach and Horses,’ nor any

[015-181] one.”
