---
description: "“Hush, Martha!” said Miss Matty, “that’s not respectful."
id: ch16
label: "Section 16"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 16

[016-001] “Hush, [[martha|Martha]]!” said [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]], “that’s not respectful.”

[016-002] “Isn’t it, ma’am? I beg pardon, I’m sure; but Jem Hearn said so as

[016-003] well. He said, she was just such a sharp, stirring sort of a body”—

[016-004] “Lady,” said [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]].

[016-005] “Lady—as Mrs Deacon.”

[016-006] Another Sunday passed away, and we still averted our eyes from Mrs

[016-007] Jamieson and her guest, and made remarks to ourselves that we thought

[016-008] were very severe—almost too much so. Miss Matty was evidently uneasy at

[016-009] our sarcastic manner of speaking.

[016-010] Perhaps by this time [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]] had found out that [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s was

[016-011] not the gayest, liveliest house in the world; perhaps Mrs Jamieson had

[016-012] found out that most of the county families were in London, and that

[016-013] those who remained in the country were not so alive as they might have

[016-014] been to the circumstance of Lady Glenmire being in their neighbourhood.

[016-015] Great events spring out of small causes; so I will not pretend to say

[016-016] what induced Mrs Jamieson to alter her determination of excluding the

[016-017] [[cranford-town|Cranford]] ladies, and send notes of invitation all round for a small

[016-018] party on the following Tuesday. Mr Mulliner himself brought them round.

[016-019] He _would_ always ignore the fact of there being a back door to any

[016-020] house, and gave a louder rat-tat than his mistress, Mrs Jamieson. He

[016-021] had three little notes, which he carried in a large basket, in order to

[016-022] impress his mistress with an idea of their great weight, though they

[016-023] might easily have gone into his waistcoat pocket.

[016-024] Miss Matty and I quietly decided that we would have a previous

[016-025] engagement at home: it was the evening on which Miss Matty usually made

[016-026] candle-lighters of all the notes and [[letter-writing|letters]] of the week; for on Mondays

[016-027] her accounts were always made straight—not a penny owing from the week

[016-028] before; so, by a natural arrangement, making candle-lighters fell upon a

[016-029] Tuesday evening, and gave us a legitimate excuse for declining Mrs

[016-030] Jamieson’s invitation. But before our answer was written, in came Miss

[016-031] Pole, with an open note in her hand.

[016-032] “So!” she said. “Ah! I see you have got your note, too. Better late

[016-033] than never. I could have told my Lady Glenmire she would be glad enough

[016-034] of our society before a fortnight was over.”

[016-035] “Yes,” said Miss Matty, “we’re asked for Tuesday evening. And perhaps

[016-036] you would just kindly bring your work across and drink [[tea-drinking|tea]] with us that

[016-037] night. It is my usual regular time for looking over the last week’s

[016-038] bills, and notes, and letters, and making candle-lighters of them; but

[016-039] that does not seem quite reason enough for saying I have a previous

[016-040] engagement at home, though I meant to make it do. Now, if you would

[016-041] come, my conscience would be quite at ease, and luckily the note is not

[016-042] written yet.”

[016-043] I saw Miss Pole’s countenance change while Miss Matty was speaking.

[016-044] “Don’t you mean to go then?” asked she.

[016-045] “Oh, no!” said, Miss Matty quietly. “You don’t either, I suppose?”

[016-046] “I don’t know,” replied Miss Pole. “Yes, I think I do,” said she,

[016-047] rather briskly; and on seeing Miss Matty look surprised, she added, “You

[016-048] see, one would not like Mrs Jamieson to think that anything she could

[016-049] do, or say, was of consequence enough to give offence; it would be a

[016-050] kind of letting down of ourselves, that I, for one, should not like. It

[016-051] would be too flattering to Mrs Jamieson if we allowed her to suppose

[016-052] that what she had said affected us a week, nay ten days afterwards.”

[016-053] “Well! I suppose it is wrong to be hurt and annoyed so long about

[016-054] anything; and, perhaps, after all, she did not mean to vex us. But I

[016-055] must say, I could not have brought myself to say the things Mrs Jamieson

[016-056] did about our not calling. I really don’t think I shall go.”

[016-057] “Oh, come! Miss Matty, you must go; you know our friend Mrs Jamieson is

[016-058] much more phlegmatic than most people, and does not enter into the

[016-059] little delicacies of feeling which you possess in so remarkable a

[016-060] degree.”

[016-061] “I thought you possessed them, too, that day Mrs Jamieson called to tell

[016-062] us not to go,” said Miss Matty innocently.

[016-063] But Miss Pole, in addition to her delicacies of feeling, possessed a

[016-064] very smart cap, which she was anxious to show to an admiring world; and

[016-065] so she seemed to forget all her angry words uttered not a fortnight

[016-066] before, and to be ready to act on what she called the great Christian

[016-067] principle of “Forgive and forget”; and she lectured dear Miss Matty so

[016-068] long on this head that she absolutely ended by assuring her it was her

[016-069] duty, as a deceased rector’s daughter, to buy a new cap and go to the

[016-070] party at Mrs Jamieson’s. So “we were most happy to accept,” instead of

[016-071] “regretting that we were obliged to decline.”

[016-072] [Picture: Mr Mulliner]

[016-073] The expenditure on dress in Cranford was principally in that one article

[016-074] referred to. If the heads were buried in smart new caps, the ladies

[016-075] were like ostriches, and cared not what became of their bodies. Old

[016-076] gowns, white and venerable collars, any number of brooches, up and down

[016-077] and everywhere (some with dogs’ eyes painted in them; some that were

[016-078] like small picture-frames with mausoleums and weeping-willows neatly

[016-079] executed in hair inside; some, again, with miniatures of ladies and

[016-080] gentlemen sweetly smiling out of a nest of stiff muslin), old brooches

[016-081] for a permanent ornament, and new caps to suit the fashion of the

[016-082] day—the ladies of Cranford always dressed with chaste elegance and

[016-083] propriety, as [[miss-barker|Miss Barker]] once prettily expressed it.

[016-084] And with three new caps, and a greater array of brooches than had ever

[016-085] been seen together at one time since Cranford was a town, did Mrs

[016-086] Forrester, and Miss Matty, and Miss Pole appear on that memorable

[016-087] Tuesday evening. I counted seven brooches myself on Miss Pole’s dress.

[016-088] Two were fixed negligently in her cap (one was a butterfly made of

[016-089] Scotch pebbles, which a vivid imagination might believe to be the real

[016-090] insect); one fastened her net neckerchief; one her collar; one

[016-091] ornamented the front of her gown, midway between her throat and waist;

[016-092] and another adorned the point of her stomacher. Where the seventh was I

[016-093] have forgotten, but it was somewhere about her, I am sure.

[016-094] But I am getting on too fast, in describing the dresses of the company.

[016-095] I should first relate the gathering on the way to Mrs Jamieson’s. That

[016-096] lady lived in a large house just outside the town. A road which had

[016-097] known what it was to be a street ran right before the house, which

[016-098] opened out upon it without any intervening garden or court. Whatever

[016-099] the sun was about, he never shone on the front of that house. To be

[016-100] sure, the living-rooms were at the back, looking on to a pleasant

[016-101] garden; the front windows only belonged to kitchens and housekeepers’

[016-102] rooms, and pantries, and in one of them Mr Mulliner was reported to sit.

[016-103] Indeed, looking askance, we often saw the back of a head covered with

[016-104] hair powder, which also extended itself over his coat-collar down to his

[016-105] very waist; and this imposing back was always engaged in reading the _St

[016-106] James’s Chronicle_, opened wide, which, in some degree, accounted for

[016-107] the length of time the said newspaper was in reaching us—equal

[016-108] subscribers with Mrs Jamieson, though, in right of her honourableness,

[016-109] she always had the reading of it first. This very Tuesday, the delay in

[016-110] forwarding the last number had been particularly aggravating; just when

[016-111] both Miss Pole and Miss Matty, the former more especially, had been

[016-112] wanting to see it, in order to coach up the Court news ready for the

[016-113] evening’s interview with [[aristocracy-in-cranford|aristocracy]]. Miss Pole told us she had

[016-114] absolutely taken time by the forelock, and been dressed by five o’clock,

[016-115] in order to be ready if the _St James’s Chronicle_ should come in at the

[016-116] last moment—the very _St James’s Chronicle_ which the powdered head was

[016-117] tranquilly and composedly reading as we passed the accustomed window

[016-118] this evening.

[016-119] “The impudence of the man!” said Miss Pole, in a low indignant whisper.

[016-120] “I should like to ask him whether his mistress pays her quarter-share

[016-121] for his exclusive use.”

[016-122] We looked at her in admiration of the courage of her thought; for Mr

[016-123] Mulliner was an object of great awe to all of us. He seemed never to

[016-124] have forgotten his condescension in coming to live at Cranford. Miss

[016-125] Jenkyns, at times, had stood forth as the undaunted champion of her sex,

[016-126] and spoken to him on terms of equality; but even [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]] could get

[016-127] no higher. In his pleasantest and most gracious moods he looked like a

[016-128] sulky cockatoo. He did not speak except in gruff monosyllables. He

[016-129] would wait in the hall when we begged him not to wait, and then look

[016-130] deeply offended because we had kept him there, while, with trembling,

[016-131] hasty hands we prepared ourselves for appearing in company.

[016-132] Miss Pole ventured on a small joke as we went upstairs, intended, though

[016-133] addressed to us, to afford Mr Mulliner some slight amusement. We all

[016-134] smiled, in order to seem as if we felt at our ease, and timidly looked

[016-135] for Mr Mulliner’s sympathy. Not a muscle of that wooden face had

[016-136] relaxed; and we were grave in an instant.

[016-137] Mrs Jamieson’s drawing-room was cheerful; the evening sun came streaming

[016-138] into it, and the large square window was clustered round with flowers.

[016-139] The furniture was white and gold; not the later style, Louis Quatorze, I

[016-140] think they call it, all shells and twirls; no, Mrs Jamieson’s chairs and

[016-141] tables had not a curve or bend about them. The chair and table legs

[016-142] diminished as they neared the ground, and were straight and square in

[016-143] all their corners. The chairs were all a-row against the walls, with

[016-144] the exception of four or five which stood in a circle round the fire.

[016-145] They were railed with white bars across the back and knobbed with gold;

[016-146] neither the railings nor the knobs invited to ease. There was a

[016-147] japanned table devoted to [[reading-in-cranford|literature]], on which lay a Bible, a Peerage,

[016-148] and a Prayer-Book. There was another square Pembroke table dedicated to

[016-149] the Fine Arts, on which were a kaleidoscope, conversation-cards,

[016-150] puzzle-cards (tied together to an interminable length with faded pink

[016-151] satin ribbon), and a box painted in fond imitation of the drawings which

[016-152] decorate tea-chests. Carlo lay on the worsted-worked rug, and

[016-153] ungraciously barked at us as we entered. Mrs Jamieson stood up, giving

[016-154] us each a torpid smile of welcome, and looking helplessly beyond us at

[016-155] Mr Mulliner, as if she hoped he would place us in chairs, for, if he did

[016-156] not, she never could. I suppose he thought we could find our way to the

[016-157] circle round the fire, which reminded me of Stonehenge, I don’t know

[016-158] why. Lady Glenmire came to the rescue of our hostess, and, somehow or

[016-159] other, we found ourselves for the first time placed agreeably, and not

[016-160] formally, in Mrs Jamieson’s house. Lady Glenmire, now we had time to

[016-161] look at her, proved to be a bright little woman of middle age, who had

[016-162] been very pretty in the days of her youth, and who was even yet very

[016-163] pleasant-looking. I saw Miss Pole appraising her dress in the first

[016-164] five minutes, and I take her word when she said the next day—

[016-165] “My dear! ten pounds would have purchased every stitch she had on—lace

[016-166] and all.”

[016-167] It was pleasant to suspect that a peeress could be poor, and partly

[016-168] reconciled us to the fact that her husband had never sat in the House of

[016-169] Lords; which, when we first heard of it, seemed a kind of swindling us

[016-170] out of our prospects on false pretences; a sort of “A Lord and No Lord”

[016-171] business.
