---
description: "We were all very silent at first."
id: ch17
label: "Section 17"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 17

[017-001] We were all very silent at first. We were thinking what we could talk

[017-002] about, that should be high enough to interest My Lady. There had been a

[017-003] rise in the price of sugar, which, as preserving-time was near, was a

[017-004] piece of intelligence to all our house-keeping hearts, and would have

[017-005] been the natural topic if [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]] had not been by. But we were

[017-006] not sure if the peerage ate preserves—much less knew how they were made.

[017-007] At last, [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]], who had always a great deal of courage and _savoir

[017-008] faire_, spoke to Lady Glenmire, who on her part had seemed just as much

[017-009] puzzled to know how to break the silence as we were.

[017-010] “Has your ladyship been to Court lately?” asked she; and then gave a

[017-011] little glance round at us, half timid and half triumphant, as much as to

[017-012] say, “See how judiciously I have chosen a subject befitting the rank of

[017-013] the stranger.”

[017-014] “I never was there in my life,” said Lady Glenmire, with a broad Scotch

[017-015] accent, but in a very sweet voice. And then, as if she had been too

[017-016] abrupt, she added: “We very seldom went to London—only twice, in fact,

[017-017] during all my married life; and before I was married my father had far

[017-018] too large a family” (fifth daughter of Mr Campbell was in all our minds,

[017-019] I am sure) “to take us often from our home, even to Edinburgh. Ye’ll

[017-020] have been in Edinburgh, maybe?” said she, suddenly brightening up with

[017-021] the hope of a common interest. We had none of us been there; but Miss

[017-022] Pole had an uncle who once had passed a night there, which was very

[017-023] pleasant.

[017-024] [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]], meanwhile, was absorbed in wonder why Mr Mulliner did not

[017-025] bring the [[tea-drinking|tea]]; and at length the wonder oozed out of her mouth.

[017-026] “I had better ring the bell, my dear, had not I?” said Lady Glenmire

[017-027] briskly.

[017-028] “No—I think not—Mulliner does not like to be hurried.”

[017-029] We should have liked our tea, for we dined at an earlier hour than Mrs

[017-030] Jamieson. I suspect Mr Mulliner had to finish the _St James’s

[017-031] Chronicle_ before he chose to trouble himself about tea. His mistress

[017-032] fidgeted and fidgeted, and kept saying, “I can’t think why Mulliner does

[017-033] not bring tea. I can’t think what he can be about.” And Lady Glenmire

[017-034] at last grew quite impatient, but it was a pretty kind of impatience

[017-035] after all; and she rang the bell rather sharply, on receiving a

[017-036] half-permission from her sister-in-law to do so. Mr Mulliner appeared

[017-037] in dignified surprise. “Oh!” said Mrs Jamieson, “Lady Glenmire rang the

[017-038] bell; I believe it was for tea.”

[017-039] In a few minutes tea was brought. Very delicate was the china, very old

[017-040] the plate, very thin the bread and butter, and very small the lumps of

[017-041] sugar. Sugar was evidently Mrs Jamieson’s favourite economy. I

[017-042] question if the little filigree sugar-tongs, made something like

[017-043] scissors, could have opened themselves wide enough to take up an honest,

[017-044] vulgar good-sized piece; and when I tried to seize two little minnikin

[017-045] pieces at once, so as not to be detected in too many returns to the

[017-046] sugar-basin, they absolutely dropped one, with a little sharp clatter,

[017-047] quite in a malicious and unnatural manner. But before this happened we

[017-048] had had a slight disappointment. In the little silver jug was cream, in

[017-049] the larger one was milk. As soon as Mr Mulliner came in, Carlo began to

[017-050] beg, which was a thing our manners forbade us to do, though I am sure we

[017-051] were just as hungry; and Mrs Jamieson said she was certain we would

[017-052] excuse her if she gave her poor dumb Carlo his tea first. She

[017-053] accordingly mixed a saucerful for him, and put it down for him to lap;

[017-054] and then she told us how intelligent and sensible the dear little fellow

[017-055] was; he knew cream quite well, and constantly refused tea with only milk

[017-056] in it: so the milk was left for us; but we silently thought we were

[017-057] quite as intelligent and sensible as Carlo, and felt as if insult were

[017-058] added to injury when we were called upon to admire the gratitude evinced

[017-059] by his wagging his tail for the cream which should have been ours.

[017-060] After tea we thawed down into common-life subjects. We were thankful to

[017-061] Lady Glenmire for having proposed some more bread and butter, and this

[017-062] mutual want made us better acquainted with her than we should ever have

[017-063] been with talking about the Court, though Miss Pole did say she had

[017-064] hoped to know how the dear Queen was from some one who had seen her.

[017-065] The friendship begun over bread and butter extended on to cards. Lady

[017-066] Glenmire played Preference to admiration, and was a complete authority

[017-067] as to Ombre and Quadrille. Even Miss Pole quite forgot to say “my

[017-068] lady,” and “your ladyship,” and said “Basto! ma’am”; “you have Spadille,

[017-069] I believe,” just as quietly as if we had never held the great [[cranford-town|Cranford]]

[017-070] Parliament on the subject of the proper mode of addressing a peeress.

[017-071] As a proof of how thoroughly we had forgotten that we were in the

[017-072] presence of one who might have sat down to tea with a coronet, instead

[017-073] of a cap, on her head, [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]] related a curious little fact to

[017-074] Lady Glenmire—an anecdote known to the circle of her intimate friends,

[017-075] but of which even Mrs Jamieson was not aware. It related to some fine

[017-076] old lace, the sole relic of better days, which Lady Glenmire was

[017-077] admiring on Mrs Forrester’s collar.

[017-078] “Yes,” said that lady, “such lace cannot be got now for either love or

[017-079] money; made by the nuns abroad, they tell me. They say that they can’t

[017-080] make it now even there. But perhaps they can, now they’ve passed the

[017-081] Catholic Emancipation Bill. I should not wonder. But, in the meantime,

[017-082] I treasure up my lace very much. I daren’t even trust the washing of it

[017-083] to my maid” (the little [[kindness-in-cranford|charity]] school-girl I have named before, but who

[017-084] sounded well as “my maid”). “I always wash it myself. And once it had

[017-085] a narrow escape. Of course, your ladyship knows that such lace must

[017-086] never be starched or ironed. Some people wash it in sugar and water,

[017-087] and some in coffee, to make it the right yellow colour; but I myself

[017-088] have a very good receipt for washing it in milk, which stiffens it

[017-089] enough, and gives it a very good creamy colour. Well, ma’am, I had

[017-090] tacked it together (and the beauty of this fine lace is that, when it is

[017-091] wet, it goes into a very little space), and put it to soak in milk,

[017-092] when, unfortunately, I left the room; on my return, I found pussy on the

[017-093] table, looking very like a thief, but gulping very uncomfortably, as if

[017-094] she was half-choked with something she wanted to swallow and could not.

[017-095] And, would you believe it? At first I pitied her, and said ‘Poor

[017-096] pussy! poor pussy!’ till, all at once, I looked and saw the cup of milk

[017-097] empty—cleaned out! ‘You naughty cat!’ said I, and I believe I was

[017-098] provoked enough to give her a slap, which did no good, but only helped

[017-099] the lace down—just as one slaps a choking child on the back. I could

[017-100] have cried, I was so vexed; but I determined I would not give the lace

[017-101] up without a struggle for it. I hoped the lace might disagree with her,

[017-102] at any rate; but it would have been too much for Job, if he had seen, as

[017-103] I did, that cat come in, quite placid and purring, not a quarter of an

[017-104] hour after, and almost expecting to be stroked. ‘No, pussy!’ said I,

[017-105] ‘if you have any conscience you ought not to expect that!’ And then a

[017-106] thought struck me; and I rang the bell for my maid, and sent her to Mr

[017-107] Hoggins, with my compliments, and would he be kind enough to lend me one

[017-108] of his top-boots for an hour? I did not think there was anything odd in

[017-109] the message; but Jenny said the young men in the surgery laughed as if

[017-110] they would be ill at my wanting a top-boot. When it came, Jenny and I

[017-111] put pussy in, with her forefeet straight down, so that they were

[017-112] fastened, and could not scratch, and we gave her a teaspoonful of

[017-113] current-jelly in which (your ladyship must excuse me) I had mixed some

[017-114] tartar emetic. I shall never forget how anxious I was for the next

[017-115] half-hour. I took pussy to my own room, and spread a clean towel on the

[017-116] floor. I could have kissed her when she returned the lace to sight,

[017-117] very much as it had gone down. Jenny had boiling water ready, and we

[017-118] soaked it and soaked it, and spread it on a lavender-bush in the sun

[017-119] before I could touch it again, even to put it in milk. But now your

[017-120] ladyship would never guess that it had been in pussy’s inside.”

[017-121] [Picture: We gave her a teaspoonful of current-jelly]

[017-122] We found out, in the course of the evening, that Lady Glenmire was going

[017-123] to pay Mrs Jamieson a long visit, as she had given up her apartments in

[017-124] Edinburgh, and had no ties to take her back there in a hurry. On the

[017-125] whole, we were rather glad to hear this, for she had made a pleasant

[017-126] impression upon us; and it was also very comfortable to find, from

[017-127] things which dropped out in the course of conversation, that, in

[017-128] addition to many other genteel qualities, she was far removed from the

[017-129] “vulgarity of wealth.”

[017-130] “Don’t you find it very unpleasant walking?” asked Mrs Jamieson, as our

[017-131] respective servants were announced. It was a pretty regular question

[017-132] from Mrs Jamieson, who had her own carriage in the coach-house, and

[017-133] always went out in a sedan-chair to the very shortest distances. The

[017-134] answers were nearly as much a matter of course.

[017-135] “Oh dear, no! it is so pleasant and still at night!” “Such a

[017-136] refreshment after the excitement of a party!” “The stars are so

[017-137] beautiful!” This last was from [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]].

[017-138] “Are you fond of astronomy?” Lady Glenmire asked.

[017-139] “Not very,” replied Miss Matty, rather confused at the moment to

[017-140] remember which was astronomy and which was astrology—but the answer was

[017-141] true under either circumstance, for she read, and was slightly alarmed

[017-142] at Francis Moore’s astrological predictions; and, as to astronomy, in a

[017-143] private and confidential conversation, she had told me she never could

[017-144] believe that the earth was moving constantly, and that she would not

[017-145] believe it if she could, it made her feel so tired and dizzy whenever

[017-146] she thought about it.

[017-147] In our pattens we picked our way home with extra care that night, so

[017-148] refined and delicate were our perceptions after drinking tea with “my

[017-149] lady.”

[017-150] CHAPTER IX.

[017-151] SIGNOR BRUNONI

[017-152] SOON after the events of which I gave an account in my last paper, I was

[017-153] summoned home by my father’s illness; and for a time I forgot, in

[017-154] anxiety about him, to wonder how my dear friends at Cranford were

[017-155] getting on, or how Lady Glenmire could reconcile herself to the dulness

[017-156] of the long visit which she was still paying to her sister-in-law, Mrs

[017-157] Jamieson. When my father grew a little stronger I accompanied him to the

[017-158] seaside, so that altogether I seemed banished from Cranford, and was

[017-159] deprived of the opportunity of hearing any chance intelligence of the

[017-160] dear little town for the greater part of that year.

[017-161] Late in November—when we had returned home again, and my father was once

[017-162] more in good health—I received a letter from Miss Matty; and a very

[017-163] mysterious letter it was. She began many sentences without ending them,

[017-164] running them one into another, in much the same confused sort of way in

[017-165] which written words run together on blotting-paper. All I could make

[017-166] out was that, if my father was better (which she hoped he was), and

[017-167] would take warning and wear a great-coat from Michaelmas to Lady-day, if

[017-168] turbans were in fashion, could I tell her? Such a piece of gaiety was

[017-169] going to happen as had not been seen or known of since Wombwell’s lions

[017-170] came, when one of them ate a little child’s arm; and she was, perhaps,

[017-171] too old to care about dress, but a new cap she must have; and, having

[017-172] heard that turbans were worn, and some of the county families likely to

[017-173] come, she would like to look tidy, if I would bring her a cap from the

[017-174] milliner I employed; and oh, dear! how careless of her to forget that

[017-175] she wrote to beg I would come and pay her a visit next Tuesday; when she

[017-176] hoped to have something to offer me in the way of amusement, which she

[017-177] would not now more particularly describe, only sea-green was her

[017-178] favourite colour. So she ended her letter; but in a P.S. she added, she

[017-179] thought she might as well tell me what was the peculiar attraction to

[017-180] Cranford just now; Signor Brunoni was going to exhibit his wonderful

[017-181] magic in [[the-assembly-rooms|the Cranford Assembly Rooms]] on Wednesday and Friday evening in

[017-182] the following week.
