---
description: "Really I do not know how much was true or false in the reports which flew about like wildfire just at this time; but it."
id: ch20
label: "Section 20"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 20

[020-001] Really I do not know how much was true or false in the reports which

[020-002] flew about like wildfire just at this time; but it seemed to me then

[020-003] that there was every reason to believe that at Mardon (a small town

[020-004] about eight miles from [[cranford-town|Cranford]]) houses and shops were entered by holes

[020-005] made in the walls, the bricks being silently carried away in the dead of

[020-006] the night, and all done so quietly that no sound was heard either in or

[020-007] out of the house. [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]] gave it up in despair when she heard of

[020-008] this. “What was the use,” said she, “of locks and bolts, and bells to

[020-009] the windows, and going round the house every night? That last trick was

[020-010] fit for a conjuror. Now she did believe that Signor Brunoni was at the

[020-011] bottom of it.”

[020-012] One afternoon, about five o’clock, we were startled by a hasty knock at

[020-013] the door. Miss Matty bade me run and tell [[martha|Martha]] on no account to open

[020-014] the door till she (Miss Matty) had reconnoitred through the window; and

[020-015] she armed herself with a footstool to drop down on the head of the

[020-016] visitor, in case he should show a face covered with black crape, as he

[020-017] looked up in answer to her inquiry of who was there. But it was nobody

[020-018] but [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] and Betty. The former came upstairs, carrying a little

[020-019] hand-basket, and she was evidently in a state of great agitation.

[020-020] “Take care of that!” said she to me, as I offered to relieve her of her

[020-021] basket. “It’s my plate. I am sure there is a plan to rob my house

[020-022] to-night. I am come to throw myself on your hospitality, Miss Matty.

[020-023] Betty is going to sleep with her cousin at the ‘George.’ I can sit up

[020-024] here all night if you will allow me; but my house is so far from any

[020-025] neighbours, and I don’t believe we could be heard if we screamed ever

[020-026] so!”

[020-027] “But,” said Miss Matty, “what has alarmed you so much? Have you seen

[020-028] any men lurking about the house?”

[020-029] “Oh, yes!” answered Miss Pole. “Two very bad-looking men have gone

[020-030] three times past the house, very slowly; and an Irish beggar-woman came

[020-031] not half-an-hour ago, and all but forced herself in past Betty, saying

[020-032] her children were starving, and she must speak to the mistress. You

[020-033] see, she said ‘mistress,’ though there was a hat hanging up in the hall,

[020-034] and it would have been more natural to have said ‘master.’ But Betty

[020-035] shut the door in her face, and came up to me, and we got the spoons

[020-036] together, and sat in the parlour-window watching till we saw Thomas

[020-037] Jones going from his work, when we called to him and asked him to take

[020-038] care of us into the town.”

[020-039] We might have triumphed over Miss Pole, who had professed such [[courage|bravery]]

[020-040] until she was frightened; but we were too glad to perceive that she

[020-041] shared in the weaknesses of humanity to exult over her; and I gave up my

[020-042] room to her very willingly, and shared Miss Matty’s bed for the night.

[020-043] But before we retired, the two ladies rummaged up, out of the recesses

[020-044] of their memory, such horrid stories of robbery and murder that I quite

[020-045] quaked in my shoes. Miss Pole was evidently anxious to prove that such

[020-046] terrible events had occurred within her experience that she was

[020-047] justified in her sudden panic; and Miss Matty did not like to be

[020-048] outdone, and capped every story with one yet more horrible, till it

[020-049] reminded me oddly enough, of an old story I had read somewhere, of a

[020-050] nightingale and a musician, who strove one against the other which could

[020-051] produce the most admirable music, till poor Philomel dropped down dead.

[020-052] One of the stories that haunted me for a long time afterwards was of a

[020-053] girl who was left in charge of a great house in Cumberland on some

[020-054] particular fair-day, when the other servants all went off to the

[020-055] gaieties. The family were away in London, and a pedlar came by, and

[020-056] asked to leave his large and heavy pack in the kitchen, saying he would

[020-057] call for it again at night; and the girl (a gamekeeper’s daughter),

[020-058] roaming about in search of amusement, chanced to hit upon a gun hanging

[020-059] up in the hall, and took it down to look at the chasing; and it went off

[020-060] through the open kitchen door, hit the pack, and a slow dark thread of

[020-061] blood came oozing out. (How Miss Pole enjoyed this part of the story,

[020-062] dwelling on each word as if she loved it!) She rather hurried over the

[020-063] further account of the girl’s bravery, and I have but a confused idea

[020-064] that, somehow, she baffled the robbers with Italian irons, heated

[020-065] red-hot, and then restored to blackness by being dipped in grease.

[020-066] We parted for the night with an awe-stricken wonder as to what we should

[020-067] hear of in the morning—and, on my part, with a vehement desire for the

[020-068] night to be over and gone: I was so afraid lest the robbers should have

[020-069] seen, from some dark lurking-place, that Miss Pole had carried off her

[020-070] plate, and thus have a double motive for attacking our house.

[020-071] [Picture: Asked him to take care of us]

[020-072] But until [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]] came to call next day we heard of nothing

[020-073] unusual. The kitchen fire-irons were in exactly the same position

[020-074] against the back door as when Martha and I had skilfully piled them up,

[020-075] like spillikins, ready to fall with an awful clatter if only a cat had

[020-076] touched the outside panels. I had wondered what we should all do if

[020-077] thus awakened and alarmed, and had proposed to Miss Matty that we should

[020-078] cover up our faces under the bed-clothes so that there should be no

[020-079] danger of the robbers thinking that we could identify them; but Miss

[020-080] Matty, who was trembling very much, scouted this idea, and said we owed

[020-081] it to society to apprehend them, and that she should certainly do her

[020-082] best to lay hold of them and lock them up in the garret till morning.

[020-083] When Lady Glenmire came, we almost felt jealous of her. [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s

[020-084] house had really been attacked; at least there were men’s footsteps to

[020-085] be seen on the flower borders, underneath the kitchen windows, “where

[020-086] nae men should be;” and Carlo had barked all through the night as if

[020-087] strangers were abroad. Mrs Jamieson had been awakened by Lady Glenmire,

[020-088] and they had rung the bell which communicated with Mr Mulliner’s room in

[020-089] the third storey, and when his night-capped head had appeared over the

[020-090] bannisters, in answer to the summons, they had told him of their alarm,

[020-091] and the reasons for it; whereupon he retreated into his bedroom, and

[020-092] locked the door (for fear of draughts, as he informed them in the

[020-093] morning), and opened the window, and called out valiantly to say, if the

[020-094] supposed robbers would come to him he would fight them; but, as Lady

[020-095] Glenmire observed, that was but poor comfort, since they would have to

[020-096] pass by Mrs Jamieson’s room and her own before they could reach him, and

[020-097] must be of a very pugnacious disposition indeed if they neglected the

[020-098] opportunities of robbery presented by the unguarded lower storeys, to go

[020-099] up to a garret, and there force a door in order to get at the champion

[020-100] of the house. Lady Glenmire, after waiting and listening for some time

[020-101] in the drawing-room, had proposed to Mrs Jamieson that they should go to

[020-102] bed; but that lady said she should not feel comfortable unless she sat

[020-103] up and watched; and, accordingly, she packed herself warmly up on the

[020-104] sofa, where she was found by the housemaid, when she came into the room

[020-105] at six o’clock, fast asleep; but Lady Glenmire went to bed, and kept

[020-106] awake all night.

[020-107] When Miss Pole heard of this, she nodded her head in great satisfaction.

[020-108] She had been sure we should hear of something happening in Cranford that

[020-109] night; and we had heard. It was clear enough they had first proposed to

[020-110] attack her house; but when they saw that she and Betty were on their

[020-111] guard, and had carried off the plate, they had changed their tactics and

[020-112] gone to Mrs Jamieson’s, and no one knew what might have happened if

[020-113] Carlo had not barked, like a good dog as he was!

[020-114] Poor Carlo! his barking days were nearly over. Whether the gang who

[020-115] infested the neighbourhood were afraid of him, or whether they were

[020-116] revengeful enough, for the way in which he had baffled them on the night

[020-117] in question, to poison him; or whether, as some among the more

[020-118] uneducated people thought, he died of apoplexy, brought on by too much

[020-119] feeding and too little exercise; at any rate, it is certain that, two

[020-120] days after this eventful night, Carlo was found dead, with his poor legs

[020-121] stretched out stiff in the attitude of running, as if by such unusual

[020-122] exertion he could escape the sure pursuer, Death.

[020-123] We were all sorry for Carlo, the old familiar friend who had snapped at

[020-124] us for so many years; and the mysterious mode of his death made us very

[020-125] uncomfortable. Could Signor Brunoni be at the bottom of this? He had

[020-126] apparently killed a canary with only a word of command; his will seemed

[020-127] of deadly force; who knew but what he might yet be lingering in the

[020-128] neighbourhood willing all sorts of awful things!

[020-129] We whispered these fancies among ourselves in the evenings; but in the

[020-130] mornings our courage came back with the daylight, and in a week’s time

[020-131] we had got over the shock of Carlo’s death; all but Mrs Jamieson. She,

[020-132] poor thing, felt it as she had felt no event since her husband’s death;

[020-133] indeed, Miss Pole said, that as the Honourable Mr Jamieson drank a good

[020-134] deal, and occasioned her much uneasiness, it was possible that Carlo’s

[020-135] death might be the greater affliction. But there was always a tinge of

[020-136] cynicism in Miss Pole’s remarks. However, one thing was clear and

[020-137] certain—it was necessary for Mrs Jamieson to have some change of scene;

[020-138] and Mr Mulliner was very impressive on this point, shaking his head

[020-139] whenever we inquired after his mistress, and speaking of her loss of

[020-140] appetite and bad nights very ominously; and with justice too, for if she

[020-141] had two characteristics in her natural state of health they were a

[020-142] facility of eating and sleeping. If she could neither eat nor sleep,

[020-143] she must be indeed out of spirits and out of health.

[020-144] Lady Glenmire (who had evidently taken very kindly to Cranford) did not

[020-145] like the idea of Mrs Jamieson’s going to Cheltenham, and more than once

[020-146] insinuated pretty plainly that it was Mr Mulliner’s doing, who had been

[020-147] much alarmed on the occasion of the house being attacked, and since had

[020-148] said, more than once, that he felt it a very responsible charge to have

[020-149] to defend so many women. Be that as it might, Mrs Jamieson went to

[020-150] Cheltenham, escorted by Mr Mulliner; and Lady Glenmire remained in

[020-151] possession of the house, her ostensible office being to take care that

[020-152] the [[servants-in-cranford|maid-servants]] did not pick up followers. She made a very

[020-153] pleasant-looking dragon; and, as soon as it was arranged for her stay in

[020-154] Cranford, she found out that Mrs Jamieson’s visit to Cheltenham was just

[020-155] the best thing in the world. She had let her house in Edinburgh, and

[020-156] was for the time house-less, so the charge of her sister-in-law’s

[020-157] comfortable abode was very convenient and acceptable.

[020-158] Miss Pole was very much inclined to instal herself as a heroine, because

[020-159] of the decided steps she had taken in flying from the two men and one

[020-160] woman, whom she entitled “that murderous gang.” She described their

[020-161] appearance in glowing colours, and I noticed that every time she went

[020-162] over the story some fresh trait of villainy was added to their

[020-163] appearance. One was tall—he grew to be gigantic in height before we had

[020-164] done with him; he of course had black hair—and by-and-by it hung in

[020-165] elf-locks over his forehead and down his back. The other was short and

[020-166] broad—and a hump sprouted out on his shoulder before we heard the last

[020-167] of him; he had red hair—which deepened into carroty; and she was almost

[020-168] sure he had a cast in the eye—a decided squint. As for the woman, her

[020-169] eyes glared, and she was masculine-looking—a perfect virago; most

[020-170] probably a man dressed in woman’s clothes; afterwards, we heard of a

[020-171] beard on her chin, and a manly voice and a stride.
