---
description: "If Miss Pole was delighted to recount the events of that afternoon to all inquirers, others were not so proud of their a."
id: ch21
label: "Section 21"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 21

[021-001] If [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] was delighted to recount the events of that afternoon to

[021-002] all inquirers, others were not so proud of their adventures in the

[021-003] robbery line. [[mr-hoggins|Mr Hoggins]], the surgeon, had been attacked at his own

[021-004] door by two ruffians, who were concealed in the shadow of the porch, and

[021-005] so effectually silenced him that he was robbed in the interval between

[021-006] ringing his bell and the servant’s answering it. Miss Pole was sure it

[021-007] would turn out that this robbery had been committed by “her men,” and

[021-008] went the very day she heard the report to have her teeth examined, and

[021-009] to question Mr Hoggins. She came to us afterwards; so we heard what she

[021-010] had heard, straight and direct from the source, while we were yet in the

[021-011] excitement and flutter of the agitation caused by the first

[021-012] intelligence; for the event had only occurred the night before.

[021-013] “Well!” said Miss Pole, sitting down with the decision of a person who

[021-014] has made up her mind as to the nature of life and the world (and such

[021-015] people never tread lightly, or seat themselves without a bump), “well,

[021-016] [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]]! men will be men. Every mother’s son of them wishes to be

[021-017] considered Samson and Solomon rolled into one—too strong ever to be

[021-018] beaten or discomfited—too wise ever to be outwitted. If you will

[021-019] notice, they have always foreseen events, though they never tell one for

[021-020] one’s warning before the events happen. My father was a man, and I know

[021-021] the sex pretty well.”

[021-022] She had talked herself out of breath, and we should have been very glad

[021-023] to fill up the necessary pause as chorus, but we did not exactly know

[021-024] what to say, or which man had suggested this diatribe against the sex;

[021-025] so we only joined in generally, with a grave shake of the head, and a

[021-026] soft murmur of “They are very incomprehensible, certainly!”

[021-027] “Now, only think,” said she. “There, I have undergone the risk of

[021-028] having one of my remaining teeth drawn (for one is terribly at the mercy

[021-029] of any surgeon-dentist; and I, for one, always speak them fair till I

[021-030] have got my mouth out of their clutches), and, after all, Mr Hoggins is

[021-031] too much of a man to own that he was robbed last night.”

[021-032] “Not robbed!” exclaimed the chorus.

[021-033] “Don’t tell me!” Miss Pole exclaimed, angry that we could be for a

[021-034] moment imposed upon. “I believe he was robbed, just as Betty told me,

[021-035] and he is ashamed to own it; and, to be sure, it was very silly of him

[021-036] to be robbed just at his own door; I daresay he feels that such a thing

[021-037] won’t raise him in the eyes of [[the-cranford-ladies|Cranford society]], and is anxious to

[021-038] conceal it—but he need not have tried to impose upon me, by saying I

[021-039] must have heard an exaggerated account of some petty theft of a neck of

[021-040] mutton, which, it seems, was stolen out of the safe in his yard last

[021-041] week; he had the impertinence to add, he believed that that was taken by

[021-042] the cat. I have no doubt, if I could get at the bottom of it, it was

[021-043] that Irishman dressed up in woman’s clothes, who came spying about my

[021-044] house, with the story about the starving children.”

[021-045] After we had duly condemned the want of candour which Mr Hoggins had

[021-046] evinced, and abused men in general, taking him for the representative

[021-047] and type, we got round to the subject about which we had been talking

[021-048] when Miss Pole came in; namely, how far, in the present disturbed state

[021-049] of the country, we could venture to accept an invitation which Miss

[021-050] Matty had just received from [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]], to come as usual and keep

[021-051] the anniversary of her wedding-day by drinking [[tea-drinking|tea]] with her at five

[021-052] o’clock, and playing a quiet pool afterwards. Mrs Forrester had said

[021-053] that she asked us with some diffidence, because the roads were, she

[021-054] feared, very unsafe. But she suggested that perhaps one of us would not

[021-055] object to take the sedan, and that the others, by walking briskly, might

[021-056] keep up with the long trot of the chairmen, and so we might all arrive

[021-057] safely at Over Place, a suburb of the town. (No; that is too large an

[021-058] expression: a small cluster of houses separated from [[cranford-town|Cranford]] by about

[021-059] two hundred yards of a dark and lonely lane.) There was no doubt but

[021-060] that a similar note was awaiting Miss Pole at home; so her call was a

[021-061] very fortunate affair, as it enabled us to consult together. We would

[021-062] all much rather have declined this invitation; but we felt that it would

[021-063] not be quite kind to Mrs Forrester, who would otherwise be left to a

[021-064] solitary retrospect of her not very happy or fortunate life. Miss Matty

[021-065] and Miss Pole had been visitors on this occasion for many years, and now

[021-066] they gallantly determined to nail their colours to the mast, and to go

[021-067] through [[darkness-lane|Darkness Lane]] rather than fail in loyalty to their friend.

[021-068] But when the evening came, Miss Matty (for it was she who was voted into

[021-069] the chair, as she had a cold), before being shut down in the sedan, like

[021-070] jack-in-a-box, implored the chairmen, whatever might befall, not to run

[021-071] away and leave her fastened up there, to be murdered; and even after

[021-072] they had promised, I saw her tighten her features into the stern

[021-073] determination of a martyr, and she gave me a melancholy and ominous

[021-074] shake of the head through the glass. However, we got there safely, only

[021-075] rather out of breath, for it was who could trot hardest through Darkness

[021-076] Lane, and I am afraid poor Miss Matty was sadly jolted.

[021-077] Mrs Forrester had made extra preparations, in acknowledgment of our

[021-078] exertion in coming to see her through such dangers. The usual forms of

[021-079] genteel ignorance as to what her servants might send up were all gone

[021-080] through; and harmony and Preference seemed likely to be the order of the

[021-081] evening, but for an interesting conversation that began I don’t know

[021-082] how, but which had relation, of course, to the robbers who infested the

[021-083] neighbourhood of Cranford.

[021-084] Having braved the dangers of Darkness Lane, and thus having a little

[021-085] stock of reputation for courage to fall back upon; and also, I daresay,

[021-086] desirous of proving ourselves superior to men (_videlicet_ Mr Hoggins)

[021-087] in the article of candour, we began to relate our individual fears, and

[021-088] the private precautions we each of us took. I owned that my pet

[021-089] apprehension was eyes—eyes looking at me, and watching me, glittering

[021-090] out from some dull, flat, wooden surface; and that if I dared to go up

[021-091] to my looking-glass when I was panic-stricken, I should certainly turn

[021-092] it round, with its back towards me, for fear of seeing eyes behind me

[021-093] looking out of the darkness. I saw Miss Matty nerving herself up for a

[021-094] confession; and at last out it came. She owned that, ever since she had

[021-095] been a girl, she had dreaded being caught by her last leg, just as she

[021-096] was getting into bed, by some one concealed under it. She said, when

[021-097] she was younger and more active, she used to take a flying leap from a

[021-098] distance, and so bring both her legs up safely into bed at once; but

[021-099] that this had always annoyed Deborah, who piqued herself upon getting

[021-100] into bed gracefully, and she had given it up in consequence. But now

[021-101] the old terror would often come over her, especially since Miss Pole’s

[021-102] house had been attacked (we had got quite to believe in the fact of the

[021-103] attack having taken place), and yet it was very unpleasant to think of

[021-104] looking under a bed, and seeing a man concealed, with a great, fierce

[021-105] face staring out at you; so she had bethought herself of

[021-106] something—perhaps I had noticed that she had told [[martha|Martha]] to buy her a

[021-107] penny ball, such as children play with—and now she rolled this ball

[021-108] under the bed every night: if it came out on the other side, well and

[021-109] good; if not she always took care to have her hand on the bell-rope, and

[021-110] meant to call out John and Harry, just as if she expected men-servants

[021-111] to answer her ring.

[021-112] We all applauded this ingenious contrivance, and Miss Matty sank back

[021-113] into satisfied silence, with a look at Mrs Forrester as if to ask for

[021-114] _her_ private weakness.

[021-115] Mrs Forrester looked askance at Miss Pole, and tried to change the

[021-116] subject a little by telling us that she had borrowed a boy from one of

[021-117] the neighbouring cottages and promised his parents a hundredweight of

[021-118] coals at Christmas, and his supper every evening, for the loan of him at

[021-119] nights. She had instructed him in his possible duties when he first

[021-120] came; and, finding him sensible, she had given him the Major’s sword

[021-121] (the Major was her late husband), and desired him to put it very

[021-122] carefully behind his pillow at night, turning the edge towards the head

[021-123] of the pillow. He was a sharp lad, she was sure; for, spying out the

[021-124] Major’s cocked hat, he had said, if he might have that to wear, he was

[021-125] sure he could frighten two Englishmen, or four Frenchmen any day. But

[021-126] she had impressed upon him anew that he was to lose no time in putting

[021-127] on hats or anything else; but, if he heard any noise, he was to run at

[021-128] it with his drawn sword. On my suggesting that some accident might

[021-129] occur from such slaughterous and indiscriminate directions, and that he

[021-130] might rush on Jenny getting up to wash, and have spitted her before he

[021-131] had discovered that she was not a Frenchman, Mrs Forrester said she did

[021-132] not think that that was likely, for he was a very sound sleeper, and

[021-133] generally had to be well shaken or cold-pigged in a morning before they

[021-134] could rouse him. She sometimes thought such dead sleep must be owing to

[021-135] the hearty suppers the poor lad ate, for he was half-starved at home,

[021-136] and she told Jenny to see that he got a good meal at night.

[021-137] [Picture: Slaughterous and indiscriminate directions]

[021-138] Still this was no confession of Mrs Forrester’s peculiar timidity, and

[021-139] we urged her to tell us what she thought would frighten her more than

[021-140] anything. She paused, and stirred the fire, and snuffed the candles,

[021-141] and then she said, in a sounding whisper—

[021-142] “Ghosts!”

[021-143] She looked at Miss Pole, as much as to say, she had declared it, and

[021-144] would stand by it. Such a look was a challenge in itself. Miss Pole

[021-145] came down upon her with indigestion, spectral illusions, optical

[021-146] delusions, and a great deal out of Dr Ferrier and Dr Hibbert besides.

[021-147] Miss Matty had rather a leaning to ghosts, as I have mentioned before,

[021-148] and what little she did say was all on Mrs Forrester’s side, who,

[021-149] emboldened by sympathy, protested that ghosts were a part of her

[021-150] [[church-in-cranford|religion]]; that surely she, the [[widowhood-in-cranford|widow]] of a major in the army, knew what

[021-151] to be frightened at, and what not; in short, I never saw Mrs Forrester

[021-152] so warm either before or since, for she was a gentle, meek, enduring old

[021-153] lady in most things. Not all the elder-wine that ever was mulled could

[021-154] this night wash out the remembrance of this difference between Miss Pole

[021-155] and her hostess. Indeed, when the elder-wine was brought in, it gave

[021-156] rise to a new burst of discussion; for Jenny, the little maiden who

[021-157] staggered under the tray, had to give evidence of having seen a ghost

[021-158] with her own eyes, not so many nights ago, in Darkness Lane, the very

[021-159] lane we were to go through on our way home.

[021-160] In spite of the uncomfortable feeling which this last consideration gave

[021-161] me, I could not help being amused at Jenny’s position, which was

[021-162] exceedingly like that of a witness being examined and cross-examined by

[021-163] two counsel who are not at all scrupulous about asking leading

[021-164] questions. The conclusion I arrived at was, that Jenny had certainly

[021-165] seen something beyond what a fit of indigestion would have caused. A

[021-166] lady all in white, and without her head, was what she deposed and

[021-167] adhered to, supported by a consciousness of the secret sympathy of her

[021-168] mistress under the withering scorn with which Miss Pole regarded her.

[021-169] And not only she, but many others, had seen this headless lady, who sat

[021-170] by the roadside wringing her hands as in deep grief. Mrs Forrester

[021-171] looked at us from time to time with an air of conscious triumph; but

[021-172] then she had not to pass through Darkness Lane before she could bury

[021-173] herself beneath her own familiar bed-clothes.
