---
description: "‘Set her on the Tintock tap, The wind will blaw a man till her.’” “That was because ‘Tibbie Fowler’ was rich, I think."
id: ch25
label: "Section 25"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 25

[025-001] ‘Set her on the Tintock tap,

[025-002] The wind will blaw a man till her.’”

[025-003] “That was because ‘Tibbie Fowler’ was rich, I think.”

[025-004] “Well! there was a kind of attraction about [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]] that I, for

[025-005] one, should be ashamed to have.”

[025-006] I put in my wonder. “But how can she have fancied [[mr-hoggins|Mr Hoggins]]? I am not

[025-007] surprised that Mr Hoggins has liked her.”

[025-008] “Oh! I don’t know. Mr Hoggins is rich, and very pleasant-looking,”

[025-009] said [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]], “and very good-tempered and kind-hearted.”

[025-010] “She has married for an establishment, that’s it. I suppose she takes

[025-011] the surgery with it,” said [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]], with a little dry laugh at her own

[025-012] joke. But, like many people who think they have made a severe and

[025-013] sarcastic speech, which yet is clever of its kind, she began to relax in

[025-014] her grimness from the moment when she made this allusion to the surgery;

[025-015] and we turned to speculate on the way in which [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]] would

[025-016] receive the news. The person whom she had left in charge of her house

[025-017] to keep off followers from her maids to set up a follower of her own!

[025-018] And that follower a man whom Mrs Jamieson had tabooed as vulgar, and

[025-019] inadmissible to [[the-cranford-ladies|Cranford society]], not merely on account of his name, but

[025-020] because of his voice, his complexion, his boots, smelling of the stable,

[025-021] and himself, smelling of drugs. Had he ever been to see Lady Glenmire

[025-022] at Mrs Jamieson’s? Chloride of lime would not purify the house in its

[025-023] owner’s estimation if he had. Or had their interviews been confined to

[025-024] the occasional meetings in the chamber of the poor sick conjuror, to

[025-025] whom, with all our sense of the _mésalliance_, we could not help

[025-026] allowing that they had both been exceedingly kind? And now it turned

[025-027] out that a servant of Mrs Jamieson’s had been ill, and Mr Hoggins had

[025-028] been attending her for some weeks. So the wolf had got into the fold,

[025-029] and now he was carrying off the shepherdess. What would Mrs Jamieson

[025-030] say? We looked into the darkness of futurity as a child gazes after a

[025-031] rocket up in the cloudy sky, full of wondering expectation of the

[025-032] rattle, the discharge, and the brilliant shower of sparks and light.

[025-033] Then we brought ourselves down to earth and the present time by

[025-034] questioning each other (being all equally ignorant, and all equally

[025-035] without the slightest data to build any conclusions upon) as to when IT

[025-036] would take place? Where? How much a year Mr Hoggins had? Whether she

[025-037] would drop her title? And how [[martha|Martha]] and the other correct servants in

[025-038] [[cranford-town|Cranford]] would ever be brought to announce a married couple as Lady

[025-039] Glenmire and Mr Hoggins? But would they be visited? Would Mrs Jamieson

[025-040] let us? Or must we choose between the Honourable Mrs Jamieson and the

[025-041] degraded Lady Glenmire? We all liked Lady Glenmire the best. She was

[025-042] bright, and kind, and sociable, and agreeable; and Mrs Jamieson was

[025-043] dull, and inert, and pompous, and tiresome. But we had acknowledged the

[025-044] sway of the latter so long, that it seemed like a kind of disloyalty now

[025-045] even to meditate disobedience to the prohibition we anticipated.

[025-046] [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]] surprised us in our darned caps and patched collars; and

[025-047] we forgot all about them in our eagerness to see how she would bear the

[025-048] information, which we honourably left to Miss Pole, to impart, although,

[025-049] if we had been inclined to take unfair advantage, we might have rushed

[025-050] in ourselves, for she had a most out-of-place fit of coughing for five

[025-051] minutes after Mrs Forrester entered the room. I shall never forget the

[025-052] imploring expression of her eyes, as she looked at us over her

[025-053] pocket-handkerchief. They said, as plain as words could speak, “Don’t

[025-054] let Nature deprive me of the treasure which is mine, although for a time

[025-055] I can make no use of it.” And we did not.

[025-056] Mrs Forrester’s surprise was equal to ours; and her sense of injury

[025-057] rather greater, because she had to feel for her Order, and saw more

[025-058] fully than we could do how such conduct brought stains on the

[025-059] [[aristocracy-in-cranford|aristocracy]].

[025-060] When she and Miss Pole left us we endeavoured to subside into calmness;

[025-061] but Miss Matty was really upset by the intelligence she had heard. She

[025-062] reckoned it up, and it was more than fifteen years since she had heard

[025-063] of any of her acquaintance going to be married, with the one exception

[025-064] of Miss Jessie Brown; and, as she said, it gave her quite a shock, and

[025-065] made her feel as if she could not think what would happen next.

[025-066] I don’t know whether it is a fancy of mine, or a real fact, but I have

[025-067] noticed that, just after the announcement of an engagement in any set,

[025-068] the unmarried ladies in that set flutter out in an unusual gaiety and

[025-069] newness of dress, as much as to say, in a tacit and unconscious manner,

[025-070] “We also are [[spinsterhood|spinsters]].” Miss Matty and Miss Pole talked and thought

[025-071] more about bonnets, gowns, caps, and shawls, during the fortnight that

[025-072] succeeded this call, than I had known them do for years before. But it

[025-073] might be the spring weather, for it was a warm and pleasant March; and

[025-074] merinoes and beavers, and woollen materials of all sorts were but

[025-075] ungracious receptacles of the bright sun’s glancing rays. It had not

[025-076] been Lady Glenmire’s dress that had won Mr Hoggins’s heart, for she went

[025-077] about on her errands of kindness more shabby than ever. Although in the

[025-078] hurried glimpses I caught of her at church or elsewhere she appeared

[025-079] rather to shun meeting any of her friends, her face seemed to have

[025-080] almost something of the flush of youth in it; her lips looked redder and

[025-081] more trembling full than in their old compressed state, and her eyes

[025-082] dwelt on all things with a lingering light, as if she was learning to

[025-083] love Cranford and its belongings. Mr Hoggins looked broad and radiant,

[025-084] and creaked up the middle aisle at church in a brand-new pair of

[025-085] top-boots—an audible, as well as visible, sign of his purposed change of

[025-086] state; for the tradition went, that the boots he had worn till now were

[025-087] the identical pair in which he first set out on his rounds in Cranford

[025-088] twenty-five years ago; only they had been new-pieced, high and low, top

[025-089] and bottom, heel and sole, black leather and brown leather, more times

[025-090] than any one could tell.

[025-091] None of the ladies in Cranford chose to sanction the marriage by

[025-092] congratulating either of the parties. We wished to ignore the whole

[025-093] affair until our liege lady, Mrs Jamieson, returned. Till she came back

[025-094] to give us our cue, we felt that it would be better to consider the

[025-095] engagement in the same light as the Queen of Spain’s legs—facts which

[025-096] certainly existed, but the less said about the better. This restraint

[025-097] upon our tongues—for you see if we did not speak about it to any of the

[025-098] parties concerned, how could we get answers to the questions that we

[025-099] longed to ask?—was beginning to be irksome, and our idea of the dignity

[025-100] of silence was paling before our curiosity, when another direction was

[025-101] given to our thoughts, by an announcement on the part of the principal

[025-102] shopkeeper of Cranford, who ranged the trades from grocer and

[025-103] cheesemonger to man-milliner, as occasion required, that the spring

[025-104] fashions were arrived, and would be exhibited on the following Tuesday

[025-105] at his rooms in [[cranford-high-street|High Street]]. Now Miss Matty had been only waiting for

[025-106] this before buying herself a new silk gown. I had offered, it is true,

[025-107] to send to Drumble for patterns, but she had rejected my proposal,

[025-108] gently implying that she had not forgotten her disappointment about the

[025-109] sea-green turban. I was thankful that I was on the spot now, to

[025-110] counteract the dazzling fascination of any yellow or scarlet silk.

[025-111] I must say a word or two here about myself. I have spoken of my

[025-112] father’s old friendship for the Jenkyns family; indeed, I am not sure if

[025-113] there was not some distant relationship. He had willingly allowed me to

[025-114] remain all the winter at Cranford, in consideration of a letter which

[025-115] Miss Matty had written to him about the time of [[the-great-cranford-panic|the panic]], in which I

[025-116] suspect she had exaggerated my powers and my [[courage|bravery]] as a defender of

[025-117] the house. But now that the days were longer and more cheerful, he was

[025-118] beginning to urge the necessity of my return; and I only delayed in a

[025-119] sort of odd forlorn hope that if I could obtain any clear information, I

[025-120] might make the account given by the signora of the [[peter-jenkyns|Aga Jenkyns]] tally

[025-121] with that of “poor Peter,” his appearance and disappearance, which I had

[025-122] winnowed out of the conversation of Miss Pole and Mrs Forrester.

[025-123] CHAPTER XIII.

[025-124] STOPPED PAYMENT

[025-125] THE very Tuesday morning on which Mr Johnson was going to show the

[025-126] fashions, the post-woman brought two [[letter-writing|letters]] to the house. I say the

[025-127] post-woman, but I should say the postman’s wife. He was a lame

[025-128] shoemaker, a very clean, honest man, much respected in the town; but he

[025-129] never brought the letters round except on unusual occasions, such as

[025-130] Christmas Day or Good Friday; and on those days the letters, which

[025-131] should have been delivered at eight in the morning, did not make their

[025-132] appearance until two or three in the afternoon, for every one liked poor

[025-133] Thomas, and gave him a welcome on these festive occasions. He used to

[025-134] say, “He was welly stawed wi’ eating, for there were three or four

[025-135] houses where nowt would serve ’em but he must share in their breakfast;”

[025-136] and by the time he had done his last breakfast, he came to some other

[025-137] friend who was beginning dinner; but come what might in the way of

[025-138] temptation, Tom was always sober, civil, and smiling; and, as Miss

[025-139] Jenkyns used to say, it was a lesson in patience, that she doubted not

[025-140] would call out that precious quality in some minds, where, but for

[025-141] Thomas, it might have lain dormant and undiscovered. Patience was

[025-142] certainly very dormant in [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]]’s mind. She was always expecting

[025-143] letters, and always drumming on the table till the post-woman had called

[025-144] or gone past. On Christmas Day and Good Friday she drummed from

[025-145] breakfast till church, from church-time till two o’clock—unless when the

[025-146] fire wanted stirring, when she invariably knocked down the fire-irons,

[025-147] and scolded Miss Matty for it. But equally certain was the hearty

[025-148] welcome and the good dinner for Thomas; Miss Jenkyns standing over him

[025-149] like a bold dragoon, questioning him as to his children—what they were

[025-150] doing—what school they went to; upbraiding him if another was likely to

[025-151] make its appearance, but sending even the little babies the shilling and

[025-152] the mince-pie which was her gift to all the children, with half-a-crown

[025-153] in addition for both father and mother. The post was not half of so

[025-154] much consequence to dear Miss Matty; but not for the world would she

[025-155] have diminished Thomas’s welcome and his dole, though I could see that

[025-156] she felt rather shy over the [[etiquette|ceremony]], which had been regarded by Miss

[025-157] Jenkyns as a glorious opportunity for giving advice and benefiting her

[025-158] fellow-creatures. Miss Matty would steal the money all in a lump into

[025-159] his hand, as if she were ashamed of herself. Miss Jenkyns gave him each

[025-160] individual coin separate, with a “There! that’s for yourself; that’s for

[025-161] Jenny,” etc. Miss Matty would even beckon Martha out of the kitchen

[025-162] while he ate his food: and once, to my knowledge, winked at its rapid

[025-163] disappearance into a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief. Miss Jenkyns

[025-164] almost scolded him if he did not leave a clean plate, however heaped it

[025-165] might have been, and gave an injunction with every mouthful.

[025-166] [Picture: Standing over him like a bold dragoon]
