---
description: "“I will give you five sovereigns for your note, my good man,” said Miss Matty."
id: ch27
label: "Section 27"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 27

[027-001] “I will give you five sovereigns for your note, my good man,” said Miss

[027-002] [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Matty]]. “I think there is some great mistake about it, for I am one of

[027-003] the shareholders, and I’m sure they would have told me if things had not

[027-004] been going on right.”

[027-005] The shopman whispered a word or two across the table to Miss Matty. She

[027-006] looked at him with a dubious air.

[027-007] “Perhaps so,” said she. “But I don’t pretend to understand business; I

[027-008] only know that if it is going to fail, and if honest people are to lose

[027-009] their money because they have taken our notes—I can’t explain myself,”

[027-010] said she, suddenly becoming aware that she had got into a long sentence

[027-011] with four people for audience; “only I would rather exchange my gold for

[027-012] the note, if you please,” turning to the farmer, “and then you can take

[027-013] your wife the shawl. It is only going without my gown a few days

[027-014] longer,” she continued, speaking to me. “Then, I have no doubt,

[027-015] everything will be cleared up.”

[027-016] “But if it is cleared up the wrong way?” said I.

[027-017] “Why, then it will only have been common honesty in me, as a

[027-018] shareholder, to have given this good man the money. I am quite clear

[027-019] about it in my own mind; but, you know, I can never speak quite as

[027-020] comprehensibly as others can, only you must give me your note, Mr

[027-021] Dobson, if you please, and go on with your purchases with these

[027-022] sovereigns.”

[027-023] [Picture: You must give me your note, Mr Dobson, if you please]

[027-024] The man looked at her with silent gratitude—too awkward to put his

[027-025] thanks into words; but he hung back for a minute or two, fumbling with

[027-026] his note.

[027-027] “I’m loth to make another one lose instead of me, if it is a loss; but,

[027-028] you see, five pounds is a deal of money to a man with a family; and, as

[027-029] you say, ten to one in a day or two the note will be as good as gold

[027-030] again.”

[027-031] “No hope of that, my friend,” said the shopman.

[027-032] “The more reason why I should take it,” said Miss Matty quietly. She

[027-033] pushed her sovereigns towards the man, who slowly laid his note down in

[027-034] exchange. “Thank you. I will wait a day or two before I purchase any

[027-035] of these silks; perhaps you will then have a greater choice. My dear,

[027-036] will you come upstairs?”

[027-037] We inspected the fashions with as minute and curious an interest as if

[027-038] the gown to be made after them had been bought. I could not see that

[027-039] the little event in the shop below had in the least damped Miss Matty’s

[027-040] curiosity as to the make of sleeves or the sit of skirts. She once or

[027-041] twice exchanged congratulations with me on our private and leisurely

[027-042] view of the bonnets and shawls; but I was, all the time, not so sure

[027-043] that our examination was so utterly private, for I caught glimpses of a

[027-044] figure dodging behind the cloaks and mantles; and, by a dexterous move,

[027-045] I came face to face with [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]], also in morning costume (the

[027-046] principal feature of which was her being without teeth, and wearing a

[027-047] veil to conceal the deficiency), come on the same errand as ourselves.

[027-048] But she quickly took her departure, because, as she said, she had a bad

[027-049] headache, and did not feel herself up to conversation.

[027-050] As we came down through the shop, the civil Mr Johnson was awaiting us;

[027-051] he had been informed of the exchange of the note for gold, and with much

[027-052] good feeling and real kindness, but with a little want of tact, he

[027-053] wished to condole with Miss Matty, and impress upon her the true state

[027-054] of the case. I could only hope that he had heard an exaggerated rumour

[027-055] for he said that her shares were worse than nothing, and that the bank

[027-056] could not pay a shilling in the pound. I was glad that Miss Matty

[027-057] seemed still a little incredulous; but I could not tell how much of this

[027-058] was real or assumed, with that self-control which seemed habitual to

[027-059] ladies of Miss Matty’s standing in [[cranford-town|Cranford]], who would have thought

[027-060] their dignity compromised by the slightest expression of surprise,

[027-061] dismay, or any similar feeling to an inferior in station, or in a public

[027-062] shop. However, we walked home very silently. I am ashamed to say, I

[027-063] believe I was rather vexed and annoyed at Miss Matty’s conduct in taking

[027-064] the note to herself so decidedly. I had so set my heart upon her having

[027-065] a new silk gown, which she wanted sadly; in general she was so undecided

[027-066] anybody might turn her round; in this case I had felt that it was no use

[027-067] attempting it, but I was not the less put out at the result.

[027-068] Somehow, after twelve o’clock, we both acknowledged to a sated curiosity

[027-069] about the fashions, and to a certain fatigue of body (which was, in

[027-070] fact, depression of mind) that indisposed us to go out again. But still

[027-071] we never spoke of the note; till, all at once, something possessed me to

[027-072] ask Miss Matty if she would think it her duty to offer sovereigns for

[027-073] all the notes of the [[town-and-county-bank|Town and County Bank]] she met with? I could have

[027-074] bitten my tongue out the minute I had said it. She looked up rather

[027-075] sadly, and as if I had thrown a new perplexity into her already

[027-076] distressed mind; and for a minute or two she did not speak. Then she

[027-077] said—my own dear Miss Matty—without a shade of reproach in her voice—

[027-078] “My dear, I never feel as if my mind was what people call very strong;

[027-079] and it’s often hard enough work for me to settle what I ought to do with

[027-080] the case right before me. I was very thankful to—I was very thankful,

[027-081] that I saw my duty this morning, with the poor man standing by me; but

[027-082] it’s rather a strain upon me to keep thinking and thinking what I should

[027-083] do if such and such a thing happened; and, I believe, I had rather wait

[027-084] and see what really does come; and I don’t doubt I shall be helped then

[027-085] if I don’t fidget myself, and get too anxious beforehand. You know,

[027-086] love, I’m not like Deborah. If Deborah had lived, I’ve no doubt she

[027-087] would have seen after them, before they had got themselves into this

[027-088] state.”

[027-089] We had neither of us much appetite for dinner, though we tried to talk

[027-090] cheerfully about indifferent things. When we returned into the

[027-091] drawing-room, Miss Matty unlocked her desk and began to look over her

[027-092] account-[[reading-in-cranford|books]]. I was so penitent for what I had said in the morning,

[027-093] that I did not choose to take upon myself the presumption to suppose

[027-094] that I could assist her; I rather left her alone, as, with puzzled brow,

[027-095] her eye followed her pen up and down the ruled page. By-and-by she shut

[027-096] the book, locked the desk, and came and drew a chair to mine, where I

[027-097] sat in moody sorrow over the fire. I stole my hand into hers; she

[027-098] clasped it, but did not speak a word. At last she said, with forced

[027-099] composure in her voice, “If that bank goes wrong, I shall lose one

[027-100] hundred and forty-nine pounds thirteen shillings and fourpence a year; I

[027-101] shall only have thirteen pounds a year left.” I squeezed her hand hard

[027-102] and tight. I did not know what to say. Presently (it was too dark to

[027-103] see her face) I felt her fingers work convulsively in my grasp; and I

[027-104] knew she was going to speak again. I heard the sobs in her voice as she

[027-105] said, “I hope it’s not wrong—not wicked—but, oh! I am so glad poor

[027-106] Deborah is spared this. She could not have borne to come down in the

[027-107] world—she had such a noble, lofty spirit.”

[027-108] This was all she said about the sister who had insisted upon investing

[027-109] their little property in that unlucky bank. We were later in lighting

[027-110] the candle than usual that night, and until that light shamed us into

[027-111] speaking, we sat together very silently and sadly.

[027-112] However, we took to our work after [[tea-drinking|tea]] with a kind of forced

[027-113] cheerfulness (which soon became real as far as it went), talking of that

[027-114] never-ending wonder, [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]]’s engagement. Miss Matty was almost

[027-115] coming round to think it a good thing.

[027-116] “I don’t mean to deny that men are troublesome in a house. I don’t

[027-117] judge from my own experience, for my father was neatness itself, and

[027-118] wiped his shoes on coming in as carefully as any woman; but still a man

[027-119] has a sort of knowledge of what should be done in difficulties, that it

[027-120] is very pleasant to have one at hand ready to lean upon. Now, Lady

[027-121] Glenmire, instead of being tossed about, and wondering where she is to

[027-122] settle, will be certain of a home among pleasant and kind people, such

[027-123] as our good Miss Pole and [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]]. And [[mr-hoggins|Mr Hoggins]] is really a

[027-124] very personable man; and as for his manners, why, if they are not very

[027-125] polished, I have known people with very good hearts and very clever

[027-126] minds too, who were not what some people reckoned refined, but who were

[027-127] both true and tender.”

[027-128] She fell off into a soft reverie about [[mr-holbrook|Mr Holbrook]], and I did not

[027-129] interrupt her, I was so busy maturing a plan I had had in my mind for

[027-130] some days, but which this threatened failure of the bank had brought to

[027-131] a crisis. That night, after Miss Matty went to bed, I treacherously

[027-132] lighted the candle again, and sat down in the drawing-room to compose a

[027-133] letter to the [[peter-jenkyns|Aga Jenkyns]], a letter which should affect him if he were

[027-134] Peter, and yet seem a mere statement of dry facts if he were a stranger.

[027-135] The church clock pealed out two before I had done.

[027-136] The next morning news came, both official and otherwise, that the Town

[027-137] and County Bank had stopped payment. Miss Matty was ruined.

[027-138] She tried to speak quietly to me; but when she came to the actual fact

[027-139] that she would have but about five shillings a week to live upon, she

[027-140] could not restrain a few tears.

[027-141] “I am not crying for myself, dear,” said she, wiping them away; “I

[027-142] believe I am crying for the very silly thought of how my mother would

[027-143] grieve if she could know; she always cared for us so much more than for

[027-144] herself. But many a poor person has less, and I am not very

[027-145] extravagant, and, thank God, when the neck of mutton, and [[martha|Martha]]’s

[027-146] wages, and the rent are paid, I have not a farthing owing. Poor Martha!

[027-147] I think she’ll be sorry to leave me.”

[027-148] Miss Matty smiled at me through her tears, and she would fain have had

[027-149] me see only the smile, not the tears.

[027-150] CHAPTER XIV.

[027-151] FRIENDS IN NEED

[027-152] IT was an example to me, and I fancy it might be to many others, to see

[027-153] how immediately Miss Matty set about the retrenchment which she knew

[027-154] to be right under her altered circumstances. While she went down to

[027-155] speak to Martha, and break the intelligence to her, I stole out with

[027-156] my letter to the Aga Jenkyns, and went to the signor’s lodgings to

[027-157] obtain the exact address. I bound the signora to secrecy; and indeed

[027-158] her military manners had a degree of shortness and reserve in them

[027-159] which made her always say as little as possible, except when under the

[027-160] pressure of strong excitement. Moreover (which made my secret doubly

[027-161] sure), the signor was now so far recovered as to be looking forward

[027-162] to travelling and conjuring again in the space of a few days, when

[027-163] he, his wife, and little Phœbe would leave Cranford. Indeed, I found

[027-164] him looking over a great black and red placard, in which the Signor

[027-165] Brunoni’s accomplishments were set forth, and to which only the name

[027-166] of the town where he would next display them was wanting. He and his

[027-167] wife were so much absorbed in deciding where the red [[letter-writing|letters]] would come

[027-168] in with most effect (it might have been the Rubric for that matter),

[027-169] that it was some time before I could get my question asked privately,

[027-170] and not before I had given several decisions, the wisdom of which I

[027-171] questioned afterwards with equal sincerity as soon as the signor threw

[027-172] in his doubts and reasons on the important subject. At last I got

[027-173] the address, spelt by sound, and very queer it looked. I dropped it

[027-174] in the post on my way home, and then for a minute I stood looking at

[027-175] the wooden pane with a gaping slit which divided me from the letter

[027-176] but a moment ago in my hand. It was gone from me like life, never to

[027-177] be recalled. It would get tossed about on the sea, and stained with

[027-178] sea-waves perhaps, and be carried among palm-trees, and scented with

[027-179] all tropical fragrance; the little piece of paper, but an hour ago so

[027-180] familiar and commonplace, had set out on its race to the strange wild

[027-181] countries beyond the Ganges! But I could not afford to lose much time

[027-182] on this speculation. I hastened home, that Miss Matty might not miss

[027-183] me. Martha opened the door to me, her face swollen with crying. As

[027-184] soon as she saw me she burst out afresh, and taking hold of my arm she

[027-185] pulled me in, and banged the door to, in order to ask me if indeed it

[027-186] was all true that Miss Matty had been saying.
