---
description: "“I’ll never leave her! No; I won’t."
id: ch28
label: "Section 28"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 28

[028-001] “I’ll never leave her! No; I won’t. I telled her so, and said I could

[028-002] not think how she could find in her heart to give me warning. I could

[028-003] not have had the face to do it, if I’d been her. I might ha’ been just

[028-004] as good for nothing as [[mrs-fitz-adam|Mrs Fitz-Adam]]’s Rosy, who struck for wages after

[028-005] living seven years and a half in one place. I said I was not one to go

[028-006] and serve Mammon at that rate; that I knew when I’d got a good missus,

[028-007] if she didn’t know when she’d got a good servant”—

[028-008] “But, [[martha|Martha]],” said I, cutting in while she wiped her eyes.

[028-009] “Don’t, ‘but Martha’ me,” she replied to my deprecatory tone.

[028-010] “Listen to reason”—

[028-011] “I’ll not listen to reason,” she said, now in full possession of her

[028-012] voice, which had been rather choked with sobbing. “Reason always means

[028-013] what someone else has got to say. Now I think what I’ve got to say is

[028-014] good enough reason; but reason or not, I’ll say it, and I’ll stick to

[028-015] it. I’ve money in the Savings Bank, and I’ve a good stock of clothes,

[028-016] and I’m not going to leave [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]]. No, not if she gives me warning

[028-017] every hour in the day!”

[028-018] She put her arms akimbo, as much as to say she defied me; and, indeed, I

[028-019] could hardly tell how to begin to remonstrate with her, so much did I

[028-020] feel that Miss Matty, in her increasing infirmity, needed the attendance

[028-021] of this kind and faithful woman.

[028-022] “Well”—said I at last.

[028-023] “I’m thankful you begin with ‘well!’ If you’d have begun with ‘but,’ as

[028-024] you did afore, I’d not ha’ listened to you. Now you may go on.”

[028-025] “I know you would be a great loss to Miss Matty, Martha”—

[028-026] “I telled her so. A loss she’d never cease to be sorry for,” broke in

[028-027] Martha triumphantly.

[028-028] “Still, she will have so little—so very little—to live upon, that I

[028-029] don’t see just now how she could find you food—she will even be pressed

[028-030] for her own. I tell you this, Martha, because I feel you are like a

[028-031] friend to dear Miss Matty, but you know she might not like to have it

[028-032] spoken about.”

[028-033] Apparently this was even a blacker view of the subject than Miss Matty

[028-034] had presented to her, for Martha just sat down on the first chair that

[028-035] came to hand, and cried out loud (we had been standing in the kitchen).

[028-036] At last she put her apron down, and looking me earnestly in the face,

[028-037] asked, “Was that the reason Miss Matty wouldn’t order a pudding to-day?

[028-038] She said she had no great fancy for sweet things, and you and she would

[028-039] just have a mutton chop. But I’ll be up to her. Never you tell, but

[028-040] I’ll make her a pudding, and a pudding she’ll like, too, and I’ll pay

[028-041] for it myself; so mind you see she eats it. Many a one has been

[028-042] comforted in their sorrow by seeing a good dish come upon the table.”

[028-043] I was rather glad that Martha’s energy had taken the immediate and

[028-044] practical direction of pudding-making, for it staved off the quarrelsome

[028-045] discussion as to whether she should or should not leave Miss Matty’s

[028-046] service. She began to tie on a clean apron, and otherwise prepare

[028-047] herself for going to the shop for the butter, eggs, and what else she

[028-048] might require. She would not use a scrap of the articles already in the

[028-049] house for her cookery, but went to an old [[tea-drinking|tea]]-pot in which her private

[028-050] store of money was deposited, and took out what she wanted.

[028-051] I found Miss Matty very quiet, and not a little sad; but by-and-by she

[028-052] tried to smile for my sake. It was settled that I was to write to my

[028-053] father, and ask him to come over and hold a consultation, and as soon as

[028-054] this letter was despatched we began to talk over future plans. Miss

[028-055] Matty’s idea was to take a single room, and retain as much of her

[028-056] furniture as would be necessary to fit up this, and sell the rest, and

[028-057] there to quietly exist upon what would remain after paying the rent.

[028-058] For my part, I was more ambitious and less contented. I thought of all

[028-059] the things by which a woman, past middle age, and with the education

[028-060] common to ladies fifty years ago, could earn or add to a living without

[028-061] materially losing caste; but at length I put even this last clause on

[028-062] one side, and wondered what in the world Miss Matty could do.

[028-063] Teaching was, of course, the first thing that suggested itself. If Miss

[028-064] Matty could teach children anything, it would throw her among the little

[028-065] elves in whom her soul delighted. I ran over her accomplishments. Once

[028-066] upon a time I had heard her say she could play “Ah! vous dirai-je,

[028-067] maman?” on the piano, but that was long, long ago; that faint shadow of

[028-068] musical acquirement had died out years before. She had also once been

[028-069] able to trace out patterns very nicely for muslin embroidery, by dint of

[028-070] placing a piece of silver paper over the design to be copied, and

[028-071] holding both against the window-pane while she marked the scollop and

[028-072] eyelet-holes. But that was her nearest approach to the accomplishment

[028-073] of drawing, and I did not think it would go very far. Then again, as to

[028-074] the branches of a solid English education—fancy work and the use of the

[028-075] globes—such as the mistress of the Ladies’ Seminary, to which all the

[028-076] tradespeople in [[cranford-town|Cranford]] sent their daughters, professed to teach. Miss

[028-077] Matty’s eyes were failing her, and I doubted if she could discover the

[028-078] number of threads in a worsted-work pattern, or rightly appreciate the

[028-079] different shades required for Queen Adelaide’s face in the loyal

[028-080] wool-work now fashionable in Cranford. As for the use of the globes, I

[028-081] had never been able to find it out myself, so perhaps I was not a good

[028-082] judge of Miss Matty’s capability of instructing in this branch of

[028-083] education; but it struck me that equators and tropics, and such mystical

[028-084] circles, were very imaginary lines indeed to her, and that she looked

[028-085] upon the signs of the Zodiac as so many remnants of the Black Art.

[028-086] What she piqued herself upon, as arts in which she excelled, was making

[028-087] candle-lighters, or “spills” (as she preferred calling them), of

[028-088] coloured paper, cut so as to resemble feathers, and knitting garters in

[028-089] a variety of dainty stitches. I had once said, on receiving a present

[028-090] of an elaborate pair, that I should feel quite tempted to drop one of

[028-091] them in the street, in order to have it admired; but I found this little

[028-092] joke (and it was a very little one) was such a distress to her sense of

[028-093] propriety, and was taken with such anxious, earnest alarm, lest the

[028-094] temptation might some day prove too strong for me, that I quite

[028-095] regretted having ventured upon it. A present of these

[028-096] delicately-wrought garters, a bunch of gay “spills,” or a set of cards

[028-097] on which sewing-silk was wound in a mystical manner, were the well-known

[028-098] tokens of Miss Matty’s favour. But would any one pay to have their

[028-099] children taught these arts? or, indeed, would Miss Matty sell, for

[028-100] filthy lucre, the knack and the skill with which she made trifles of

[028-101] value to those who loved her?

[028-102] I had to come down to reading, writing, and arithmetic; and, in reading

[028-103] the chapter every morning, she always coughed before coming to long

[028-104] words. I doubted her power of getting through a genealogical chapter,

[028-105] with any number of coughs. Writing she did well and delicately—but

[028-106] spelling! She seemed to think that the more out-of-the-way this was,

[028-107] and the more trouble it cost her, the greater the compliment she paid to

[028-108] her correspondent; and words that she would spell quite correctly in her

[028-109] [[letter-writing|letters]] to me became perfect enigmas when she wrote to my father.

[028-110] No! there was nothing she could teach to the rising generation of

[028-111] Cranford, unless they had been quick learners and ready imitators of her

[028-112] patience, her humility, her sweetness, her quiet contentment with all

[028-113] that she could not do. I pondered and pondered until dinner was

[028-114] announced by Martha, with a face all blubbered and swollen with crying.

[028-115] Miss Matty had a few little peculiarities which Martha was apt to regard

[028-116] as whims below her attention, and appeared to consider as childish

[028-117] fancies of which an old lady of fifty-eight should try and cure herself.

[028-118] But to-day everything was attended to with the most careful regard. The

[028-119] bread was cut to the imaginary pattern of excellence that existed in

[028-120] Miss Matty’s mind, as being the way which her mother had preferred, the

[028-121] curtain was drawn so as to exclude the dead brick wall of a neighbour’s

[028-122] stable, and yet left so as to show every tender leaf of the poplar which

[028-123] was bursting into spring beauty. Martha’s tone to Miss Matty was just

[028-124] such as that good, rough-spoken servant usually kept sacred for little

[028-125] children, and which I had never heard her use to any grown-up person.

[028-126] I had forgotten to tell Miss Matty about the pudding, and I was afraid

[028-127] she might not do justice to it, for she had evidently very little

[028-128] appetite this day; so I seized the opportunity of letting her into the

[028-129] secret while Martha took away the meat. Miss Matty’s eyes filled with

[028-130] tears, and she could not speak, either to express surprise or delight,

[028-131] when Martha returned bearing it aloft, made in the most wonderful

[028-132] representation of a lion _couchant_ that ever was moulded. Martha’s

[028-133] face gleamed with triumph as she set it down before Miss Matty with an

[028-134] exultant “There!” Miss Matty wanted to speak her thanks, but could not;

[028-135] so she took Martha’s hand and shook it warmly, which set Martha off

[028-136] crying, and I myself could hardly keep up the necessary composure.

[028-137] Martha burst out of the room, and Miss Matty had to clear her voice once

[028-138] or twice before she could speak. At last she said, “I should like to

[028-139] keep this pudding under a glass shade, my dear!” and the notion of the

[028-140] lion _couchant_, with his currant eyes, being hoisted up to the place of

[028-141] honour on a mantelpiece, tickled my hysterical fancy, and I began to

[028-142] laugh, which rather surprised Miss Matty.

[028-143] “I am sure, dear, I have seen uglier things under a glass shade before

[028-144] now,” said she.

[028-145] So had I, many a time and oft, and I accordingly composed my countenance

[028-146] (and now I could hardly keep from crying), and we both fell to upon the

[028-147] pudding, which was indeed excellent—only every morsel seemed to choke

[028-148] us, our hearts were so full.

[028-149] We had too much to think about to talk much that afternoon. It passed

[028-150] over very tranquilly. But when the tea-urn was brought in a new thought

[028-151] came into my head. Why should not Miss Matty sell tea—be an agent to

[028-152] the East [[india-in-cranford|India]] Tea Company which then existed? I could see no

[028-153] objections to this plan, while the advantages were many—always supposing

[028-154] that Miss Matty could get over the degradation of condescending to

[028-155] anything like trade. Tea was neither greasy nor sticky—grease and

[028-156] stickiness being two of the qualities which Miss Matty could not endure.

[028-157] No shop-window would be required. A small, genteel notification of her

[028-158] being licensed to sell tea would, it is true, be necessary, but I hoped

[028-159] that it could be placed where no one would see it. Neither was tea a

[028-160] heavy article, so as to tax Miss Matty’s fragile strength. The only

[028-161] thing against my plan was the buying and selling involved.

[028-162] While I was giving but absent answers to the questions Miss Matty was

[028-163] putting—almost as absently—we heard a clumping sound on the stairs, and

[028-164] a whispering outside the door, which indeed once opened and shut as if

[028-165] by some invisible agency. After a little while Martha came in, dragging

[028-166] after her a great tall young man, all crimson with shyness, and finding

[028-167] his only relief in perpetually sleeking down his hair.
