---
description: "“Please, ma’am, he’s only Jem Hearn,” said Martha, by way of an introduction; and so out of breath was she that I imagin."
id: ch29
label: "Section 29"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 29

[029-001] “Please, ma’am, he’s only Jem Hearn,” said [[martha|Martha]], by way of an

[029-002] introduction; and so out of breath was she that I imagine she had had

[029-003] some bodily struggle before she could overcome his reluctance to be

[029-004] presented on the courtly scene of Miss [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Matilda Jenkyns]]’s drawing-room.

[029-005] “And please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off-hand. And please, ma’am,

[029-006] we want to take a lodger—just one quiet lodger, to make our two ends

[029-007] meet; and we’d take any house conformable; and, oh dear Miss Matty, if I

[029-008] may be so bold, would you have any objections to lodging with us? Jem

[029-009] wants it as much as I do.” [To Jem ]—“You great oaf! why can’t you back

[029-010] me!—But he does want it all the same, very bad—don’t you, Jem?—only, you

[029-011] see, he’s dazed at being called on to speak before quality.”

[029-012] [Picture: Please, ma’am, he wants to marry me off-hand]

[029-013] “It’s not that,” broke in Jem. “It’s that you’ve taken me all on a

[029-014] sudden, and I didn’t think for to get married so soon—and such quick

[029-015] words does flabbergast a man. It’s not that I’m against it, ma’am”

[029-016] (addressing Miss Matty), “only Martha has such quick ways with her when

[029-017] once she takes a thing into her head; and marriage, ma’am—marriage nails

[029-018] a man, as one may say. I dare say I shan’t mind it after it’s once

[029-019] over.”

[029-020] “Please, ma’am,” said Martha—who had plucked at his sleeve, and nudged

[029-021] him with her elbow, and otherwise tried to interrupt him all the time

[029-022] he had been speaking—“don’t mind him, he’ll come to; ’twas only last

[029-023] night he was an-axing me, and an-axing me, and all the more because I

[029-024] said I could not think of it for years to come, and now he’s only taken

[029-025] aback with the suddenness of the joy; but you know, Jem, you are just as

[029-026] full as me about wanting a lodger.” (Another great nudge.)

[029-027] “Ay! if Miss Matty would lodge with us—otherwise I’ve no mind to be

[029-028] cumbered with strange folk in the house,” said Jem, with a want of tact

[029-029] which I could see enraged Martha, who was trying to represent a lodger

[029-030] as the great object they wished to obtain, and that, in fact, Miss Matty

[029-031] would be smoothing their path and conferring a favour, if she would only

[029-032] come and live with them.

[029-033] Miss Matty herself was bewildered by the pair; their, or rather Martha’s

[029-034] sudden resolution in favour of matrimony staggered her, and stood

[029-035] between her and the contemplation of the plan which Martha had at heart.

[029-036] Miss Matty began—

[029-037] “Marriage is a very solemn thing, Martha.”

[029-038] “It is indeed, ma’am,” quoth Jem. “Not that I’ve no objections to

[029-039] Martha.”

[029-040] “You’ve never let me a-be for asking me for to fix when I would be

[029-041] married,” said Martha—her face all a-fire, and ready to cry with

[029-042] vexation—“and now you’re shaming me before my missus and all.”

[029-043] “Nay, now! Martha don’t ee! don’t ee! only a man likes to have

[029-044] breathing-time,” said Jem, trying to possess himself of her hand, but in

[029-045] vain. Then seeing that she was more seriously hurt than he had

[029-046] imagined, he seemed to try to rally his scattered faculties, and with

[029-047] more straightforward dignity than, ten minutes before, I should have

[029-048] thought it possible for him to assume, he turned to Miss Matty, and

[029-049] said, “I hope, ma’am, you know that I am bound to respect every one who

[029-050] has been kind to Martha. I always looked on her as to be my wife—some

[029-051] time; and she has often and often spoken of you as the kindest lady that

[029-052] ever was; and though the plain truth is, I would not like to be troubled

[029-053] with lodgers of the common run, yet if, ma’am, you’d honour us by living

[029-054] with us, I’m sure Martha would do her best to make you comfortable; and

[029-055] I’d keep out of your way as much as I could, which I reckon would be the

[029-056] best kindness such an awkward chap as me could do.”

[029-057] Miss Matty had been very busy with taking off her spectacles, wiping

[029-058] them, and replacing them; but all she could say was, “Don’t let any

[029-059] thought of me hurry you into marriage: pray don’t. Marriage is such a

[029-060] very solemn thing!”

[029-061] “But Miss Matilda will think of your plan, Martha,” said I, struck with

[029-062] the advantages that it offered, and unwilling to lose the opportunity of

[029-063] considering about it. “And I’m sure neither she nor I can ever forget

[029-064] your kindness; nor yours either, Jem.”

[029-065] “Why, yes, ma’am! I’m sure I mean kindly, though I’m a bit fluttered by

[029-066] being pushed straight ahead into matrimony, as it were, and mayn’t

[029-067] express myself conformable. But I’m sure I’m willing enough, and give

[029-068] me time to get accustomed; so, Martha, wench, what’s the use of crying

[029-069] so, and slapping me if I come near?”

[029-070] This last was _sotto voce_, and had the effect of making Martha bounce

[029-071] out of the room, to be followed and soothed by her lover. Whereupon

[029-072] Miss Matty sat down and cried very heartily, and accounted for it by

[029-073] saying that the thought of Martha being married so soon gave her quite a

[029-074] shock, and that she should never forgive herself if she thought she was

[029-075] hurrying the poor creature. I think my pity was more for Jem, of the

[029-076] two; but both Miss Matty and I appreciated to the full the kindness of

[029-077] the honest couple, although we said little about this, and a good deal

[029-078] about the chances and dangers of matrimony.

[029-079] The next morning, very early, I received a note from [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]], so

[029-080] mysteriously wrapped up, and with so many seals on it to secure secrecy,

[029-081] that I had to tear the paper before I could unfold it. And when I came

[029-082] to the writing I could hardly understand the meaning, it was so involved

[029-083] and oracular. I made out, however, that I was to go to Miss Pole’s at

[029-084] eleven o’clock; the number _eleven_ being written in full length as well

[029-085] as in numerals, and _A.M._ twice dashed under, as if I were very likely

[029-086] to come at eleven at night, when all [[cranford-town|Cranford]] was usually abed and

[029-087] asleep by ten. There was no signature except Miss Pole’s initials

[029-088] reversed, P.E.; but as Martha had given me the note, “with Miss Pole’s

[029-089] kind regards,” it needed no wizard to find out who sent it; and if the

[029-090] writer’s name was to be kept secret, it was very well that I was alone

[029-091] when Martha delivered it.

[029-092] I went as requested to Miss Pole’s. The door was opened to me by her

[029-093] little maid Lizzy in Sunday trim, as if some grand event was impending

[029-094] over this work-day. And the drawing-room upstairs was arranged in

[029-095] accordance with this idea. The table was set out with the best green

[029-096] card-cloth, and writing materials upon it. On the little chiffonier was

[029-097] a tray with a newly-decanted bottle of cowslip wine, and some

[029-098] ladies’-finger biscuits. Miss Pole herself was in solemn array, as if

[029-099] to receive visitors, although it was only eleven o’clock. [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]]

[029-100] was there, crying quietly and sadly, and my arrival seemed only to call

[029-101] forth fresh tears. Before we had finished our greetings, performed with

[029-102] lugubrious mystery of demeanour, there was another rat-tat-tat, and Mrs

[029-103] Fitz-Adam appeared, crimson with walking and excitement. It seemed as

[029-104] if this was all the company expected; for now Miss Pole made several

[029-105] demonstrations of being about to open the business of the meeting, by

[029-106] stirring the fire, opening and shutting the door, and coughing and

[029-107] blowing her nose. Then she arranged us all round the table, taking care

[029-108] to place me opposite to her; and last of all, she inquired of me if the

[029-109] sad report was true, as she feared it was, that Miss Matty had lost all

[029-110] her fortune?

[029-111] Of course, I had but one answer to make; and I never saw more unaffected

[029-112] sorrow depicted on any countenances than I did there on the three before

[029-113] me.

[029-114] “I wish [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]] was here!” said Mrs Forrester at last; but to judge

[029-115] from [[mrs-fitz-adam|Mrs Fitz-Adam]]’s face, she could not second the wish.

[029-116] “But without Mrs Jamieson,” said Miss Pole, with just a sound of

[029-117] offended merit in her voice, “we, the ladies of Cranford, in my

[029-118] drawing-room assembled, can resolve upon something. I imagine we are

[029-119] none of us what may be called rich, though we all possess a genteel

[029-120] competency, sufficient for tastes that are elegant and refined, and

[029-121] would not, if they could, be vulgarly ostentatious.” (Here I observed

[029-122] Miss Pole refer to a small card concealed in her hand, on which I

[029-123] imagine she had put down a few notes.)

[029-124] “Miss Smith,” she continued, addressing me (familiarly known as “Mary”

[029-125] to all the company assembled, but this was a state occasion), “I have

[029-126] conversed in private—I made it my business to do so yesterday

[029-127] afternoon—with these ladies on the misfortune which has happened to our

[029-128] friend, and one and all of us have agreed that while we have a

[029-129] superfluity, it is not only a duty, but a pleasure—a true pleasure,

[029-130] Mary!”—her voice was rather choked just here, and she had to wipe her

[029-131] spectacles before she could go on—“to give what we can to assist

[029-132] her—Miss Matilda Jenkyns. Only in consideration of the feelings of

[029-133] delicate independence existing in the mind of every refined female”—I

[029-134] was sure she had got back to the card now—“we wish to contribute our

[029-135] mites in a secret and concealed manner, so as not to hurt the feelings I

[029-136] have referred to. And our object in requesting you to meet us this

[029-137] morning is that, believing you are the daughter—that your father is, in

[029-138] fact, her confidential adviser, in all pecuniary matters, we imagined

[029-139] that, by consulting with him, you might devise some mode in which our

[029-140] contribution could be made to appear the legal due which Miss Matilda

[029-141] Jenkyns ought to receive from—— Probably your father, knowing her

[029-142] investments, can fill up the blank.”

[029-143] Miss Pole concluded her address, and looked round for approval and

[029-144] agreement.

[029-145] “I have expressed your meaning, ladies, have I not? And while Miss

[029-146] Smith considers what reply to make, allow me to offer you some little

[029-147] refreshment.”

[029-148] I had no great reply to make: I had more thankfulness at my heart for

[029-149] their kind thoughts than I cared to put into words; and so I only

[029-150] mumbled out something to the effect “that I would name what Miss Pole

[029-151] had said to my father, and that if anything could be arranged for dear

[029-152] Miss Matty,”—and here I broke down utterly, and had to be refreshed with

[029-153] a glass of cowslip wine before I could check the crying which had been

[029-154] repressed for the last two or three days. The worst was, all the ladies

[029-155] cried in concert. Even Miss Pole cried, who had said a hundred times

[029-156] that to betray emotion before any one was a sign of weakness and want of

[029-157] self-control. She recovered herself into a slight degree of impatient

[029-158] anger, directed against me, as having set them all off; and, moreover, I

[029-159] think she was vexed that I could not make a speech back in return for

[029-160] hers; and if I had known beforehand what was to be said, and had a card

[029-161] on which to express the probable feelings that would rise in my heart, I

[029-162] would have tried to gratify her. As it was, Mrs Forrester was the

[029-163] person to speak when we had recovered our composure.

[029-164] “I don’t mind, among friends, stating that I—no! I’m not poor exactly,

[029-165] but I don’t think I’m what you may call rich; I wish I were, for dear

[029-166] Miss Matty’s sake—but, if you please, I’ll write down in a sealed paper

[029-167] what I can give. I only wish it was more; my dear Mary, I do indeed.”

[029-168] Now I saw why paper, pens, and ink were provided. Every lady wrote down

[029-169] the sum she could give annually, signed the paper, and sealed it

[029-170] mysteriously. If their proposal was acceded to, my father was to be

[029-171] allowed to open the papers, under pledge of secrecy. If not, they were

[029-172] to be returned to their writers.
