---
description: "When the ceremony had been gone through, I rose to depart; but each lady seemed to wish to have a private conference wit."
id: ch30
label: "Section 30"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 30

[030-001] When the [[etiquette|ceremony]] had been gone through, I rose to depart; but each lady

[030-002] seemed to wish to have a private conference with me. [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] kept me

[030-003] in the drawing-room to explain why, in [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s absence, she had

[030-004] taken the lead in this “movement,” as she was pleased to call it, and

[030-005] also to inform me that she had heard from good sources that Mrs Jamieson

[030-006] was coming home directly in a state of high displeasure against her

[030-007] sister-in-law, who was forthwith to leave her house, and was, she

[030-008] believed, to return to Edinburgh that very afternoon. Of course this

[030-009] piece of intelligence could not be communicated before [[mrs-fitz-adam|Mrs Fitz-Adam]],

[030-010] more especially as Miss Pole was inclined to think that [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]]’s

[030-011] engagement to [[mr-hoggins|Mr Hoggins]] could not possibly hold against the blaze of

[030-012] Mrs Jamieson’s displeasure. A few hearty inquiries after [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]]’s

[030-013] health concluded my interview with Miss Pole.

[030-014] On coming downstairs I found [[mrs-forrester|Mrs Forrester]] waiting for me at the

[030-015] entrance to the dining-parlour; she drew me in, and when the door was

[030-016] shut, she tried two or three times to begin on some subject, which was

[030-017] so unapproachable apparently, that I began to despair of our ever

[030-018] getting to a clear understanding. At last out it came; the poor old

[030-019] lady trembling all the time as if it were a great crime which she was

[030-020] exposing to daylight, in telling me how very, very little she had to

[030-021] live upon; a confession which she was brought to make from a dread lest

[030-022] we should think that the small contribution named in her paper bore any

[030-023] proportion to her love and regard for Miss Matty. And yet that sum

[030-024] which she so eagerly relinquished was, in truth, more than a twentieth

[030-025] part of what she had to live upon, and keep house, and a little

[030-026] serving-maid, all as became one born a Tyrrell. And when the whole

[030-027] income does not nearly amount to a hundred pounds, to give up a

[030-028] twentieth of it will necessitate many careful economies, and many pieces

[030-029] of self-denial, small and insignificant in the world’s account, but

[030-030] bearing a different value in another account-book that I have heard of.

[030-031] She did so wish she was rich, she said, and this wish she kept

[030-032] repeating, with no thought of herself in it, only with a longing,

[030-033] yearning desire to be able to heap up Miss Matty’s measure of comforts.

[030-034] It was some time before I could console her enough to leave her; and

[030-035] then, on quitting the house, I was waylaid by Mrs Fitz-Adam, who had

[030-036] also her confidence to make of pretty nearly the opposite description.

[030-037] She had not liked to put down all that she could afford and was ready to

[030-038] give. She told me she thought she never could look Miss Matty in the

[030-039] face again if she presumed to be giving her so much as she should like

[030-040] to do. “Miss Matty!” continued she, “that I thought was such a fine

[030-041] young lady when I was nothing but a country girl, coming to market with

[030-042] eggs and butter and such like things. For my father, though well-to-do,

[030-043] would always make me go on as my mother had done before me, and I had to

[030-044] come into [[cranford-town|Cranford]] every Saturday, and see after sales, and prices, and

[030-045] what not. And one day, I remember, I met Miss Matty in the lane that

[030-046] leads to Combehurst; she was walking on the footpath, which, you know,

[030-047] is raised a good way above the road, and a gentleman rode beside her,

[030-048] and was talking to her, and she was looking down at some primroses she

[030-049] had gathered, and pulling them all to pieces, and I do believe she was

[030-050] crying. But after she had passed, she turned round and ran after me to

[030-051] ask—oh, so kindly—about my poor mother, who lay on her death-bed; and

[030-052] when I cried she took hold of my hand to comfort me—and the gentleman

[030-053] waiting for her all the time—and her poor heart very full of something,

[030-054] I am sure; and I thought it such an honour to be spoken to in that

[030-055] pretty way by the rector’s daughter, who visited at [[arley-hall|Arley Hall]]. I have

[030-056] loved her ever since, though perhaps I’d no right to do it; but if you

[030-057] can think of any way in which I might be allowed to give a little more

[030-058] without any one knowing it, I should be so much obliged to you, my dear.

[030-059] And my brother would be delighted to doctor her for nothing—medicines,

[030-060] leeches, and all. I know that he and her ladyship (my dear, I little

[030-061] thought in the days I was telling you of that I should ever come to be

[030-062] sister-in-law to a ladyship!) would do anything for her. We all would.”

[030-063] I told her I was quite sure of it, and promised all sorts of things in

[030-064] my anxiety to get home to Miss Matty, who might well be wondering what

[030-065] had become of me—absent from her two hours without being able to account

[030-066] for it. She had taken very little note of time, however, as she had

[030-067] been occupied in numberless little arrangements preparatory to the great

[030-068] step of giving up her house. It was evidently a relief to her to be

[030-069] doing something in the way of retrenchment, for, as she said, whenever

[030-070] she paused to think, the recollection of the poor fellow with his bad

[030-071] five-pound note came over her, and she felt quite dishonest; only if it

[030-072] made her so uncomfortable, what must it not be doing to the directors of

[030-073] the bank, who must know so much more of the misery consequent upon this

[030-074] failure? She almost made me angry by dividing her sympathy between

[030-075] these directors (whom she imagined overwhelmed by self-reproach for the

[030-076] mismanagement of other people’s affairs) and those who were suffering

[030-077] like her. Indeed, of the two, she seemed to think poverty a lighter

[030-078] burden than self-reproach; but I privately doubted if the directors

[030-079] would agree with her.

[030-080] Old hoards were taken out and examined as to their money value which

[030-081] luckily was small, or else I don’t know how Miss Matty would have

[030-082] prevailed upon herself to part with such things as her mother’s

[030-083] wedding-ring, the strange, uncouth brooch with which her father had

[030-084] disfigured his shirt-frill, &c. However, we arranged things a little in

[030-085] order as to their pecuniary estimation, and were all ready for my father

[030-086] when he came the next morning.

[030-087] I am not going to weary you with the details of all the business we went

[030-088] through; and one reason for not telling about them is, that I did not

[030-089] understand what we were doing at the time, and cannot recollect it now.

[030-090] Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts, and schemes, and reports,

[030-091] and documents, of which I do not believe we either of us understood a

[030-092] word; for my father was clear-headed and decisive, and a capital man of

[030-093] business, and if we made the slightest inquiry, or expressed the

[030-094] slightest want of comprehension, he had a sharp way of saying, “Eh? eh?

[030-095] it’s as clear as daylight. What’s your objection?” And as we had not

[030-096] comprehended anything of what he had proposed, we found it rather

[030-097] difficult to shape our objections; in fact, we never were sure if we had

[030-098] any. So presently Miss Matty got into a nervously acquiescent state,

[030-099] and said “Yes,” and “Certainly,” at every pause, whether required or

[030-100] not; but when I once joined in as chorus to a “Decidedly,” pronounced by

[030-101] Miss Matty in a tremblingly dubious tone, my father fired round at me

[030-102] and asked me “What there was to decide?” And I am sure to this day I

[030-103] have never known. But, in justice to him, I must say he had come over

[030-104] from Drumble to help Miss Matty when he could ill spare the time, and

[030-105] when his own affairs were in a very anxious state.

[030-106] [Picture: Miss Matty and I sat assenting to accounts]

[030-107] While Miss Matty was out of the room giving orders for luncheon—and

[030-108] sadly perplexed between her desire of honouring my father by a delicate,

[030-109] dainty meal, and her conviction that she had no right, now that all her

[030-110] money was gone, to indulge this desire—I told him of the meeting of the

[030-111] Cranford ladies at Miss Pole’s the day before. He kept brushing his

[030-112] hand before his eyes as I spoke—and when I went back to [[martha|Martha]]’s offer

[030-113] the evening before, of receiving Miss Matty as a lodger, he fairly

[030-114] walked away from me to the window, and began drumming with his fingers

[030-115] upon it. Then he turned abruptly round, and said, “See, Mary, how a

[030-116] good, innocent life makes friends all around. Confound it! I could

[030-117] make a good lesson out of it if I were a parson; but, as it is, I can’t

[030-118] get a tail to my sentences—only I’m sure you feel what I want to say.

[030-119] You and I will have a walk after lunch and talk a bit more about these

[030-120] plans.”

[030-121] The lunch—a hot savoury mutton-chop, and a little of the cold loin

[030-122] sliced and fried—was now brought in. Every morsel of this last dish was

[030-123] finished, to Martha’s great gratification. Then my father bluntly told

[030-124] Miss Matty he wanted to talk to me alone, and that he would stroll out

[030-125] and see some of the old places, and then I could tell her what plan we

[030-126] thought desirable. Just before we went out, she called me back and

[030-127] said, “Remember, dear, I’m the only one left—I mean, there’s no one to

[030-128] be hurt by what I do. I’m willing to do anything that’s right and

[030-129] honest; and I don’t think, if Deborah knows where she is, she’ll care so

[030-130] very much if I’m not genteel; because, you see, she’ll know all, dear.

[030-131] Only let me see what I can do, and pay the poor people as far as I’m

[030-132] able.”

[030-133] I gave her a hearty kiss, and ran after my father. The result of our

[030-134] conversation was this. If all parties were agreeable, Martha and Jem

[030-135] were to be married with as little delay as possible, and they were to

[030-136] live on in Miss Matty’s present abode; the sum which the Cranford ladies

[030-137] had agreed to contribute annually being sufficient to meet the greater

[030-138] part of the rent, and leaving Martha free to appropriate what Miss Matty

[030-139] should pay for her lodgings to any little extra comforts required.

[030-140] [[About]] the sale, my father was dubious at first. He said [[the-rectory|the old rectory]]

[030-141] furniture, however carefully used and reverently treated, would fetch

[030-142] very little; and that little would be but as a drop in the sea of the

[030-143] debts of the [[town-and-county-bank|Town and County Bank]]. But when I represented how Miss

[030-144] Matty’s tender conscience would be soothed by feeling that she had done

[030-145] what she could, he gave way; especially after I had told him the

[030-146] five-pound note adventure, and he had scolded me well for allowing it.

[030-147] I then alluded to my idea that she might add to her small income by

[030-148] selling [[tea-drinking|tea]]; and, to my surprise (for I had nearly given up the plan),

[030-149] my father grasped at it with all the energy of a tradesman. I think he

[030-150] reckoned his chickens before they were hatched, for he immediately ran

[030-151] up the profits of the sales that she could effect in Cranford to more

[030-152] than twenty pounds a year. The small dining-parlour was to be converted

[030-153] into a shop, without any of its degrading characteristics; a table was

[030-154] to be the counter; one window was to be retained unaltered, and the

[030-155] other changed into a glass door. I evidently rose in his estimation for

[030-156] having made this bright suggestion. I only hoped we should not both

[030-157] fall in Miss Matty’s.

[030-158] But she was patient and content with all our arrangements. She knew,

[030-159] she said, that we should do the best we could for her; and she only

[030-160] hoped, only stipulated, that she should pay every farthing that she

[030-161] could be said to owe, for her father’s sake, who had been so respected

[030-162] in Cranford. My father and I had agreed to say as little as possible

[030-163] about the bank, indeed never to mention it again, if it could be helped.

[030-164] Some of the plans were evidently a little perplexing to her; but she

[030-165] had seen me sufficiently snubbed in the morning for want of

[030-166] comprehension to venture on too many inquiries now; and all passed over

[030-167] well with a hope on her part that no one would be hurried into marriage

[030-168] on her account. When we came to the proposal that she should sell tea, I

[030-169] could see it was rather a shock to her; not on account of any personal

[030-170] loss of gentility involved, but only because she distrusted her own

[030-171] powers of action in a new line of life, and would timidly have preferred

[030-172] a little more privation to any exertion for which she feared she was

[030-173] unfitted. However, when she saw my father was bent upon it, she sighed,

[030-174] and said she would try; and if she did not do well, of course she might

[030-175] give it up. One good thing about it was, she did not think men ever

[030-176] bought tea; and it was of men particularly she was afraid. They had

[030-177] such sharp loud ways with them; and did up accounts, and counted their

[030-178] change so quickly! Now, if she might only sell comfits to children, she

[030-179] was sure she could please them!
