---
description: "CHAPTER XV. A HAPPY RETURN BEFORE I left Miss Matty at Cranford everything had been comfortably arranged for her."
id: ch31
label: "Section 31"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 31

[031-001] CHAPTER XV.

[031-002] A HAPPY RETURN

[031-003] BEFORE I left [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]] at [[cranford-town|Cranford]] everything had been comfortably

[031-004] arranged for her. Even [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s approval of her selling [[tea-drinking|tea]] had

[031-005] been gained. That oracle had taken a few days to consider whether by so

[031-006] doing Miss Matty would forfeit her right to the privileges of society in

[031-007] Cranford. I think she had some little idea of mortifying [[lady-glenmire|Lady Glenmire]]

[031-008] by the decision she gave at last; which was to this effect: that whereas

[031-009] a married woman takes her husband’s rank by the strict laws of

[031-010] precedence, an unmarried woman retains the station her father occupied.

[031-011] So Cranford was allowed to visit Miss Matty; and, whether allowed or

[031-012] not, it intended to visit Lady Glenmire.

[031-013] But what was our surprise—our dismay—when we learnt that Mr and _Mrs

[031-014] Hoggins_ were returning on the following Tuesday! Mrs Hoggins! Had

[031-015] she absolutely dropped her title, and so, in a spirit of bravado, cut

[031-016] the [[aristocracy-in-cranford|aristocracy]] to become a Hoggins! She, who might have been called

[031-017] Lady Glenmire to her dying day! Mrs Jamieson was pleased. She said it

[031-018] only convinced her of what she had known from the first, that the

[031-019] creature had a low taste. But “the creature” looked very happy on

[031-020] Sunday at church; nor did we see it necessary to keep our veils down on

[031-021] that side of our bonnets on which Mr and Mrs Hoggins sat, as Mrs

[031-022] Jamieson did; thereby missing all the smiling glory of his face, and all

[031-023] the becoming blushes of hers. I am not sure if [[martha|Martha]] and Jem looked

[031-024] more radiant in the afternoon, when they, too, made their first

[031-025] appearance. Mrs Jamieson soothed the turbulence of her soul by having

[031-026] the blinds of her windows drawn down, as if for a funeral, on the day

[031-027] when Mr and Mrs Hoggins received callers; and it was with some

[031-028] difficulty that she was prevailed upon to continue the _St James’s

[031-029] Chronicle_, so indignant was she with its having inserted the

[031-030] announcement of the marriage.

[031-031] [Picture: Smiling glory ... and becoming blushes]

[031-032] Miss Matty’s sale went off famously. She retained the furniture of her

[031-033] sitting-room and bedroom; the former of which she was to occupy till

[031-034] Martha could meet with a lodger who might wish to take it; and into this

[031-035] sitting-room and bedroom she had to cram all sorts of things, which were

[031-036] (the auctioneer assured her) bought in for her at the sale by an unknown

[031-037] friend. I always suspected [[mrs-fitz-adam|Mrs Fitz-Adam]] of this; but she must have had

[031-038] an accessory, who knew what articles were particularly regarded by Miss

[031-039] Matty on account of their associations with her early days. The rest of

[031-040] the house looked rather bare, to be sure; all except one tiny bedroom,

[031-041] of which my father allowed me to purchase the furniture for my

[031-042] occasional use in case of Miss Matty’s illness.

[031-043] I had expended my own small store in buying all manner of comfits and

[031-044] lozenges, in order to tempt the little people whom Miss Matty loved so

[031-045] much to come about her. Tea in bright green canisters, and comfits in

[031-046] tumblers—Miss Matty and I felt quite proud as we looked round us on the

[031-047] evening before the shop was to be opened. Martha had scoured the

[031-048] boarded floor to a white cleanness, and it was adorned with a brilliant

[031-049] piece of oil-cloth, on which customers were to stand before the

[031-050] table-counter. The wholesome smell of plaster and whitewash pervaded the

[031-051] apartment. A very small “Matilda Jenkyns, licensed to sell tea,” was

[031-052] hidden under the lintel of the new door, and two boxes of tea, with

[031-053] cabalistic inscriptions all over them, stood ready to disgorge their

[031-054] contents into the canisters.

[031-055] Miss Matty, as I ought to have mentioned before, had had some scruples

[031-056] of conscience at selling tea when there was already Mr Johnson in the

[031-057] town, who included it among his numerous commodities; and, before she

[031-058] could quite reconcile herself to the adoption of her new business, she

[031-059] had trotted down to his shop, unknown to me, to tell him of the project

[031-060] that was entertained, and to inquire if it was likely to injure his

[031-061] business. My father called this idea of hers “great nonsense,” and

[031-062] “wondered how tradespeople were to get on if there was to be a continual

[031-063] consulting of each other’s interests, which would put a stop to all

[031-064] competition directly.” And, perhaps, it would not have done in Drumble,

[031-065] but in Cranford it answered very well; for not only did Mr Johnson

[031-066] kindly put at rest all Miss Matty’s scruples and fear of injuring his

[031-067] business, but I have reason to know he repeatedly sent customers to her,

[031-068] saying that the teas he kept were of a common kind, but that Miss

[031-069] Jenkyns had all the choice sorts. And expensive tea is a very favourite

[031-070] luxury with well-to-do tradespeople and rich farmers’ wives, who turn up

[031-071] their noses at the Congou and Souchong prevalent at many tables of

[031-072] gentility, and will have nothing else than Gunpowder and Pekoe for

[031-073] themselves.

[031-074] But to return to Miss Matty. It was really very pleasant to see how her

[031-075] unselfishness and simple sense of justice called out the same good

[031-076] qualities in others. She never seemed to think any one would impose

[031-077] upon her, because she should be so grieved to do it to them. I have

[031-078] heard her put a stop to the asseverations of the man who brought her

[031-079] coals by quietly saying, “I am sure you would be sorry to bring me wrong

[031-080] weight;” and if the coals were short measure that time, I don’t believe

[031-081] they ever were again. People would have felt as much ashamed of

[031-082] presuming on her good faith as they would have done on that of a child.

[031-083] But my father says “such simplicity might be very well in Cranford, but

[031-084] would never do in the world.” And I fancy the world must be very bad,

[031-085] for with all my father’s suspicion of every one with whom he has

[031-086] dealings, and in spite of all his many precautions, he lost upwards of a

[031-087] thousand pounds by roguery only last year.

[031-088] I just stayed long enough to establish Miss Matty in her new mode of

[031-089] life, and to pack up the library, which the rector had purchased. He

[031-090] had written a very kind letter to Miss Matty, saying “how glad he should

[031-091] be to take a library, so well selected as he knew that the late Mr

[031-092] Jenkyns’s must have been, at any valuation put upon them.” And when she

[031-093] agreed to this, with a touch of sorrowful gladness that they would go

[031-094] back to [[the-jenkyns-rectory|the rectory]] and be arranged on the accustomed walls once more,

[031-095] he sent word that he feared that he had not room for them all, and

[031-096] perhaps Miss Matty would kindly allow him to leave some volumes on her

[031-097] shelves. But Miss Matty said that she had her Bible and “Johnson’s

[031-098] Dictionary,” and should not have much time for reading, she was afraid;

[031-099] still, I retained a few [[reading-in-cranford|books]] out of consideration for the rector’s

[031-100] kindness.

[031-101] The money which he had paid, and that produced by the sale, was partly

[031-102] expended in the stock of tea, and part of it was invested against a

[031-103] rainy day—_i.e._ old age or illness. It was but a small sum, it is

[031-104] true; and it occasioned a few evasions of truth and white lies (all of

[031-105] which I think very wrong indeed—in theory—and would rather not put them

[031-106] in practice), for we knew Miss Matty would be perplexed as to her duty

[031-107] if she were aware of any little reserve-fund being made for her while

[031-108] the debts of the bank remained unpaid. Moreover, she had never been

[031-109] told of the way in which her friends were contributing to pay the rent.

[031-110] I should have liked to tell her this, but the mystery of the affair gave

[031-111] a piquancy to their deed of kindness which the ladies were unwilling to

[031-112] give up; and at first Martha had to shirk many a perplexed question as

[031-113] to her ways and means of living in such a house, but by-and-by Miss

[031-114] Matty’s prudent uneasiness sank down into acquiescence with the existing

[031-115] arrangement.

[031-116] I left Miss Matty with a good heart. Her sales of tea during the first

[031-117] two days had surpassed my most sanguine expectations. The whole country

[031-118] round seemed to be all out of tea at once. The only alteration I could

[031-119] have desired in Miss Matty’s way of doing business was, that she should

[031-120] not have so plaintively entreated some of her customers not to buy green

[031-121] tea—running it down as a slow poison, sure to destroy the nerves, and

[031-122] produce all manner of evil. Their pertinacity in taking it, in spite of

[031-123] all her warnings, distressed her so much that I really thought she would

[031-124] relinquish the sale of it, and so lose half her custom; and I was driven

[031-125] to my wits’ end for instances of longevity entirely attributable to a

[031-126] persevering use of green tea. But the final argument, which settled the

[031-127] question, was a happy reference of mine to the train-oil and tallow

[031-128] candles which the Esquimaux not only enjoy but digest. After that she

[031-129] acknowledged that “one man’s meat might be another man’s poison,” and

[031-130] contented herself thence-forward with an occasional remonstrance when

[031-131] she thought the purchaser was too young and innocent to be acquainted

[031-132] with the evil effects green tea produced on some constitutions, and an

[031-133] habitual sigh when people old enough to choose more wisely would prefer

[031-134] it.

[031-135] I went over from Drumble once a quarter at least to settle the accounts,

[031-136] and see after the necessary business [[letter-writing|letters]]. And, speaking of letters,

[031-137] I began to be very much ashamed of remembering my letter to the Aga

[031-138] Jenkyns, and very glad I had never named my writing to any one. I only

[031-139] hoped the letter was lost. No answer came. No sign was made.

[031-140] [[About]] a year after Miss Matty set up shop, I received one of Martha’s

[031-141] hieroglyphics, begging me to come to Cranford very soon. I was afraid

[031-142] that Miss Matty was ill, and went off that very afternoon, and took

[031-143] Martha by surprise when she saw me on opening the door. We went into

[031-144] the kitchen as usual, to have our confidential conference, and then

[031-145] Martha told me she was expecting her confinement very soon—in a week or

[031-146] two; and she did not think Miss Matty was aware of it, and she wanted me

[031-147] to break the news to her, “for indeed, miss,” continued Martha, crying

[031-148] hysterically, “I’m afraid she won’t approve of it, and I’m sure I don’t

[031-149] know who is to take care of her as she should be taken care of when I am

[031-150] laid up.”

[031-151] I comforted Martha by telling her I would remain till she was about

[031-152] again, and only wished she had told me her reason for this sudden

[031-153] summons, as then I would have brought the requisite stock of clothes.

[031-154] But Martha was so tearful and tender-spirited, and unlike her usual

[031-155] self, that I said as little as possible about myself, and endeavoured

[031-156] rather to comfort Martha under all the probable and possible misfortunes

[031-157] which came crowding upon her imagination.

[031-158] I then stole out of the house-door, and made my appearance as if I were

[031-159] a customer in the shop, just to take Miss Matty by surprise, and gain an

[031-160] idea of how she looked in her new situation. It was warm May weather,

[031-161] so only the little half-door was closed; and Miss Matty sat behind the

[031-162] counter, knitting an elaborate pair of garters; elaborate they seemed to

[031-163] me, but the difficult stitch was no weight upon her mind, for she was

[031-164] singing in a low voice to herself as her needles went rapidly in and

[031-165] out. I call it singing, but I dare say a musician would not use that

[031-166] word to the tuneless yet sweet humming of the low worn voice. I found

[031-167] out from the words, far more than from the attempt at the tune, that it

[031-168] was the Old Hundredth she was crooning to herself; but the quiet

[031-169] continuous sound told of content, and gave me a pleasant feeling, as I

[031-170] stood in the street just outside the door, quite in harmony with that

[031-171] soft May morning. I went in. At first she did not catch who it was,

[031-172] and stood up as if to serve me; but in another minute watchful pussy had

[031-173] clutched her knitting, which was dropped in eager joy at seeing me. I

[031-174] found, after we had had a little conversation, that it was as Martha

[031-175] said, and that Miss Matty had no idea of the approaching household

[031-176] event. So I thought I would let things take their course, secure that

[031-177] when I went to her with the baby in my arms, I should obtain that

[031-178] forgiveness for Martha which she was needlessly frightening herself into

[031-179] believing that Miss Matty would withhold, under some notion that the new

[031-180] claimant would require attentions from its mother that it would be

[031-181] faithless treason to Miss Matty to render.
