---
description: "But I was right. I think that must be an hereditary quality, for my father says he is scarcely ever wrong."
id: ch32
label: "Section 32"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 32

[032-001] But I was right. I think that must be an hereditary quality, for my

[032-002] father says he is scarcely ever wrong. One morning, within a week after

[032-003] I arrived, I went to call [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]], with a little bundle of flannel in

[032-004] my arms. She was very much awestruck when I showed her what it was, and

[032-005] asked for her spectacles off the dressing-table, and looked at it

[032-006] curiously, with a sort of tender wonder at its small perfection of

[032-007] parts. She could not banish the thought of the surprise all day, but

[032-008] went about on tiptoe, and was very silent. But she stole up to see

[032-009] [[martha|Martha]] and they both cried with joy, and she got into a complimentary

[032-010] speech to Jem, and did not know how to get out of it again, and was only

[032-011] extricated from her dilemma by the sound of the shop-bell, which was an

[032-012] equal relief to the shy, proud, honest Jem, who shook my hand so

[032-013] vigorously when I congratulated him, that I think I feel the pain of it

[032-014] yet.

[032-015] [Picture: I went to call Miss Matty]

[032-016] I had a busy life while Martha was laid up. I attended on Miss Matty,

[032-017] and prepared her meals; I cast up her accounts, and examined into the

[032-018] state of her canisters and tumblers. I helped her, too, occasionally,

[032-019] in the shop; and it gave me no small amusement, and sometimes a little

[032-020] uneasiness, to watch her ways there. If a little child came in to ask

[032-021] for an ounce of almond-comfits (and four of the large kind which Miss

[032-022] Matty sold weighed that much), she always added one more by “way of

[032-023] make-weight,” as she called it, although the scale was handsomely turned

[032-024] before; and when I remonstrated against this, her reply was, “The little

[032-025] things like it so much!” There was no use in telling her that the fifth

[032-026] comfit weighed a quarter of an ounce, and made every sale into a loss to

[032-027] her pocket. So I remembered the green [[tea-drinking|tea]], and winged my shaft with a

[032-028] feather out of her own plumage. I told her how unwholesome

[032-029] almond-comfits were, and how ill excess in them might make the little

[032-030] children. This argument produced some effect; for, henceforward,

[032-031] instead of the fifth comfit, she always told them to hold out their tiny

[032-032] palms, into which she shook either peppermint or ginger lozenges, as a

[032-033] preventive to the dangers that might arise from the previous sale.

[032-034] Altogether the lozenge trade, conducted on these principles, did not

[032-035] promise to be remunerative; but I was happy to find she had made more

[032-036] than twenty pounds during the last year by her sales of tea; and,

[032-037] moreover, that now she was accustomed to it, she did not dislike the

[032-038] employment, which brought her into kindly intercourse with many of the

[032-039] people round about. If she gave them good weight, they, in their turn,

[032-040] brought many a little country present to the “old rector’s daughter”; a

[032-041] cream cheese, a few new-laid eggs, a little fresh ripe fruit, a bunch of

[032-042] flowers. The counter was quite loaded with these offerings sometimes,

[032-043] as she told me.

[032-044] As for [[cranford-town|Cranford]] in general, it was going on much as usual. The Jamieson

[032-045] and Hoggins feud still raged, if a feud it could be called, when only

[032-046] one side cared much about it. Mr and Mrs Hoggins were very happy

[032-047] together, and, like most very happy people, quite ready to be friendly;

[032-048] indeed, Mrs Hoggins was really desirous to be restored to [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]]’s

[032-049] good graces, because of the former intimacy. But Mrs Jamieson

[032-050] considered their very happiness an insult to the Glenmire family, to

[032-051] which she had still the honour to belong, and she doggedly refused and

[032-052] rejected every advance. Mr Mulliner, like a faithful clansman, espoused

[032-053] his mistress’s side with ardour. If he saw either Mr or Mrs Hoggins, he

[032-054] would cross the street, and appear absorbed in the contemplation of life

[032-055] in general, and his own path in particular, until he had passed them by.

[032-056] [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] used to amuse herself with wondering what in the world Mrs

[032-057] Jamieson would do, if either she, or Mr Mulliner, or any other member of

[032-058] her household was taken ill; she could hardly have the face to call in

[032-059] [[mr-hoggins|Mr Hoggins]] after the way she had behaved to them. Miss Pole grew quite

[032-060] impatient for some indisposition or accident to befall Mrs Jamieson or

[032-061] her dependents, in order that Cranford might see how she would act under

[032-062] the perplexing circumstances.

[032-063] Martha was beginning to go about again, and I had already fixed a limit,

[032-064] not very far distant, to my visit, when one afternoon, as I was sitting

[032-065] in the shop-parlour with Miss Matty—I remember the weather was colder

[032-066] now than it had been in May, three weeks before, and we had a fire and

[032-067] kept the door fully closed—we saw a gentleman go slowly past the window,

[032-068] and then stand opposite to the door, as if looking out for the name

[032-069] which we had so carefully hidden. He took out a double eyeglass and

[032-070] peered about for some time before he could discover it. Then he came

[032-071] in. And, all on a sudden, it flashed across me that it was the Aga

[032-072] himself! For his clothes had an out-of-the-way foreign cut about them,

[032-073] and his face was deep brown, as if tanned and re-tanned by the sun. His

[032-074] complexion contrasted oddly with his plentiful snow-white hair, his eyes

[032-075] were dark and piercing, and he had an odd way of contracting them and

[032-076] puckering up his cheeks into innumerable wrinkles when he looked

[032-077] earnestly at objects. He did so to Miss Matty when he first came in.

[032-078] His glance had first caught and lingered a little upon me, but then

[032-079] turned, with the peculiar searching look I have described, to Miss

[032-080] Matty. She was a little fluttered and nervous, but no more so than she

[032-081] always was when any man came into her shop. She thought that he would

[032-082] probably have a note, or a sovereign at least, for which she would have

[032-083] to give change, which was an operation she very much disliked to

[032-084] perform. But the present customer stood opposite to her, without asking

[032-085] for anything, only looking fixedly at her as he drummed upon the table

[032-086] with his fingers, just for all the world as [[miss-jenkyns-deborah|Miss Jenkyns]] used to do.

[032-087] Miss Matty was on the point of asking him what he wanted (as she told me

[032-088] afterwards), when he turned sharp to me: “Is your name Mary Smith?”

[032-089] “Yes!” said I.

[032-090] All my doubts as to his identity were set at rest, and I only wondered

[032-091] what he would say or do next, and how Miss Matty would stand the joyful

[032-092] shock of what he had to reveal. Apparently he was at a loss how to

[032-093] announce himself, for he looked round at last in search of something to

[032-094] buy, so as to gain time, and, as it happened, his eye caught on the

[032-095] almond-comfits, and he boldly asked for a pound of “those things.” I

[032-096] doubt if Miss Matty had a whole pound in the shop, and, besides the

[032-097] unusual magnitude of the order, she was distressed with the idea of the

[032-098] indigestion they would produce, taken in such unlimited quantities. She

[032-099] looked up to remonstrate. Something of tender relaxation in his face

[032-100] struck home to her heart. She said, “It is—oh, sir! can you be Peter?”

[032-101] and trembled from head to foot. In a moment he was round the table and

[032-102] had her in his arms, sobbing the tearless cries of old age. I brought

[032-103] her a glass of wine, for indeed her colour had changed so as to alarm me

[032-104] and Mr Peter too. He kept saying, “I have been too sudden for you,

[032-105] Matty—I have, my little girl.”

[032-106] I proposed that she should go at once up into the drawing-room and lie

[032-107] down on the sofa there. She looked wistfully at her brother, whose hand

[032-108] she had held tight, even when nearly fainting; but on his assuring her

[032-109] that he would not leave her, she allowed him to carry her upstairs.

[032-110] I thought that the best I could do was to run and put the kettle on the

[032-111] fire for early tea, and then to attend to the shop, leaving the brother

[032-112] and sister to exchange some of the many thousand things they must have

[032-113] to say. I had also to break the news to Martha, who received it with a

[032-114] burst of tears which nearly infected me. She kept recovering herself to

[032-115] ask if I was sure it was indeed Miss Matty’s brother, for I had

[032-116] mentioned that he had grey hair, and she had always heard that he was a

[032-117] very handsome young man. Something of the same kind perplexed Miss

[032-118] Matty at tea-time, when she was installed in the great easy-chair

[032-119] opposite to Mr Jenkyns in order to gaze her fill. She could hardly

[032-120] drink for looking at him, and as for eating, that was out of the

[032-121] question.

[032-122] “I suppose hot climates age people very quickly,” said she, almost to

[032-123] herself. “When you left Cranford you had not a grey hair in your head.”

[032-124] “But how many years ago is that?” said Mr Peter, smiling.

[032-125] “Ah, true! yes, I suppose you and I are getting old. But still I did

[032-126] not think we were so very old! But white hair is very becoming to you,

[032-127] Peter,” she continued—a little afraid lest she had hurt him by revealing

[032-128] how his appearance had impressed her.

[032-129] “I suppose I forgot dates too, Matty, for what do you think I have

[032-130] brought for you from [[india-in-cranford|India]]? I have an Indian muslin gown and a pearl

[032-131] necklace for you somewhere in my chest at Portsmouth.” He smiled as if

[032-132] amused at the idea of the incongruity of his presents with the

[032-133] appearance of his sister; but this did not strike her all at once, while

[032-134] the elegance of the articles did. I could see that for a moment her

[032-135] imagination dwelt complacently on the idea of herself thus attired; and

[032-136] instinctively she put her hand up to her throat—that little delicate

[032-137] throat which (as Miss Pole had told me) had been one of her youthful

[032-138] charms; but the hand met the touch of folds of soft muslin in which she

[032-139] was always swathed up to her chin, and the sensation recalled a sense of

[032-140] the unsuitableness of a pearl necklace to her age. She said, “I’m

[032-141] afraid I’m too old; but it was very kind of you to think of it. They

[032-142] are just what I should have liked years ago—when I was young.”

[032-143] “So I thought, my little Matty. I remembered your tastes; they were so

[032-144] like my dear mother’s.” At the mention of that name the brother and

[032-145] sister clasped each other’s hands yet more fondly, and, although they

[032-146] were perfectly silent, I fancied they might have something to say if

[032-147] they were unchecked by my presence, and I got up to arrange my room for

[032-148] Mr Peter’s occupation that night, intending myself to share Miss Matty’s

[032-149] bed. But at my movement, he started up. “I must go and settle about a

[032-150] room at the ‘George.’ My carpet-bag is there too.”

[032-151] “No!” said Miss Matty, in great distress—“you must not go; please, dear

[032-152] Peter—pray, Mary—oh! you must not go!”

[032-153] She was so much agitated that we both promised everything she wished.

[032-154] Peter sat down again and gave her his hand, which for better security

[032-155] she held in both of hers, and I left the room to accomplish my

[032-156] arrangements.

[032-157] Long, long into the night, far, far into the morning, did Miss Matty and

[032-158] I talk. She had much to tell me of her brother’s life and adventures,

[032-159] which he had communicated to her as they had sat alone. She said all

[032-160] was thoroughly clear to her; but I never quite understood the whole

[032-161] story; and when in after days I lost my awe of Mr Peter enough to

[032-162] question him myself, he laughed at my curiosity, and told me stories

[032-163] that sounded so very much like Baron Munchausen’s, that I was sure he

[032-164] was making fun of me. What I heard from Miss Matty was that he had been

[032-165] a volunteer at the siege of Rangoon; had been taken prisoner by the

[032-166] Burmese; and somehow obtained favour and eventual freedom from knowing

[032-167] how to bleed the chief of the small tribe in some case of dangerous

[032-168] illness; that on his release from years of captivity he had had his

[032-169] [[letter-writing|letters]] returned from England with the ominous word “Dead” marked upon

[032-170] them; and, believing himself to be the last of his race, he had settled

[032-171] down as an indigo planter, and had proposed to spend the remainder of

[032-172] his life in the country to whose inhabitants and modes of life he had

[032-173] become habituated, when my letter had reached him; and, with the odd

[032-174] vehemence which characterised him in age as it had done in youth, he had

[032-175] sold his land and all his possessions to the first purchaser, and come

[032-176] home to the poor old sister, who was more glad and rich than any

[032-177] princess when she looked at him. She talked me to sleep at last, and

[032-178] then I was awakened by a slight sound at the door, for which she begged

[032-179] my pardon as she crept penitently into bed; but it seems that when I

[032-180] could no longer confirm her belief that the long-lost was really

[032-181] here—under the same roof—she had begun to fear lest it was only a waking

[032-182] dream of hers; that there never had been a Peter sitting by her all that

[032-183] blessed evening—but that the real Peter lay dead far away beneath some

[032-184] wild sea-wave, or under some strange eastern tree. And so strong had

[032-185] this nervous feeling of hers become, that she was fain to get up and go

[032-186] and convince herself that he was really there by listening through the

[032-187] door to his even, regular breathing—I don’t like to call it snoring, but

[032-188] I heard it myself through two closed doors—and by-and-by it soothed Miss

[032-189] Matty to sleep.
