---
description: "But when I arrived in Cranford, nothing was as yet ascertained of Mrs Jamieson’s own intentions; would the honourable la."
id: ch34
label: "Section 34"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 34

[034-001] But when I arrived in [[cranford-town|Cranford]], nothing was as yet ascertained of Mrs

[034-002] Jamieson’s own intentions; would the honourable lady go, or would she

[034-003] not? Mr Peter declared that she should and she would; [[miss-pole|Miss Pole]] shook

[034-004] her head and desponded. But Mr Peter was a man of resources. In the

[034-005] first place, he persuaded [[miss-matty-jenkyns|Miss Matty]] to write to [[lady-glenmire|Mrs Gordon]], and to tell

[034-006] her of [[mrs-fitz-adam|Mrs Fitz-Adam]]’s existence, and to beg that one so kind, and

[034-007] cordial, and generous, might be included in the pleasant invitation. An

[034-008] answer came back by return of post, with a pretty little note for Mrs

[034-009] Fitz-Adam, and a request that Miss Matty would deliver it herself and

[034-010] explain the previous omission. Mrs Fitz-Adam was as pleased as could

[034-011] be, and thanked Miss Matty over and over again. Mr Peter had said,

[034-012] “Leave [[mrs-jamieson|Mrs Jamieson]] to me;” so we did; especially as we knew nothing

[034-013] that we could do to alter her determination if once formed.

[034-014] I did not know, nor did Miss Matty, how things were going on, until Miss

[034-015] Pole asked me, just the day before Mrs Gordon came, if I thought there

[034-016] was anything between Mr Peter and Mrs Jamieson in the matrimonial line,

[034-017] for that Mrs Jamieson was really going to the lunch at the “George.”

[034-018] She had sent Mr Mulliner down to desire that there might be a footstool

[034-019] put to the warmest seat in the room, as she meant to come, and knew that

[034-020] their chairs were very high. Miss Pole had picked this piece of news

[034-021] up, and from it she conjectured all sorts of things, and bemoaned yet

[034-022] more. “If Peter should marry, what would become of poor dear Miss Matty?

[034-023] And Mrs Jamieson, of all people!” Miss Pole seemed to think there were

[034-024] other ladies in Cranford who would have done more credit to his choice,

[034-025] and I think she must have had someone who was unmarried in her head, for

[034-026] she kept saying, “It was so wanting in delicacy in a [[widowhood-in-cranford|widow]] to think of

[034-027] such a thing.”

[034-028] When I got back to Miss Matty’s I really did begin to think that Mr

[034-029] Peter might be thinking of Mrs Jamieson for a wife, and I was as unhappy

[034-030] as Miss Pole about it. He had the proof sheet of a great placard in his

[034-031] hand. “Signor Brunoni, Magician to the King of Delhi, the Rajah of

[034-032] Oude, and the great Lama of Thibet,” &c. &c., was going to “perform in

[034-033] Cranford for one night only,” the very next night; and Miss Matty,

[034-034] exultant, showed me a letter from the Gordons, promising to remain over

[034-035] this gaiety, which Miss Matty said was entirely Peter’s doing. He had

[034-036] written to ask the signor to come, and was to be at all the expenses of

[034-037] the affair. Tickets were to be sent gratis to as many as the room would

[034-038] hold. In short, Miss Matty was charmed with the plan, and said that

[034-039] to-morrow Cranford would remind her of the Preston Guild, to which she

[034-040] had been in her youth—a luncheon at the “George,” with the dear Gordons,

[034-041] and the signor in [[the-assembly-rooms|the Assembly Room]] in the evening. But I—I looked only

[034-042] at the fatal words:—

[034-043] “_Under the Patronage of the_ HONOURABLE MRS JAMIESON.”

[034-044] She, then, was chosen to preside over this entertainment of Mr Peter’s;

[034-045] she was perhaps going to displace my dear Miss Matty in his heart, and

[034-046] make her life lonely once more! I could not look forward to the morrow

[034-047] with any pleasure; and every innocent anticipation of Miss Matty’s only

[034-048] served to add to my annoyance.

[034-049] So, angry and irritated, and exaggerating every little incident which

[034-050] could add to my irritation, I went on till we were all assembled in the

[034-051] great parlour at the “George.” Major and Mrs Gordon and pretty Flora

[034-052] and Mr Ludovic were all as bright and handsome and friendly as could be;

[034-053] but I could hardly attend to them for watching Mr Peter, and I saw that

[034-054] Miss Pole was equally busy. I had never seen Mrs Jamieson so roused and

[034-055] animated before; her face looked full of interest in what Mr Peter was

[034-056] saying. I drew near to listen. My relief was great when I caught that

[034-057] his words were not words of love, but that, for all his grave face, he

[034-058] was at his old tricks. He was telling her of his travels in [[india-in-cranford|India]], and

[034-059] describing the wonderful height of the Himalaya mountains: one touch

[034-060] after another added to their size, and each exceeded the former in

[034-061] absurdity; but Mrs Jamieson really enjoyed all in perfect good faith. I

[034-062] suppose she required strong stimulants to excite her to come out of her

[034-063] apathy. Mr Peter wound up his account by saying that, of course, at

[034-064] that altitude there were none of the [[pets-in-cranford|animals]] to be found that existed in

[034-065] the lower regions; the game,—everything was different. Firing one day

[034-066] at some flying creature, he was very much dismayed when it fell, to find

[034-067] that he had shot a cherubim! Mr Peter caught my eye at this moment, and

[034-068] gave me such a funny twinkle, that I felt sure he had no thoughts of Mrs

[034-069] Jamieson as a wife from that time. She looked uncomfortably amazed—

[034-070] “But, Mr Peter, shooting a cherubim—don’t you think—I am afraid that was

[034-071] sacrilege!”

[034-072] Mr Peter composed his countenance in a moment, and appeared shocked at

[034-073] the idea, which, as he said truly enough, was now presented to him for

[034-074] the first time; but then Mrs Jamieson must remember that he had been

[034-075] living for a long time among savages—all of whom were heathens—some of

[034-076] them, he was afraid, were downright Dissenters. Then, seeing Miss Matty

[034-077] draw near, he hastily changed the conversation, and after a little

[034-078] while, turning to me, he said, “Don’t be shocked, prim little Mary, at

[034-079] all my wonderful stories. I consider Mrs Jamieson fair game, and

[034-080] besides I am bent on propitiating her, and the first step towards it is

[034-081] keeping her well awake. I bribed her here by asking her to let me have

[034-082] her name as patroness for my poor conjuror this evening; and I don’t

[034-083] want to give her time enough to get up her rancour against the

[034-084] Hogginses, who are just coming in. I want everybody to be friends, for

[034-085] it harasses Matty so much to hear of these quarrels. I shall go at it

[034-086] again by-and-by, so you need not look shocked. I intend to enter the

[034-087] Assembly Room to-night with Mrs Jamieson on one side, and my lady, Mrs

[034-088] Hoggins, on the other. You see if I don’t.”

[034-089] Somehow or another he did; and fairly got them into conversation

[034-090] together. Major and Mrs Gordon helped at the good work with their

[034-091] perfect ignorance of any existing coolness between any of the

[034-092] inhabitants of Cranford.

[034-093] Ever since that day there has been the old friendly sociability in

[034-094] [[the-cranford-ladies|Cranford society]]; which I am thankful for, because of my dear Miss

[034-095] Matty’s love of peace and kindliness. We all love Miss Matty, and I

[034-096] somehow think we are all of us better when she is near us.

[034-097] * * * * *

[034-098] PRINTED BY

[034-099] TURNBULL AND SPEARS,

[034-100] EDINBURGH

[034-101] *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRANFORD ***

[034-102] Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will

[034-103] be renamed.

[034-104] Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright

[034-105] law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

[034-106] so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United

[034-107] States without permission and without paying copyright

[034-108] royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

[034-109] of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

[034-110] Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™

[034-111] concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

[034-112] and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

[034-113] the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

[034-114] of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for

[034-115] copies
