---
description: "Produced by Douglas Levy, for Nikki"
id: ch001
label: "Section 1"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[001-001]Produced by Douglas Levy, for Nikki

[001-002]HEDDA GABLER

[001-003]By Henrik Ibsen

[001-004]Translated by Edmund Gosse and William Archer

[001-005]Introduction by William Archer

[001-006]INTRODUCTION.

[001-007]From Munich, on June 29, 1890, Ibsen wrote to the Swedish poet, Count

[001-008]Carl Soilsky: "Our intention has all along been to spend the summer in

[001-009]the Tyrol again. But circumstances are against our doing so. I am at

[001-010]present engaged upon a new dramatic work, which for several reasons has

[001-011]made very slow progress, and I do not leave Munich until I can take with

[001-012]me the completed first draft. There is little or no prospect of my being

[001-013]able to complete it in July." Ibsen did not leave Munich at all that

[001-014]season. On October 30 he wrote: "At present I am utterly engrossed in

[001-015]a new play. Not one leisure hour have I had for several months." Three

[001-016]weeks later (November 20) he wrote to his French translator, Count

[001-017]Prozor: "My new play is finished; the manuscript went off to Copenhagen

[001-018]the day before yesterday.... It produces a curious feeling of emptiness

[001-019]to be thus suddenly separated from a work which has occupied one's time

[001-020]and thoughts for several months, to the exclusion of all else. But it is

[001-021]a good thing, too, to have done with it. The constant intercourse with

[001-022]the fictitious personages was beginning to make me quite nervous." To

[001-023]the same correspondent he wrote on December 4: "The title of the play is

[001-024]_[[Hedda-Gabler|Hedda Gabler]]_. My intention in giving it this name was to indicate

[001-025]that Hedda, as a personality, is to be regarded rather as her father's

[001-026]daughter than as her husband's wife. It was not my desire to deal in

[001-027]this play with so-called problems. What I principally wanted to do was

[001-028]to depict human beings, human emotions, and human destinies, upon a

[001-029]groundwork of certain of the social conditions and principles of the

[001-030]present day."

[001-031]So far we read the history of the play in the official

[001-032]"Correspondence."(1) Some interesting glimpses into the poet's moods

[001-033]during the period between the completion of _The Lady from the Sea_

[001-034]and the publication of _Hedda Gabler_ are to be found in the series of

[001-035]letters to Fraulein Emilie Bardach, of Vienna, published by Dr. George

[001-036]Brandes.(2) This young lady Ibsen met at Gossensass in the Tyrol in

[001-037]the autumn of 1889. The record of their brief friendship belongs to the

[001-038]history of _The Master Builder_ rather than to that of _Hedda Gabler_,

[001-039]but the allusions to his work in his letters to her during the winter of

[001-040]1889 demand some examination.

[001-041]So early as October 7, 1889, he writes to her: "A new poem begins to

[001-042]dawn in me. I will execute it this winter, and try to transfer to it

[001-043]the bright atmosphere of the summer. But I feel that it will end in

[001-044]sadness--such is my nature." Was this "dawning" poem _Hedda Gabler_? Or

[001-045]was it rather _The Master Builder_ that was germinating in his mind? Who

[001-046]shall say? The latter hypothesis seems the more probable, for it is hard

[001-047]to believe that at any stage in the incubation of _Hedda Gabler_ he can

[001-048]have conceived it as even beginning in gaiety. A week later, however,

[001-049]he appears to have made up his mind that the time had not come for the

[001-050]poetic utilisation of his recent experiences. He writes on October 15:

[001-051]"Here I sit as usual at my writing-table. Now I would fain work, but

[001-052]am unable to. My fancy, indeed, is very active. But it always wanders

[001-053]away ours. I cannot repress my summer memories--nor do I wish to. I live

[001-054]through my experience again and again and yet again. To transmute it

[001-055]all into a poem, I find, in the meantime, impossible." Clearly, then,

[001-056]he felt that his imagination ought to have been engaged on some theme

[001-057]having no relation to his summer experiences--the theme, no doubt, of

[001-058]_Hedda Gabler_. In his next letter, dated October 29, he writes: "Do not

[001-059]be troubled because I cannot, in the meantime, create (_dichten_). In

[001-060]reality I am for ever creating, or, at any rate, dreaming of something

[001-061]which, when in the fulness of time it ripens, will reveal itself as

[001-062]a creation (_Dichtung_)." On November 19 he says: "I am very busily

[001-063]occupied with preparations for my new poem. I sit almost the whole day

[001-064]at my writing-table. Go out only in the evening for a little while." The

[001-065]five following letters contain no allusion to the play; but on September

[001-066]18, 1890, he wrote: "My wife and son are at present at Riva, on the Lake

[001-067]of Garda, and will probably remain there until the middle of October,

[001-068]or even longer. Thus I am quite alone here, and cannot get away. The new

[001-069]play on which I am at present engaged will probably not be ready until

[001-070]November, though I sit at my writing-table daily, and almost the whole

[001-071]day long."

[001-072]Here ends the history of _Hedda Gabler_, so far as the poet's

[001-073]letters carry us. Its hard clear outlines, and perhaps somewhat bleak

[001-074]atmosphere, seem to have resulted from a sort of reaction against the

[001-075]sentimental "dreamery" begotten of his Gossensass experiences. He

[001-076]sought refuge in the chill materialism of Hedda from the ardent

[001-077]transcendentalism of Hilda, whom he already heard knocking at the door.

[001-078]He was not yet in the mood to deal with her on the plane of poetry.(3)

[001-079]_Hedda Gabler_ was published in Copenhagen on December 16, 1890. This

[001-080]was the first of Ibsen's plays to be translated from proof-sheets and

[001-081]published in England and America almost simultaneously with its first

[001-082]appearance in Scandinavia. The earliest theatrical performance took

[001-083]place at the Residenz Theater, Munich, on the last day of January 1891,

[001-084]in the presence of the poet, Frau Conrad-Ramlo playing the title-part.

[001-085]The Lessing Theater, Berlin, followed suit on February 10. Not till

[001-086]February 25 was the play seen in Copenhagen, with Fru Hennings as Hedda.

[001-087]On the following night it was given for the first time in Christiania,

[001-088]the Norwegian Hedda being Froken Constance Bruun. It was this production

[001-089]which the poet saw when he visited the Christiania Theater for the first

[001-090]time after his return to Norway, August 28, 1891. It would take pages

[001-091]to give even the baldest list of the productions and revivals of _Hedda

[001-092]Gabler_ in Scandinavia and Germany, where it has always ranked among

[001-093]Ibsen's most popular works. The admirable production of the play by Miss

[001-094]Elizabeth Robins and Miss Marion Lea, at the Vaudeville Theatre,

[001-095]London, April 20, 1891, may rank as the second great step towards

[001-096]the popularisation of Ibsen in England, the first being the

[001-097]Charrington-Achurch production of _A Doll's House_ in 1889. Miss Robins

[001-098]afterwards repeated her fine performance of Hedda many times, in London,

[001-099]in the English provinces, and in New York. The character has also been

[001-100]acted in London by Eleonora Duse, and as I write (March, 5, 1907) by

[001-101]Mrs. Patrick Campbell, at the Court Theatre. In Australia and America,

[001-102]Hedda has frequently been acted by Miss Nance O'Neill and other

[001-103]actresses--quite recently by a Russian actress, Madame Alla Nazimova,

[001-104]who (playing in English) seems to have made a notable success both in

[001-105]this part and in Nora. The first French Hedda Gabler was Mlle. Marthe

[001-106]Brandes, who played the part at the Vaudeville Theatre, Paris, on

[001-107]December 17, 1891, the performance being introduced by a lecture by M.

[001-108]Jules Lemaitre. In Holland, in Italy, in Russia, the play has been acted

[001-109]times without number. In short (as might easily have been foretold) it

[001-110]has rivalled _A Doll's House_ in world-wide popularity.

[001-111]It has been suggested,(4) I think without sufficient ground, that Ibsen

[001-112]deliberately conceived _Hedda Gabler_ as an "international" play, and

[001-113]that the scene is really the "west end" of any European city. To me

[001-114]it seems quite clear that Ibsen had Christiania in mind, and the

[001-115]Christiania of a somewhat earlier period than the 'nineties. The

[001-116]electric cars, telephones, and other conspicuous factors in the life of

[001-117]a modern capital are notably absent from the play. There is no electric

[001-118]light in Secretary Falk's villa. It is still the habit for ladies to

[001-119]return on foot from evening parties, with gallant swains escorting them.

[001-120]This "suburbanism," which so distressed the London critics of 1891,

[001-121]was characteristic of the Christiania Ibsen himself had known in the

[001-122]'sixties--the Christiania of _Love's Comedy_--rather than of the

[001-123]greatly extended and modernised city of the end of the century. Moreover

[001-124]Lovborg's allusions to the fiord, and the suggested picture of Sheriff

[001-125]Elvsted, his family and his avocations are all distinctively Norwegian.

[001-126]The truth seems to be very simple--the environment and the subsidiary

[001-127]personages are all thoroughly national, but Hedda herself is an

[001-128]"international" type, a product of civilisation by no means peculiar to

[001-129]Norway.

[001-130]We cannot point to any individual model or models who "sat to" Ibsen for

[001-131]the character of Hedda.(5) The late Grant Allen declared that Hedda was

[001-132]"nothing more nor less than the girl we take down to dinner in London

[001-133]nineteen times out of twenty"; in which case Ibsen must have suffered

[001-134]from a superfluidity of models, rather than from any difficulty in

[001-135]finding one. But the fact is that in this, as in all other instances,

[001-136]the word "model" must be taken in a very different sense from that in

[001-137]which it is commonly used in painting. Ibsen undoubtedly used models for

[001-138]this trait and that, but never for a whole figure. If his characters can

[001-139]be called portraits at all, they are composite portraits. Even when it

[001-140]seems pretty clear that the initial impulse towards the creation of a

[001-141]particular character came from some individual, the original figure is

[001-142]entirely transmuted in the process of harmonisation with the dramatic

[001-143]scheme. We need not, therefore, look for a definite prototype of Hedda;

[001-144]but Dr. Brandes shows that two of that lady's exploits were probably

[001-145]suggested by the anecdotic history of the day.

[001-146]Ibsen had no doubt heard how the wife of a well-known Norwegian

[001-147]composer, in a fit of raging jealousy excited by her husband's prolonged

[001-148]absence from home, burnt the manuscript of a symphony which he had just

[001-149]finished. The circumstances under which Hedda burns Lovborg's manuscript

[001-150]are, of course, entirely different and infinitely more dramatic;

[001-151]but here we have merely another instance of the dramatisation or

[001-152]"poetisation" of the raw material of life. Again, a still more painful

[001-153]incident probably came to his knowledge about the same time. A beautiful

[001-154]and very intellectual woman was married to a well-known man who had been

[001-155]addicted to drink, but had entirely conquered the vice. One day a mad

[001-156]whim seized her to put his self-mastery and her power over him to the

[001-157]test. As it happened to be his birthday, she rolled into his study a

[001-158]small keg of brandy, and then withdrew. She returned some time after

[001-159]wards to find that he had broached the keg, and lay insensible on the

[001-160]floor. In this anecdote we cannot but recognise the germ, not only of

[001-161]Hedda's temptation of Lovborg, but of a large part of her character.

[001-162]"Thus," says Dr. Brandes, "out of small and scattered traits of reality

[001-163]Ibsen fashioned his close-knit and profoundly thought-out works of art."

[001-164]For the character of [[Eilert-Lovborg|Eilert Lovborg]], again, Ibsen seem unquestionably

[001-165]to have borrowed several traits from a definite original. A young Danish

[001-166]man of letters, whom Dr. Brandes calls Holm, was an enthusiastic admirer

[001-167]of Ibsen, and came to be on very friendly terms with him. One day Ibsen

[001-168]was astonished to receive, in Munich, a parcel addressed from Berlin by

[001-169]this young man, containing, without a word of explanation, a packet of

[001-170]his (Ibsen's) letters, and a photograph which he had presented to Holm.

[001-171]Ibsen brooded and brooded over the incident, and at last came to the

[001-172]conclusion that the young man had intended to return her letters and

[001-173]photograph to a young lady to whom he was known to be attached, and had

[001-174]in a fit of aberration mixed up the two objects of his worship. Some

[001-175]time after, Holm appeared at Ibsen's rooms. He talked quite rationally,

[001-176]but professed to have no knowledge whatever of the letter-incident,

[001-177]though he admitted the truth of Ibsen's conjecture that the "belle dame

[001-178]sans merci" had demanded the return of her letters and portrait. Ibsen

[001-179]was determined to get at the root of the mystery; and a little inquiry

[001-180]into his young friend's habits revealed the fact that he broke his fast

[001-181]on a bottle of port wine, consumed a bottle of Rhine wine at lunch, of

[001-182]Burgundy at dinner, and finished off the evening with one or two more

[001-183]bottles of port. Then he heard, too, how, in the course of a night's

[001-184]carouse, Holm had lost the manuscript of a book; and in these traits he

[001-185]saw the outline of the figure of Eilert Lovborg.
