---
description: "Article 146 of The Passions of the Soul — Part II"
id: article-146
label: "146. The desires that depend on us and on other things"
tags: ["part-ii"]
type: chapter
---

# Article 146: The desires that depend on us and on other things

[146-001] So we should •entirely reject the common view that there is a ‘fortune’ outside us that makes things happen or not happen, just as it pleases, and should •recognize that everything is directed by divine Providence, whose eternal decree is infallible and immutable. So much so that we must consider everything that affects us as occurring necessarily and as it were by fate, so that it would be an error to desire things to happen in any other way. [[[rene-descartes]] builds into that sentence a qualification. Instead of ‘everything’, he says ‘everything except for matters that this decree has chosen to make dependent on our free will’.] But most of our desires extend to matters that depend partly on us and partly on other things; and within any such desired outcome we should carefully pick out just the part that does depend only on us, so as to limit our desire to that alone. As for the other part, although we should consider its outcome to be entirely fated and immutable (so as to prevent our desire from occupying itself with them), we must nevertheless consider the reasons that make it more or less likely, so as to use these reasons in governing our actions. Example: We have business in a place that we could reach by either of two routes, of which x is usually much safer than y. Providence may—·for all we know to the contrary·—have decreed that if we go by x we’ll certainly be robbed, whereas we can travel by y without any danger. That shouldn’t make us regard the choice of route as a toss-up. . . . Reason wants us to choose the route that is usually the safer. . . [Descartes continues, in an immensely complex sentence, to say in effect: . . . and if we do take that route, whatever happens to us on it, we have satisfied any reasonable desire that we might have had. If we are robbed on the safe route, we know that this was inevitable from our point of view, and we had no basis for wishing to be exempt from it; it’s enough that we did the best we could given the limitations on our knowledge. He continues:] It is certain that when we apply ourselves to distinguish fate [here = ‘Providence’] from fortune in this way, we easily get the habit of regulating our desires so that their fulfillment depends only on us, so that they can always to give us complete satisfaction.
