---
description: 
id: ch19
label: "Chapter XIX"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[019-001] [[bobby-merrick|Bobby Merrick]]’s decision to request a four months’ leave had been based ostensibly upon an extended correspondence with Dr. Emil Arnstadt of [[vienna|Vienna]]. Arnstadt had been long at work on the coagulation cautery project before the Merrick invention was announced. Immediately he had sought full information about it which was promptly and cheerfully given. Then had sprung up the warmest attachment between them, leading to Arnstadt’s ardent hope that Doctor Merrick would come to Vienna for a leisurely conference on their mutual interests.

[019-002] “We have much to give each other,” wrote Arnstadt. “It is well we should meet.”

[019-003] In the scales alongside Arnstadt’s intriguing invitation was an importunate letter from Jack [[doctor-dawson|Dawson]], down on all fours in supplication.

[019-004] “No small matter, I tell you, to be asked into conference with Arnstadt! You’ve got to come. It’s equivalent to a command! You’ve got to come for my sake! You must realize I’ve never felt decent about the way I came here as the winner of a prize you tossed into my lap. You shouldn’t have done it. Of course, as it has all turned out, you’ve more achievement to your credit than had you written that exam in full for old Appleton and taken the persimmons you so jolly well deserved. I never had any illusions, old chap, about my winning the first honours and this prize. You handed them over to me because you thought I needed them more than you. I never felt easy about it. But—now that Arnstadt wants to do you this honour, don’t refuse. It will make me a heap more comfortable, I can tell you!”

[019-005] But these pressing invitations to Vienna were not the actual driving reasons why Bobby Merrick had decided to spend the summer in Europe. The real tug, he was bound to admit, resided in the fact that [[helen-brent|Helen Hudson]] was conducting a small party of tourists through Italy and France. He had a hope of meeting her. She was interfering with his work, disturbing him in his sleep, making him restless, absentminded, distraught. However she might regard him, he must see her again, if to no better purpose than to change the torturing mental picture he carried of her, shamed and hurt by his unintended impudence. Some kind of reconciliation must be attempted. He had accepted his expulsion from his Fool’s Paradise, and no longer cherished the notion that he could reinstate himself with Helen; but it would be worth the trip to see her—let her be indignant, indifferent, or contemptuous. He must dispose somehow of this haunting picture of her, hurt and humiliated.

[019-006] He had kept track of her movements through [[joyce-hudson|Joyce]], who had quite voluntarily confided the essential facts of Helen’s sudden departure from [[detroit|Detroit]] the next morning after the execrable theatre party. It was apparent that Joyce had not been informed—and equally apparent that she very much wanted to know—what business had drawn her young stepmother impulsively out to [[brightwood-hospital-institution|Brightwood]], that winter afternoon. In Joyce’s mind there seemed an inevitable sequence relating that event to Helen’s sudden departure for New York, early next day, on some unexplained errand.

[019-007] Short of actually putting a thumbscrew on him, Joyce’s inquisitiveness to learn how much Bobby knew about it was persistent, ingenious, desperate; but she received small pay for the news she offered as bait.

[019-008] Exactly why [[helen-hudson|Helen Hudson]] wanted or needed employment badly enough to become a routing agent in the office of the Beamond and Grayson Travel Bureau, Joyce couldn’t imagine. It was so unlike her. She hated routine. She wasn’t used to taking orders or keeping hours. She was about as practical as a Persian kitten on a satin pillow.

[019-009] Bobby had had to listen to an inordinate amount of this, astounded at his own patience, though in his honest moments he reflected that had Joyce not prattled so volubly of her own accord he would have been obliged to prime her to it.

[019-010] He was thankful enough for her gift of garrulity the day she told him Helen was about to leave the New York office for Cherbourg, as the conductor of a small party.

[019-011] “Does Joyce annoy you, Bobby?” demanded [[nancy-ashford|Nancy Ashford]] one afternoon, with her disconcerting directness.

[019-012] “Oh—not at all!” he had replied, feeling a bit silly.

[019-013] “As I thought! … She has just been offered an interesting position as a home visitor with the Juvenile Protective League. I shall press her to take it.”

[019-014] Duly pressed, Joyce accepted the new job. On her last day at [[brightwood-hospital|Brightwood]], she cornered him as he was leaving the hospital at five.

[019-015] “I won’t be seeing you any more, will I?” she said. “I’m leaving, you know.”

[019-016] “Why—that is true,” he replied, as if it had not occurred to him before. “You’ll be busy, and you know how this ties me up here. I do hope you like your new work. You must let us know how you get on with it, Joyce.”

[019-017] “You couldn’t come and see me sometimes? I’m going to be horribly lonely.” It was evident that the speech cost her something. She forced it with an effort.

[019-018] “Oh—I don’t go anywhere … Unsocial as an oyster … This business is cruelly confining. Some day I hope to have a little more time for—”

[019-019] She laughed, nervously, mirthlessly.

[019-020] “Don’t say any more, Bobby. It’s plain you don’t want to … Goodbye! I may not see you for a long time.”

[019-021] He took her cool hand and repeated his good wishes. The episode left him uncomfortable. It had been a decidedly awkward situation. Maybe, if old Tommy could be bucked up, somehow, Joyce might be willing to give him another try. It was worth looking into.

[019-022] ---

[019-023] Arriving in New York that Friday morning, the twenty-second of May—he was sailing on the *Majestic* the next day at four—Bobby had hunted his old friend down and was startled at the change in him. Tommy was seedy, shiny, spiritless, and had skipped patches under his jowls in shaving … Not much wonder Joyce wanted some other employment besides looking after Tommy.

[019-024] They had lunch together and tried heroically to recover their long lost collegiate mood, but it was rough going. Too much water had gone under the bridge … Too little water had gone into Tommy.

[019-025] “Sometimes—” Masterson furtively pushed a soiled cuff back into his coat-sleeve, and attempted to steady his leaky spoon—“sometimes, I’ve had a notion to end it. If I wasn’t such a damned coward, I’d have done it long ago.”

[019-026] So—there being at last a definite motion before the house, Bobby discussed it. Masterson was of the artist type that required a deal of encouragement and adulation. It couldn’t be laid on too heavily. Tommy had always possessed an almost infinite capacity for absorbing glory, laud, and praise. Unquestionably Joyce could have kept her man on the rails had she been a little less frugal with his necessary rations of ambrosia. Well, it was high time he had some. Bobby fed him on the rich confectionery of appreciation all day and left him hilariously drunk with it at midnight—drunk as ever he had been on whisky. He was going to perk up and show ’em, by the Eternal, that he had the stuff! He’d been temporarily depressed, but—as Bobby had said—that was naturally to be expected of any man gifted with so sensitive a creative imagination! And he’d been drinking too much; but he could stop it. He would stop it! And there was his hand on it! The worm had turned! … And a good deal more like that.

[019-027] Before he turned in, Bobby wired to Nancy.

[019-028] > Joyce urgently needed in New York stop Tommy has finished with J Barleycorn stop Is full of revived ambition stop Demands regular meals encouragement [[friendship|companionship]] stop Strongly counsel her to help him make good stop Put it up to her as important social service stop She will still be working in interest of juvenile protection stop You need not tell her that stop Affectionately Mister Fixit P S And here is hoping for better luck than usual in managing somebody elses business R M

[019-029] Sunday afternoon he was roused from a nap in his steamer-chair to receipt for a radiogram. He smiled with pleasure.

[019-030] > Joyce left for New York at noon.

[019-031] ---

[019-032] “Patricia paints beautifully!” continued [[maxine-merrick|Maxine]], passing Bobby his cup.

[019-033] “Does she, indeed?”

[019-034] “Batiks.”

[019-035] Bobby’s eyes wandered disinterestedly over the headlines on the front page of *Le Matin* at his elbow.

[019-036] “Any news?”

[019-037] “No … But—what’s this? … Seven Americans hurt in a railroad accident near … *Oh, my God!*”

[019-038] Maxine rushed after him as he dashed from the room and found him telephoning for a taxi. For the next five minutes, while he frantically tossed a few necessities into a bag, she hovered at his elbow, extracting broken phrases from him … “Terrible accident … my best friend … have to go … awfully sorry … No! … No! … Have to go—at once!”

[019-039] “But—Bobby! … My party! … Surely, you wouldn’t do such a thing to me! … Be reasonable! … You can start tonight, just as well! … Oh! I think this is just too cruel—too cruel!”

[019-040] He wasn’t hearing her … Luncheon? … Ridiculous! … He kissed her wet face and rushed out … There was no time for the sluggish automatic lift. He ran down the stairs. Ordinarily, the deafening roar of the propellers exasperated him; gnawed the insulation off his nerves, bit by bit. Today he was barely conscious of the racket. He had seen nothing on his way to Le Bourget field, and was equally indifferent to the receding landscape as Pierre Laudée tilted up his ship’s nose and climbed a steep grade into the clouds for what he boasted, that afternoon, was the record flight from [[paris|Paris]] to Rome.

[019-041] Bobby still clutched the newspaper in his hand; unnecessarily, for he could recite every word … Late last night … Naples-Rome express … wreck near Ciampino … open switch … seven Americans among the injured … Mrs. Helen Hudson, conductor of a touring party … fatally hurt … removed to the English Hospital on Via Nomentana, in Rome.

[019-042] He remembered the place … little hospital … Ardmore—good man—chief of staff … throat specialist. He knew of him.

[019-043] The day dragged on. Sometimes he relaxed from his tension, sank back into the cushions, limp, and wondered how much of the quiver of him was due to the ship’s tremor. Then his anxiety would sweep over him, drying his throat, nauseating him.

[019-044] It was an interminable grind. And it seemed almost as long again to creep in, at a thirty-mile snail-pace, from the landing-field to the hospital.

[019-045] The taxi turned in at the hospital gate and slowed down as it followed a gravelled driveway hedged with masses of shrubbery. It drew up under the porte-cochère. He had not remembered it to be such a gloomy, taciturn forbidding place as it appeared today. He wondered if that was the way Brightwood looked to people who came, heartsick with anxiety, to inquire whether their beloved still breathed.
