---
description: 
id: ch005
label: "Section 5: The Painful Fall of a Great Reputation"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[005-001] And the little man withdrew for the last time.

[005-002] He married [[miss-jameson|Miss Jameson]], the lady with the red hair and the green

[005-003] garments. She was an actress, employed (with many others) by the Romance

[005-004] Agency; and her marriage with the prim old veteran caused some stir in

[005-005] her languid and intellectualized set. She always replied very quietly

[005-006] that she had met scores of men who acted splendidly in the charades

[005-007] provided for them by Northover, but that she had only met one man who

[005-008] went down into a coal-cellar when he really thought it contained a

[005-009] murderer.

[005-010] [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] [[major-brown|Major]] and she are living as happily as birds, in an absurd villa,

[005-011] and the former has taken to smoking. Otherwise he is unchanged--except,

[005-012] perhaps, there are moments when, alert and full of feminine

[005-013] unselfishness as the Major is by nature, he falls into a trance of

[005-014] abstraction. Then his wife recognizes with a concealed smile, by

[005-015] the blind look in his blue eyes, that he is wondering what were the

[005-016] title-deeds, and why he was not allowed to mention jackals. But, like so

[005-017] many old soldiers, Brown is religious, and believes that he will realize

[005-018] the rest of those [[romance-as-adventure|purple adventures]] in a better world.

[005-019] Chapter 2. The Painful Fall of a Great Reputation

[005-020] [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]] and I were talking one day in what is perhaps the most

[005-021] perfect place for talking on earth--the top of a tolerably deserted

[005-022] tramcar. To talk on the top of a hill is superb, but to talk on the top

[005-023] of a flying hill is a fairy tale.

[005-024] The vast blank space of North London was flying by; the very pace gave

[005-025] us a sense of its immensity and its meanness. It was, as it were, a base

[005-026] infinitude, a squalid eternity, and we felt the real horror of the poor

[005-027] parts of London, the horror that is so totally missed and misrepresented

[005-028] by the sensational novelists who depict it as being a matter of narrow

[005-029] streets, filthy houses, criminals and maniacs, and dens of vice. In a

[005-030] narrow street, in a den of vice, you do not expect civilization, you

[005-031] do not expect order. But the horror of this was the fact that there was

[005-032] civilization, that there was order, but that civilisation only showed

[005-033] its morbidity, and order only its monotony. No one would say, in going

[005-034] through a [[crime-in-fiction|criminal]] slum, “I see no statues. I notice no cathedrals.” But

[005-035] here there were public buildings; only they were mostly lunatic asylums.

[005-036] Here there were statues; only they were mostly statues of railway

[005-037] engineers and philanthropists--two dingy classes of men united by their

[005-038] common contempt for the people. Here there were churches; only they were

[005-039] the churches of dim and erratic sects, Agapemonites or Irvingites. Here,

[005-040] above all, there were broad roads and vast crossings and tramway lines

[005-041] and hospitals and all the real marks of civilization. But though one

[005-042] never knew, in one sense, what one would see next, there was one thing

[005-043] we knew we should not see--anything really great, central, of the

[005-044] first [[society-and-class|class]], anything that humanity had adored. And with revulsion

[005-045] indescribable our emotions returned, I think, to those really close and

[005-046] crooked entries, to those really mean streets, to those genuine slums

[005-047] which lie round the Thames and the City, in which nevertheless a real

[005-048] possibility remains that at any chance corner the great cross of the

[005-049] great cathedral of Wren may strike down the street like a thunderbolt.

[005-050] “But you must always remember also,” said [[rupert-grant|Grant]] to me, in his heavy

[005-051] abstracted way, when I had urged this view, “that the very vileness of

[005-052] the life of these ordered plebeian places bears witness to the victory

[005-053] of the human soul. I agree with you. I agree that they have to live

[005-054] in something worse than barbarism. They have to live in a fourth-rate

[005-055] civilization. But yet I am practically certain that the majority of

[005-056] people here are good people. And being good is an [[adventure-in-fiction|adventure]] far more

[005-057] violent and daring than sailing round the world. Besides--”

[005-058] “Go on,” I said.

[005-059] No answer came.

[005-060] “Go on,” I said, looking up.

[005-061] The big blue eyes of Basil Grant were standing out of his head and he

[005-062] was paying no attention to me. He was staring over the side of the tram.

[005-063] “What is the matter?” I asked, peering over also.

[005-064] “It is very odd,” said Grant at last, grimly, “that I should have been

[005-065] caught out like this at the very moment of my optimism. I said all these

[005-066] people were good, and there is the wickedest man in England.”

[005-067] “Where?” I asked, leaning over further, “where?”

[005-068] “Oh, I was right enough,” he went on, in that strange continuous and

[005-069] sleepy tone which always angered his hearers at acute moments, “I was

[005-070] right enough when I said all these people were good. They are heroes;

[005-071] they are saints. Now and then they may perhaps steal a spoon or two;

[005-072] they may beat a wife or two with the poker. But they are saints all the

[005-073] same; they are angels; they are robed in white; they are clad with wings

[005-074] and haloes--at any rate compared to that man.”

[005-075] “Which man?” I cried again, and then my eye caught the figure at which

[005-076] Basil's bull's eyes were glaring.

[005-077] He was a slim, smooth person, passing very quickly among the quickly

[005-078] passing crowd, but though there was nothing about him sufficient to

[005-079] attract a startled notice, there was quite enough to demand a curious

[005-080] consideration when once that notice was attracted. He wore a black

[005-081] top-hat, but there was enough in it of those strange curves whereby the

[005-082] decadent artist of the eighties tried to turn the top-hat into something

[005-083] as rhythmic as an Etruscan vase. His hair, which was largely grey, was

[005-084] curled with the instinct of one who appreciated the gradual beauty of

[005-085] grey and silver. The rest of his face was oval and, I thought, rather

[005-086] Oriental; he had two black tufts of moustache.

[005-087] “What has he done?” I asked.

[005-088] “I am not sure of the details,” said Grant, “but his besetting sin is

[005-089] a desire to intrigue to the disadvantage of others. Probably he has

[005-090] adopted some imposture or other to effect his plan.”

[005-091] “What plan?” I asked. “If you know all about him, why don't you tell me

[005-092] why he is the wickedest man in England? What is his name?”

[005-093] Basil Grant stared at me for some moments.

[005-094] “I think you've made a mistake in my meaning,” he said. “I don't know

[005-095] his name. I never saw him before in my life.”

[005-096] “Never saw him before!” I cried, with a kind of anger; “then what in

[005-097] heaven's name do you mean by saying that he is the wickedest man in

[005-098] England?”

[005-099] “I meant what I said,” said Basil Grant calmly. “The moment I saw

[005-100] that man, I saw all these people stricken with a sudden and splendid

[005-101] innocence. I saw that while all ordinary poor men in the streets were

[005-102] being themselves, he was not being himself. I saw that all the men in

[005-103] these slums, cadgers, pickpockets, hooligans, are all, in the deepest

[005-104] sense, trying to be good. And I saw that that man was trying to be

[005-105] evil.”

[005-106] “But if you never saw him before--” I began.

[005-107] “In God's name, look at his face,” cried out Basil in a voice that

[005-108] startled the driver. “Look at the eyebrows. They mean that infernal

[005-109] pride which made Satan so proud that he sneered even at heaven when he

[005-110] was one of the first angels in it. Look at his moustaches, they are so

[005-111] grown as to insult humanity. In the name of the sacred heavens look at

[005-112] his hair. In the name of God and the stars, look at his hat.”

[005-113] I stirred uncomfortably.

[005-114] “But, after all,” I said, “this is very fanciful--perfectly absurd. Look

[005-115] at the mere facts. You have never seen the man before, you--”

[005-116] “Oh, the mere facts,” he cried out in a kind of despair. “The mere

[005-117] facts! Do you really admit--are you still so sunk in superstitions, so

[005-118] clinging to dim and prehistoric altars, that you believe in facts? Do

[005-119] you not trust an immediate impression?”

[005-120] “Well, an immediate impression may be,” I said, “a little less practical

[005-121] than facts.”

[005-122] “Bosh,” he said. “On what else is the whole world run but immediate

[005-123] impressions? What is more practical? My friend, the [[philosophy-and-detection|philosophy]] of

[005-124] this world may be founded on facts, its business is run on spiritual

[005-125] impressions and atmospheres. Why do you refuse or accept a clerk? Do you

[005-126] measure his skull? Do you read up his physiological state in a handbook?

[005-127] Do you go upon facts at all? Not a scrap. You accept a clerk who may

[005-128] save your business--you refuse a clerk that may rob your till, entirely

[005-129] upon those immediate mystical impressions under the pressure of which

[005-130] I pronounce, with a perfect sense of certainty and sincerity, that that

[005-131] man walking in that street beside us is a humbug and a villain of some

[005-132] kind.”

[005-133] “You always put things well,” I said, “but, of course, such things

[005-134] cannot immediately be put to the test.”

[005-135] Basil sprang up straight and swayed with the swaying car.

[005-136] “Let us get off and follow him,” he said. “I bet you five pounds it will

[005-137] turn out as I say.”

[005-138] And with a scuttle, a jump, and a run, we were off the car.

[005-139] The man with the curved silver hair and the curved Eastern face walked

[005-140] along for some time, his long splendid frock-coat flying behind him.

[005-141] Then he swung sharply out of the great glaring road and disappeared down

[005-142] an ill-lit alley. We swung silently after him.

[005-143] “This is an odd turning for a man of that kind to take,” I said.

[005-144] “A man of what kind?” asked my friend.

[005-145] “Well,” I said, “a man with that kind of expression and those boots. I

[005-146] thought it rather odd, to tell the [[truth-and-fiction|truth]], that he should be in this part

[005-147] of the world at all.”

[005-148] “Ah, yes,” said Basil, and said no more.

[005-149] We tramped on, looking steadily in front of us. The elegant figure, like

[005-150] the figure of a black swan, was silhouetted suddenly against the

[005-151] glare of intermittent gaslight and then swallowed again in night. The

[005-152] intervals between the lights were long, and a fog was thickening the

[005-153] whole city. Our pace, therefore, had become swift and mechanical between

[005-154] the lamp-posts; but Basil came to a standstill suddenly like a reined

[005-155] horse; I stopped also. We had almost run into the man. A great part of

[005-156] the solid darkness in front of us was the darkness of his body.

[005-157] At first I thought he had turned to face us. But though we were hardly a

[005-158] yard off he did not realize that we were there. He tapped four times on

[005-159] a very low and dirty door in the dark, crabbed street. A gleam of gas

[005-160] cut the darkness as it opened slowly. We listened intently, but the

[005-161] interview was short and simple and inexplicable as an interview could

[005-162] be. Our exquisite friend handed in what looked like a paper or a card

[005-163] and said:

[005-164] “At once. Take a cab.”

[005-165] A heavy, deep voice from inside said:

[005-166] “Right you are.”

[005-167] And with a click we were in the blackness again, and striding after the

[005-168] striding stranger through a labyrinth of London lanes, the lights just

[005-169] helping us. It was only five o'clock, but winter and the fog had made it

[005-170] like midnight.

[005-171] “This is really an extraordinary walk for the patent-leather boots,” I

[005-172] repeated.

[005-173] “I don't know,” said Basil humbly. “It leads to Berkeley Square.”

[005-174] As I tramped on I strained my eyes through the dusky atmosphere and

[005-175] tried to make out the direction described. For some ten minutes I

[005-176] wondered and doubted; at the end of that I saw that my friend was right.

[005-177] We were coming to the great dreary spaces of fashionable London--more

[005-178] dreary, one must admit, even than the dreary plebeian spaces.
