---
description: 
id: ch001
label: "Section 1: The Tremendous Adventures of Major Brown"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[001-001] Produced by Anonomous Project Gutenberg Volunteers

[001-002] THE CLUB OF QUEER TRADES

[001-003] by G. K. Chesterton

[001-004] Chapter 1. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] Tremendous Adventures of [[major-brown|Major Brown]]

[001-005] Rabelais, or his wild illustrator Gustave Dore, must have had something

[001-006] to do with the designing of the things called flats in England

[001-007] and America. There is something entirely Gargantuan in the idea of

[001-008] economising space by piling houses on top of each other, front doors

[001-009] and all. And in the chaos and complexity of those perpendicular streets

[001-010] anything may dwell or happen, and it is in one of them, I believe, that

[001-011] the inquirer may find the offices of the [[queer-trades|Club of Queer Trades]]. It may be

[001-012] thought at the first glance that the name would attract and startle the

[001-013] passer-by, but nothing attracts or startles in these dim immense hives.

[001-014] The passer-by is only looking for his own melancholy destination, the

[001-015] Montenegro Shipping Agency or the London office of the Rutland Sentinel,

[001-016] and passes through the twilight passages as one passes through the

[001-017] twilight corridors of a dream. If the Thugs set up a Strangers'

[001-018] Assassination Company in one of the great buildings in Norfolk Street,

[001-019] and sent in a mild man in spectacles to answer inquiries, no inquiries

[001-020] would be made. And the Club of Queer Trades reigns in a great edifice

[001-021] hidden like a fossil in a mighty cliff of fossils.

[001-022] The nature of this [[club-as-institution|society]], such as we afterwards discovered it to be,

[001-023] is soon and simply told. It is an eccentric and Bohemian Club, of which

[001-024] the absolute condition of membership lies in this, that the candidate

[001-025] must have invented the method by which he earns his living. It must be

[001-026] an entirely [[the-queer-trade-as-concept|new trade]]. The exact definition of this requirement is given

[001-027] in the two principal rules. First, it must not be a mere application or

[001-028] variation of an existing [[profession-and-trade|trade]]. Thus, for instance, the Club would

[001-029] not admit an insurance agent simply because instead of insuring men's

[001-030] furniture against being burnt in a fire, he insured, let us say, their

[001-031] trousers against being torn by a mad dog. The principle (as Sir Bradcock

[001-032] Burnaby-Bradcock, in the extraordinarily eloquent and soaring speech

[001-033] to the club on the occasion of the question being raised in the Stormby

[001-034] Smith affair, said wittily and keenly) is the same. Secondly, the

[001-035] trade must be a genuine commercial source of income, the support of its

[001-036] inventor. Thus the Club would not receive a man simply because he chose

[001-037] to pass his days collecting broken sardine tins, unless he could drive

[001-038] a roaring trade in them. [[professor-chadd|Professor]] Chick made that quite clear. And when

[001-039] one remembers what Professor Chick's own new trade was, one doesn't know

[001-040] whether to laugh or cry.

[001-041] The discovery of this strange [[society-and-class|society]] was a curiously refreshing thing;

[001-042] to realize that there were ten new trades in the world was like looking

[001-043] at the first ship or the first plough. It made a man feel what he should

[001-044] feel, that he was still in the childhood of the world. That I should

[001-045] have come at last upon so singular a body was, I may say without vanity,

[001-046] not altogether singular, for I have a mania for belonging to as many

[001-047] societies as possible: I may be said to collect clubs, and I have

[001-048] accumulated a vast and fantastic variety of specimens ever since, in my

[001-049] audacious youth, I collected the Athenaeum. At some future day, perhaps,

[001-050] I may tell tales of some of the other bodies to which I have belonged.

[001-051] I will recount the doings of the Dead Man's Shoes Society (that

[001-052] superficially immoral, but darkly justifiable communion); I will explain

[001-053] the curious origin of the Cat and Christian, the name of which has been

[001-054] so shamefully misinterpreted; and the world shall know at last why the

[001-055] Institute of Typewriters coalesced with the Red Tulip League. Of the Ten

[001-056] Teacups, of course I dare not say a word. The first of my revelations,

[001-057] at any rate, shall be concerned with the Club of Queer Trades, which, as

[001-058] I have said, was one of this class, one which I was almost bound to come

[001-059] across sooner or later, because of my singular hobby. The wild youth of

[001-060] the metropolis call me facetiously 'The King of Clubs'. They also call

[001-061] me 'The Cherub', in allusion to the roseate and youthful appearance I

[001-062] have presented in my declining years. I only hope the spirits in the

[001-063] better world have as good dinners as I have. But the finding of the Club

[001-064] of Queer Trades has one very curious thing about it. The most curious

[001-065] thing about it is that it was not discovered by me; it was discovered

[001-066] by my friend [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]], a star-gazer, a mystic, and a man who scarcely

[001-067] stirred out of his attic.

[001-068] Very few people knew anything of Basil; not because he was in the least

[001-069] unsociable, for if a man out of the street had walked into his rooms he

[001-070] would have kept him talking till morning. Few people knew him, because,

[001-071] like all poets, he could do without them; he welcomed a human face as he

[001-072] might welcome a sudden blend of colour in a sunset; but he no more felt

[001-073] the need of going out to parties than he felt the need of altering the

[001-074] sunset clouds. He lived in a queer and comfortable garret in the roofs

[001-075] of [[lambeth|Lambeth]]. He was surrounded by a chaos of things that were in

[001-076] odd contrast to the slums around him; old fantastic books, swords,

[001-077] armour--the whole dust-hole of romanticism. But his face, amid all these

[001-078] quixotic relics, appeared curiously keen and modern--a powerful, legal

[001-079] face. And no one but I knew who he was.

[001-080] Long ago as it is, everyone remembers the terrible and grotesque scene

[001-081] that occurred in ------, when one of the most acute and forcible of the

[001-082] English judges suddenly went mad on the bench. I had my own view of that

[001-083] occurrence; but about the facts themselves there is no question at all.

[001-084] For some months, indeed for some years, people had detected something

[001-085] curious in the judge's conduct. He seemed to have lost interest in the

[001-086] law, in which he had been beyond expression brilliant and terrible as

[001-087] a K.C., and to be occupied in giving personal and [[moral-philosophy|moral]] advice to the

[001-088] people concerned. He talked more like a priest or a doctor, and a very

[001-089] outspoken one at that. The first thrill was probably given when he said

[001-090] to a man who had attempted a [[crime-in-fiction|crime]] of passion: “I sentence you to

[001-091] three years imprisonment, under the firm, and solemn, and God-given

[001-092] conviction, that what you require is three months at the seaside.” He

[001-093] accused criminals from the bench, not so much of their obvious legal

[001-094] crimes, but of things that had never been heard of in a court of

[001-095] justice, monstrous egoism, lack of humour, and morbidity deliberately

[001-096] encouraged. Things came to a head in that celebrated diamond case in

[001-097] which the Prime Minister himself, that brilliant patrician, had to come

[001-098] forward, gracefully and reluctantly, to give evidence against his valet.

[001-099] After the detailed life of the household had been thoroughly exhibited,

[001-100] the judge requested the Premier again to step forward, which he did with

[001-101] quiet dignity. The judge then said, in a sudden, grating voice: “Get a

[001-102] new soul. That thing's not fit for a dog. Get a new soul.” All this, of

[001-103] course, in the eyes of the sagacious, was premonitory of that melancholy

[001-104] and farcical day when his wits actually deserted him in open court.

[001-105] It was a libel case between two very eminent and powerful financiers,

[001-106] against both of whom charges of considerable defalcation were brought.

[001-107] The case was long and complex; the advocates were long and eloquent; but

[001-108] at last, after weeks of work and rhetoric, the time came for the great

[001-109] judge to give a summing-up; and one of his celebrated masterpieces of

[001-110] lucidity and pulverizing logic was eagerly looked for. He had spoken

[001-111] very little during the prolonged affair, and he looked sad and lowering

[001-112] at the end of it. He was silent for a few moments, and then burst into a

[001-113] stentorian song. His remarks (as reported) were as follows:

[001-114] “O Rowty-owty tiddly-owty Tiddly-owty tiddly-owty Highty-ighty

[001-115] tiddly-ighty Tiddly-ighty ow.”

[001-116] He then retired from public life and took the garret in Lambeth.

[001-117] I was sitting there one evening, about six o'clock, over a glass of that

[001-118] gorgeous Burgundy which he kept behind a pile of black-letter folios; he

[001-119] was striding about the room, fingering, after a habit of his, one of the

[001-120] great swords in his collection; the red glare of the strong fire struck

[001-121] his square features and his fierce grey hair; his blue eyes were even

[001-122] unusually full of dreams, and he had opened his mouth to speak dreamily,

[001-123] when the door was flung open, and a pale, fiery man, with red hair and a

[001-124] huge furred overcoat, swung himself panting into the room.

[001-125] “Sorry to bother you, Basil,” he gasped. “I took a liberty--made an

[001-126] appointment here with a man--a client--in five minutes--I beg your

[001-127] pardon, sir,” and he gave me a bow of apology.

[001-128] Basil smiled at me. “You didn't know,” he said, “that I had a practical

[001-129] brother. This is [[rupert-grant|Rupert Grant]], Esquire, who can and does all there is

[001-130] to be done. Just as I was a failure at one thing, he is a success at

[001-131] everything. I remember him as a journalist, a house-agent, a naturalist,

[001-132] an inventor, a publisher, a schoolmaster, a--what are you now, Rupert?”

[001-133] “I am and have been for some time,” said Rupert, with some dignity, “a

[001-134] [[detective-in-fiction|private detective]], and there's my client.”

[001-135] A loud rap at the door had cut him short, and, on permission being

[001-136] given, the door was thrown sharply open and a stout, dapper man walked

[001-137] swiftly into the room, set his silk hat with a clap on the table, and

[001-138] said, “Good evening, gentlemen,” with a stress on the last syllable that

[001-139] somehow marked him out as a martinet, military, literary and social.

[001-140] He had a large head streaked with black and grey, and an abrupt black

[001-141] moustache, which gave him a look of fierceness which was contradicted by

[001-142] his sad sea-blue eyes.

[001-143] Basil immediately said to me, “Let us come into the next room, Gully,”

[001-144] and was moving towards the door, but the stranger said:

[001-145] “Not at all. Friends remain. Assistance possibly.”

[001-146] The moment I heard him speak I remembered who he was, a certain Major

[001-147] Brown I had met years before in Basil's society. I had forgotten

[001-148] altogether the black dandified figure and the large solemn head, but I

[001-149] remembered the peculiar speech, which consisted of only saying about a

[001-150] quarter of each sentence, and that sharply, like the crack of a gun. I

[001-151] do not know, it may have come from giving orders to troops.

[001-152] Major Brown was a V.C., and an able and distinguished soldier, but he

[001-153] was anything but a warlike person. Like many among the iron men who

[001-154] recovered British India, he was a man with the natural beliefs and

[001-155] tastes of an old maid. In his dress he was dapper and yet demure; in his

[001-156] habits he was precise to the point of the exact adjustment of a tea-cup.

[001-157] One enthusiasm he had, which was of the nature of a religion--the

[001-158] cultivation of pansies. And when he talked about his collection, his

[001-159] blue eyes glittered like a child's at a new toy, the eyes that had

[001-160] remained untroubled when the troops were roaring victory round Roberts

[001-161] at Candahar.

[001-162] “Well, Major,” said Rupert Grant, with a lordly heartiness, flinging

[001-163] himself into a chair, “what is the matter with you?”

[001-164] “Yellow pansies. Coal-cellar. [[northover|P. G. Northover]],” said the Major, with

[001-165] righteous indignation.

[001-166] We glanced at each other with inquisitiveness. Basil, who had his eyes

[001-167] shut in his abstracted way, said simply:

[001-168] “I beg your pardon.”

[001-169] “Fact is. Street, you know, man, pansies. On wall. Death to me.

[001-170] Something. Preposterous.”
