---
description: 
id: ch009
label: "Section 9"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[009-001] “I said genially, 'I am so sorry to disturb you, Miss [[james|James]], but I must

[009-002] really be going. I have--er--' I stopped here, for the words she

[009-003] had uttered in reply, though singularly brief and in tone extremely

[009-004] business-like, were such as to render that arrest of my remarks, I

[009-005] think, natural and excusable. I have these words also noted down. I have

[009-006] not the least idea of their meaning; so I have only been able to render

[009-007] them phonetically. But she said,” and Mr Shorter peered short-sightedly

[009-008] at his papers, “she said: 'Chuck it, fat 'ead,' and she added something

[009-009] that sounded like 'It's a kop', or (possibly) 'a kopt'. And then the

[009-010] last cord, either of my [[madness-and-sanity|sanity]] or the sanity of the universe, snapped

[009-011] suddenly. My esteemed friend and helper, [[miss-brett|Miss Brett]], standing by the

[009-012] mantelpiece, said: 'Put 'is old 'ead in a bag, Sam, and tie 'im up

[009-013] before you start jawin'. You'll be kopt yourselves some o' these days

[009-014] with this way of doin' things, har lar theater.'

[009-015] “My head went round and round. Was it really true, as I had suddenly

[009-016] fancied a moment before, that unmarried ladies had some dreadful riotous

[009-017] [[club-as-institution|society]] of their own from which all others were excluded? I remembered

[009-018] dimly in my classical days (I was a scholar in a small way once, but

[009-019] now, alas! rusty), I remembered the mysteries of the Bona Dea and their

[009-020] strange female freemasonry. I remembered the witches' Sabbaths. I was

[009-021] just, in my absurd lightheadedness, trying to remember a line of verse

[009-022] about Diana's nymphs, when [[miss-mowbray|Miss Mowbray]] threw her arm round me from

[009-023] behind. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] moment it held me I knew it was not a woman's arm.

[009-024] “Miss Brett--or what I had called Miss Brett--was standing in front of

[009-025] me with a big revolver in her hand and a broad grin on her face.

[009-026] Miss James was still leaning against the door, but had fallen into an

[009-027] attitude so totally new, and so totally unfeminine, that it gave one a

[009-028] shock. She was kicking her heels, with her hands in her pockets and her

[009-029] cap on one side. She was a man. I mean he was a wo--no, that is I saw

[009-030] that instead of being a woman she--he, I mean--that is, it was a man.”

[009-031] Mr Shorter became indescribably flurried and flapping in endeavouring to

[009-032] arrange these genders and his plaid shawl at the same time. He resumed

[009-033] with a higher fever of nervousness:

[009-034] “As for Miss Mowbray, she--he, held me in a ring of iron. He had her

[009-035] arm--that is she had his arm--round her neck--my neck I mean--and I

[009-036] could not cry out. Miss Brett--that is, Mr Brett, at least Mr something

[009-037] who was not Miss Brett--had the revolver pointed at me. The other two

[009-038] ladies--or er--gentlemen, were rummaging in some bag in the background.

[009-039] It was all clear at last: they were criminals dressed up as women, to

[009-040] kidnap me! To kidnap the Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex. But why? Was it to

[009-041] be Nonconformists?

[009-042] “The brute leaning against the door called out carelessly, ''Urry up,

[009-043] 'Arry. Show the old bloke what the game is, and let's get off.'

[009-044] “'Curse 'is eyes,' said Miss Brett--I mean the man with the

[009-045] revolver--'why should we show 'im the game?'

[009-046] “'If you take my advice you bloomin' well will,' said the man at the

[009-047] door, whom they called Bill. 'A man wot knows wot 'e's doin' is worth

[009-048] ten wot don't, even if 'e's a potty old parson.'

[009-049] “'Bill's right enough,' said the coarse voice of the man who held me (it

[009-050] had been Miss Mowbray's). 'Bring out the picture, 'Arry.'

[009-051] “The man with the revolver walked across the room to where the other

[009-052] two women--I mean men--were turning over baggage, and asked them for

[009-053] something which they gave him. He came back with it across the room

[009-054] and held it out in front of me. And compared to the surprise of that

[009-055] display, all the previous surprises of this awful day shrank suddenly.

[009-056] “It was a portrait of myself. That such a picture should be in the hands

[009-057] of these scoundrels might in any case have caused a mild surprise;

[009-058] but no more. It was no mild surprise that I felt. The likeness was

[009-059] an extremely good one, worked up with all the accessories of the

[009-060] conventional photographic studio. I was leaning my head on my hand and

[009-061] was relieved against a painted landscape of woodland. It was obvious

[009-062] that it was no snapshot; it was clear that I had sat for this

[009-063] photograph. And the [[truth-and-fiction|truth]] was that I had never sat for such a

[009-064] photograph. It was a photograph that I had never had taken.

[009-065] “I stared at it again and again. It seemed to me to be touched up a good

[009-066] deal; it was glazed as well as framed, and the glass blurred some of the

[009-067] details. But there unmistakably was my face, my eyes, my nose and mouth,

[009-068] my head and hand, posed for a professional photographer. And I had never

[009-069] posed so for any photographer.

[009-070] “'Be'old the bloomin' miracle,' said the man with the revolver, with

[009-071] ill-timed facetiousness. 'Parson, prepare to meet your God.' And with

[009-072] this he slid the glass out of the frame. As the glass moved, I saw that

[009-073] part of the picture was painted on it in Chinese white, notably a pair

[009-074] of white whiskers and a clerical collar. And underneath was a portrait

[009-075] of an old lady in a quiet black dress, leaning her head on her hand

[009-076] against the woodland landscape. The old lady was as like me as one pin

[009-077] is like another. It had required only the whiskers and the collar to

[009-078] make it me in every hair.

[009-079] “'Entertainin', ain't it?' said the man described as 'Arry, as he shot

[009-080] the glass back again. 'Remarkable resemblance, parson. Gratifyin' to the

[009-081] lady. Gratifyin' to you. And hi may hadd, particlery gratifyin' to us,

[009-082] as bein' the probable source of a very tolerable haul. You know Colonel

[009-083] Hawker, the man who's come to live in these parts, don't you?'

[009-084] “I nodded.

[009-085] “'Well,' said the man 'Arry, pointing to the picture, 'that's 'is

[009-086] mother. 'Oo ran to catch 'im when 'e fell? She did,' and he flung his

[009-087] fingers in a general gesture towards the photograph of the old lady who

[009-088] was exactly like me.

[009-089] “'Tell the old gent wot 'e's got to do and be done with it,' broke out

[009-090] Bill from the door. 'Look 'ere, Reverend Shorter, we ain't goin' to do

[009-091] you no 'arm. We'll give you a sov. for your trouble if you like. And as

[009-092] for the old woman's clothes--why, you'll look lovely in 'em.'

[009-093] “'You ain't much of a 'and at a description, Bill,' said the man behind

[009-094] me. 'Mr Shorter, it's like this. We've got to see this man Hawker

[009-095] tonight. Maybe 'e'll kiss us all and 'ave up the champagne when 'e sees

[009-096] us. Maybe on the other 'and--'e won't. Maybe 'e'll be dead when we goes

[009-097] away. Maybe not. But we've got to see 'im. Now as you know, 'e shuts

[009-098] 'isself up and never opens the door to a soul; only you don't know why

[009-099] and we does. The only one as can ever get at 'im is 'is mother.

[009-100] Well, it's a confounded funny coincidence,' he said, accenting the

[009-101] penultimate, 'it's a very unusual piece of good luck, but you're 'is

[009-102] mother.'

[009-103] “'When first I saw 'er picture,' said the man Bill, shaking his head in

[009-104] a ruminant manner, 'when I first saw it I said--old Shorter. Those were

[009-105] my exact words--old Shorter.'

[009-106] “'What do you mean, you wild creatures?' I gasped. 'What am I to do?'

[009-107] “'That's easy said, your 'oldness,' said the man with the revolver,

[009-108] good-humouredly; 'you've got to put on those clothes,' and he pointed to

[009-109] a poke-bonnet and a heap of female clothes in the corner of the room.

[009-110] “I will not dwell, Mr [[charles-swinburne|Swinburne]], upon the details of what followed. I

[009-111] had no choice. I could not fight five men, to say nothing of a loaded

[009-112] pistol. In five minutes, sir, the Vicar of Chuntsey was dressed as an

[009-113] old woman--as somebody else's mother, if you please--and was dragged out

[009-114] of the house to take part in a [[crime-in-fiction|crime]].

[009-115] “It was already late in the afternoon, and the nights of winter were

[009-116] closing in fast. On a dark road, in a blowing wind, we set out towards

[009-117] the lonely house of Colonel Hawker, perhaps the queerest cortege that

[009-118] ever straggled up that or any other road. To every human eye, in every

[009-119] external, we were six very respectable old ladies of small means, in

[009-120] black dresses and refined but antiquated bonnets; and we were really

[009-121] five criminals and a clergyman.

[009-122] “I will cut a long [[fiction-as-truth|story]] short. My brain was whirling like a windmill as

[009-123] I walked, trying to think of some manner of escape. To cry out, so long

[009-124] as we were far from houses, would be suicidal, for it would be easy for

[009-125] the ruffians to knife me or to gag me and fling me into a ditch. On the

[009-126] other hand, to attempt to stop strangers and explain the situation was

[009-127] impossible, because of the frantic folly of the situation itself. Long

[009-128] before I had persuaded the chance postman or carrier of so absurd a

[009-129] story, my companions would certainly have got off themselves, and in all

[009-130] probability would have carried me off, as a friend of theirs who had

[009-131] the misfortune to be mad or drunk. The last thought, however, was an

[009-132] inspiration; though a very terrible one. Had it come to this, that the

[009-133] Vicar of Chuntsey must pretend to be mad or drunk? It had come to this.

[009-134] “I walked along with the rest up the deserted road, imitating and

[009-135] keeping pace, as far as I could, with their rapid and yet lady-like

[009-136] step, until at length I saw a lamp-post and a policeman standing under

[009-137] it. I had made up my mind. Until we reached them we were all equally

[009-138] demure and silent and swift. When we reached them I suddenly flung

[009-139] myself against the railings and roared out: 'Hooray! Hooray! Hooray!

[009-140] Rule Britannia! Get your 'air cut. Hoop-la! Boo!' It was a condition of

[009-141] no little novelty for a man in my position.

[009-142] “The constable instantly flashed his lantern on me, or the draggled,

[009-143] drunken old woman that was my travesty. 'Now then, mum,' he began

[009-144] gruffly.

[009-145] “'Come along quiet, or I'll eat your heart,' cried Sam in my ear

[009-146] hoarsely. 'Stop, or I'll flay you.' It was frightful to hear the words

[009-147] and see the neatly shawled old spinster who whispered them.

[009-148] “I yelled, and yelled--I was in for it now. I screamed comic refrains

[009-149] that vulgar young men had sung, to my regret, at our village concerts; I

[009-150] rolled to and fro like a ninepin about to fall.

[009-151] “'If you can't get your friend on quiet, ladies,' said the policeman, 'I

[009-152] shall have to take 'er up. Drunk and disorderly she is right enough.'

[009-153] “I redoubled my efforts. I had not been brought up to this sort of

[009-154] thing; but I believe I eclipsed myself. Words that I did not know I had

[009-155] ever heard of seemed to come pouring out of my open mouth.

[009-156] “'When we get you past,' whispered Bill, 'you'll howl louder; you'll

[009-157] howl louder when we're burning your feet off.'

[009-158] “I screamed in my terror those awful songs of joy. In all the nightmares

[009-159] that men have ever dreamed, there has never been anything so blighting

[009-160] and horrible as the faces of those five men, looking out of their

[009-161] poke-bonnets; the figures of district visitors with the faces of devils.

[009-162] I cannot think there is anything so heart-breaking in hell.

[009-163] “For a sickening instant I thought that the bustle of my companions

[009-164] and the perfect [[society-and-class|respectability]] of all our dresses would overcome the

[009-165] policeman and induce him to let us pass. He wavered, so far as one

[009-166] can describe anything so solid as a policeman as wavering. I lurched

[009-167] suddenly forward and ran my head into his chest, calling out (if I

[009-168] remember correctly), 'Oh, crikey, blimey, Bill.' It was at that moment

[009-169] that I remembered most dearly that I was the Vicar of Chuntsey, in

[009-170] Essex.
