---
description: 
id: ch008
label: "Section 8: The Awful Reason of the Vicar's Visit"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[008-001] Chapter 3. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] Awful Reason of the Vicar's Visit

[008-002] The revolt of Matter against Man (which I believe to exist) has now been

[008-003] reduced to a singular condition. It is the small things rather than

[008-004] the large things which make war against us and, I may add, beat us. The

[008-005] bones of the last mammoth have long ago decayed, a mighty wreck; the

[008-006] tempests no longer devour our navies, nor the mountains with hearts

[008-007] of fire heap hell over our cities. But we are engaged in a bitter and

[008-008] eternal war with small things; chiefly with microbes and with collar

[008-009] studs. The stud with which I was engaged (on fierce and equal terms) as

[008-010] I made the above reflections, was one which I was trying to introduce

[008-011] into my shirt collar when a loud knock came at the door.

[008-012] My first thought was as to whether [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]] had called to fetch me.

[008-013] He and I were to turn up at the same dinner-party (for which I was in

[008-014] the act of dressing), and it might be that he had taken it into his head

[008-015] to come my way, though we had arranged to go separately. It was a

[008-016] small and confidential affair at the table of a good but unconventional

[008-017] political lady, an old friend of his. She had asked us both to meet a

[008-018] third guest, a [[captain-fraser|Captain Fraser]], who had made something of a name and was

[008-019] an authority on chimpanzees. As Basil was an old friend of the hostess

[008-020] and I had never seen her, I felt that it was quite possible that he

[008-021] (with his usual social sagacity) might have decided to take me along in

[008-022] order to break the ice. The theory, like all my theories, was complete;

[008-023] but as a fact it was not Basil.

[008-024] I was handed a visiting card inscribed: “[[shorter|Rev. Ellis Shorter]]”, and

[008-025] underneath was written in pencil, but in a hand in which even hurry

[008-026] could not conceal a depressing and gentlemanly excellence, “Asking the

[008-027] favour of a few moments' conversation on a most urgent matter.”

[008-028] I had already subdued the stud, thereby proclaiming that the image of

[008-029] God has supremacy over all matters (a valuable [[truth-and-fiction|truth]]), and throwing on

[008-030] my dress-coat and waistcoat, hurried into the drawing-room. He rose at

[008-031] my entrance, flapping like a seal; I can use no other description. He

[008-032] flapped a plaid shawl over his right arm; he flapped a pair of pathetic

[008-033] black gloves; he flapped his clothes; I may say, without exaggeration,

[008-034] that he flapped his eyelids, as he rose. He was a bald-browed,

[008-035] white-haired, white-whiskered old clergyman, of a flappy and floppy

[008-036] type. He said:

[008-037] “I am so sorry. I am so very sorry. I am so extremely sorry. I come--I

[008-038] can only say--I can only say in my defence, that I come--upon an

[008-039] important matter. Pray forgive me.”

[008-040] I told him I forgave perfectly and waited.

[008-041] “What I have to say,” he said brokenly, “is so dreadful--it is so

[008-042] dreadful--I have lived a quiet life.”

[008-043] I was burning to get away, for it was already doubtful if I should be in

[008-044] time for dinner. But there was something about the old man's honest air

[008-045] of bitterness that seemed to open to me the possibilities of life larger

[008-046] and more tragic than my own.

[008-047] I said gently: “Pray go on.”

[008-048] Nevertheless the old gentleman, being a gentleman as well as old,

[008-049] noticed my [[secret-in-fiction|secret]] impatience and seemed still more unmanned.

[008-050] “I'm so sorry,” he said meekly; “I wouldn't have come--but for--your

[008-051] friend [[major-brown|Major Brown]] recommended me to come here.”

[008-052] “Major Brown!” I said, with some interest.

[008-053] “Yes,” said the Reverend Mr Shorter, feverishly flapping his plaid

[008-054] shawl about. “He told me you helped him in a great difficulty--and my

[008-055] difficulty! Oh, my dear sir, it's a matter of life and death.”

[008-056] I rose abruptly, in an acute perplexity. “Will it take long, Mr

[008-057] Shorter?” I asked. “I have to go out to dinner almost at once.”

[008-058] He rose also, trembling from head to foot, and yet somehow, with all his

[008-059] [[moral-philosophy|moral]] palsy, he rose to the dignity of his age and his office.

[008-060] “I have no right, Mr [[charles-swinburne|Swinburne]]--I have no right at all,” he said. “If

[008-061] you have to go out to dinner, you have of course--a perfect right--of

[008-062] course a perfect right. But when you come back--a man will be dead.”

[008-063] And he sat down, quaking like a jelly.

[008-064] The triviality of the dinner had been in those two minutes dwarfed and

[008-065] drowned in my mind. I did not want to go and see a political widow, and

[008-066] a captain who collected apes; I wanted to hear what had brought this

[008-067] dear, doddering old vicar into relation with immediate perils.

[008-068] “Will you have a cigar?” I said.

[008-069] “No, thank you,” he said, with indescribable embarrassment, as if not

[008-070] smoking cigars was a social disgrace.

[008-071] “A glass of wine?” I said.

[008-072] “No, thank you, no, thank you; not just now,” he repeated with that

[008-073] hysterical eagerness with which people who do not drink at all often

[008-074] try to convey that on any other night of the week they would sit up all

[008-075] night drinking rum-punch. “Not just now, thank you.”

[008-076] “Nothing else I can get for you?” I said, feeling genuinely sorry for

[008-077] the well-mannered old donkey. “A cup of tea?”

[008-078] I saw a struggle in his eye and I conquered. When the cup of tea came he

[008-079] drank it like a dipsomaniac gulping brandy. Then he fell back and said:

[008-080] “I have had such a time, Mr Swinburne. I am not used to these

[008-081] excitements. As Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex”--he threw this in with

[008-082] an indescribable airiness of vanity--“I have never known such things

[008-083] happen.”

[008-084] “What things happen?” I asked.

[008-085] He straightened himself with sudden dignity.

[008-086] “As Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex,” he said, “I have never been forcibly

[008-087] dressed up as an old woman and made to take part in a [[crime-in-fiction|crime]] in the

[008-088] character of an old woman. Never once. My experience may be small. It

[008-089] may be insufficient. But it has never occurred to me before.”

[008-090] “I have never heard of it,” I said, “as among the duties of a clergyman.

[008-091] But I am not well up in church matters. Excuse me if perhaps I failed to

[008-092] follow you correctly. Dressed up--as what?”

[008-093] “As an old woman,” said the vicar solemnly, “as an old woman.”

[008-094] I thought in my heart that it required no great transformation to make

[008-095] an old woman of him, but the thing was evidently more tragic than comic,

[008-096] and I said respectfully:

[008-097] “May I ask how it occurred?”

[008-098] “I will begin at the beginning,” said Mr Shorter, “and I will tell my

[008-099] [[fiction-as-truth|story]] with the utmost possible precision. At seventeen minutes past

[008-100] eleven this morning I left the vicarage to keep certain appointments and

[008-101] pay certain visits in the village. My first visit was to Mr Jervis, the

[008-102] treasurer of our League of Christian Amusements, with whom I concluded

[008-103] some business touching the claim made by Parkes the gardener in the

[008-104] matter of the rolling of our tennis lawn. I then visited Mrs Arnett, a

[008-105] very earnest churchwoman, but permanently bedridden. She is the author

[008-106] of several small works of devotion, and of a book of verse, entitled

[008-107] (unless my memory misleads me) Eglantine.”

[008-108] He uttered all this not only with deliberation, but with something that

[008-109] can only be called, by a contradictory phrase, eager deliberation.

[008-110] He had, I think, a vague memory in his head of the detectives in the

[008-111] [[detective-in-fiction|detective]] stories, who always sternly require that nothing should be

[008-112] kept back.

[008-113] “I then proceeded,” he went on, with the same maddening

[008-114] conscientiousness of manner, “to Mr Carr (not Mr [[james|James]] Carr, of course;

[008-115] Mr Robert Carr) who is temporarily assisting our organist, and having

[008-116] consulted with him (on the subject of a choir boy who is accused, I

[008-117] cannot as yet say whether justly or not, of cutting holes in the organ

[008-118] pipes), I finally dropped in upon a Dorcas meeting at the house of Miss

[008-119] Brett. The Dorcas meetings are usually held at the vicarage, but my wife

[008-120] being unwell, [[miss-brett|Miss Brett]], a newcomer in our village, but very active in

[008-121] church [[profession-and-trade|work]], had very kindly consented to hold them. The Dorcas [[club-as-institution|society]]

[008-122] is entirely under my wife's management as a rule, and except for Miss

[008-123] Brett, who, as I say, is very active, I scarcely know any members of it.

[008-124] I had, however, promised to drop in on them, and I did so.

[008-125] “When I arrived there were only four other maiden ladies with Miss

[008-126] Brett, but they were sewing very busily. It is very difficult, of

[008-127] course, for any person, however strongly impressed with the necessity in

[008-128] these matters of full and exact exposition of the facts, to remember and

[008-129] repeat the actual details of a conversation, particularly a conversation

[008-130] which (though inspired with a most worthy and admirable zeal for good

[008-131] work) was one which did not greatly impress the hearer's mind at the

[008-132] time and was in fact--er--mostly about socks. I can, however, remember

[008-133] distinctly that one of the spinster ladies (she was a thin person with

[008-134] a woollen shawl, who appeared to feel the cold, and I am almost sure she

[008-135] was introduced to me as Miss James) remarked that the weather was very

[008-136] changeable. Miss Brett then offered me a cup of tea, which I accepted,

[008-137] I cannot recall in what words. Miss Brett is a short and stout lady with

[008-138] white hair. The only other figure in the group that caught my attention

[008-139] was a [[miss-mowbray|Miss Mowbray]], a small and neat lady of aristocratic manners,

[008-140] silver hair, and a high voice and colour. She was the most emphatic

[008-141] member of the party; and her views on the subject of pinafores, though

[008-142] expressed with a natural deference to myself, were in themselves strong

[008-143] and advanced. Beside her (although all five ladies were dressed simply

[008-144] in black) it could not be denied that the others looked in some way what

[008-145] you men of the world would call dowdy.

[008-146] “After about ten minutes' conversation I rose to go, and as I did so

[008-147] I heard something which--I cannot describe it--something which seemed

[008-148] to--but I really cannot describe it.”

[008-149] “What did you hear?” I asked, with some impatience.

[008-150] “I heard,” said the vicar solemnly, “I heard Miss Mowbray (the lady with

[008-151] the silver hair) say to Miss James (the lady with the woollen shawl),

[008-152] the following extraordinary words. I committed them to memory on the

[008-153] spot, and as soon as circumstances set me free to do so, I noted them

[008-154] down on a piece of paper. I believe I have it here.” He fumbled in

[008-155] his breast-pocket, bringing out mild things, note-books, circulars and

[008-156] programmes of village concerts. “I heard Miss Mowbray say to Miss James,

[008-157] the following words: 'Now's your time, Bill.'”

[008-158] He gazed at me for a few moments after making this announcement, gravely

[008-159] and unflinchingly, as if conscious that here he was unshaken about his

[008-160] facts. Then he resumed, turning his bald head more towards the fire.

[008-161] “This appeared to me remarkable. I could not by any means understand

[008-162] it. It seemed to me first of all peculiar that one maiden lady should

[008-163] address another maiden lady as 'Bill'. My experience, as I have said,

[008-164] may be incomplete; maiden ladies may have among themselves and in

[008-165] exclusively spinster circles wilder customs than I am aware of. But

[008-166] it seemed to me odd, and I could almost have sworn (if you will not

[008-167] misunderstand the phrase), I should have been strongly impelled to

[008-168] maintain at the time that the words, 'Now's your time, Bill', were by

[008-169] no means pronounced with that upper-[[society-and-class|class]] intonation which, as I have

[008-170] already said, had up to now characterized Miss Mowbray's conversation.

[008-171] In fact, the words, 'Now's your time, Bill', would have been, I fancy,

[008-172] unsuitable if pronounced with that upper-class intonation.

[008-173] “I was surprised, I repeat, then, at the remark. But I was still more

[008-174] surprised when, looking round me in bewilderment, my hat and umbrella in

[008-175] hand, I saw the lean lady with the woollen shawl leaning upright against

[008-176] the door out of which I was just about to make my exit. She was still

[008-177] knitting, and I supposed that this erect posture against the door was

[008-178] only an [[madness-and-sanity|eccentricity]] of spinsterhood and an oblivion of my intended

[008-179] departure.
