---
description: 
id: ch006
label: "Section 6"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[006-001] “This is very extraordinary!” said [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]], as we turned into

[006-002] Berkeley Square.

[006-003] “What is extraordinary?” I asked. “I thought you said it was quite

[006-004] natural.”

[006-005] “I do not wonder,” answered Basil, “at his walking through nasty

[006-006] streets; I do not wonder at his going to Berkeley Square. But I do

[006-007] wonder at his going to the house of a very good man.”

[006-008] “What very good man?” I asked with exasperation.

[006-009] “[[the-reverend-vicar|The]] operation of time is a singular one,” he said with his

[006-010] imperturbable irrelevancy. “It is not a true statement of the case to

[006-011] say that I have forgotten my career when I was a judge and a public man.

[006-012] I remember it all vividly, but it is like remembering some novel. But

[006-013] fifteen years ago I knew this square as well as Lord Rosebery does, and

[006-014] a confounded long sight better than that man who is going up the steps

[006-015] of old Beaumont's house.”

[006-016] “Who is old Beaumont?” I asked irritably.

[006-017] “A perfectly good fellow. [[lord-beaumont|Lord Beaumont]] of Foxwood--don't you know his

[006-018] name? He is a man of transparent sincerity, a nobleman who does more

[006-019] [[profession-and-trade|work]] than a navvy, a socialist, an anarchist, I don't know what;

[006-020] anyhow, he's a philosopher and philanthropist. I admit he has the slight

[006-021] disadvantage of being, beyond all question, off his head. He has that

[006-022] real disadvantage which has arisen out of the modern worship of progress

[006-023] and novelty; and he thinks anything odd and new must be an advance. If

[006-024] you went to him and proposed to eat your grandmother, he would agree

[006-025] with you, so long as you put it on hygienic and public grounds, as a

[006-026] cheap alternative to cremation. So long as you progress fast enough it

[006-027] seems a matter of indifference to him whether you are progressing to the

[006-028] stars or the devil. So his house is filled with an endless succession

[006-029] of literary and political fashions; men who wear long hair because it is

[006-030] [[romance-as-adventure|romantic]]; men who wear short hair because it is medical; men who walk on

[006-031] their feet only to exercise their hands; and men who walk on their hands

[006-032] for fear of tiring their feet. But though the inhabitants of his salons

[006-033] are generally fools, like himself, they are almost always, like himself,

[006-034] good men. I am really surprised to see a [[crime-in-fiction|criminal]] enter there.”

[006-035] “My good fellow,” I said firmly, striking my foot on the pavement, “the

[006-036] [[truth-and-fiction|truth]] of this affair is very simple. To use your own eloquent language,

[006-037] you have the 'slight disadvantage' of being off your head. You see a

[006-038] total stranger in a public street; you choose to start certain theories

[006-039] about his eyebrows. You then treat him as a burglar because he enters an

[006-040] honest man's door. The thing is too monstrous. Admit that it is, Basil,

[006-041] and come home with me. Though these people are still having tea, yet

[006-042] with the distance we have to go, we shall be late for dinner.”

[006-043] Basil's eyes were shining in the twilight like lamps.

[006-044] “I thought,” he said, “that I had outlived vanity.”

[006-045] “What do you want now?” I cried.

[006-046] “I want,” he cried out, “what a girl wants when she wears her new frock;

[006-047] I want what a boy wants when he goes in for a clanging match with a

[006-048] monitor--I want to show somebody what a fine fellow I am. I am as right

[006-049] about that man as I am about your having a hat on your head. You say

[006-050] it cannot be tested. I say it can. I will take you to see my old friend

[006-051] Beaumont. He is a delightful man to know.”

[006-052] “Do you really mean--?” I began.

[006-053] “I will apologize,” he said calmly, “for our not being dressed for a

[006-054] call,” and walking across the vast misty square, he walked up the dark

[006-055] stone steps and rang at the bell.

[006-056] A severe servant in black and white opened the door to us: on receiving

[006-057] my friend's name his manner passed in a flash from astonishment to

[006-058] respect. We were ushered into the house very quickly, but not so quickly

[006-059] but that our host, a white-haired man with a fiery face, came out

[006-060] quickly to meet us.

[006-061] “My dear fellow,” he cried, shaking Basil's hand again and again,

[006-062] “I have not seen you for years. Have you been--er--” he said, rather

[006-063] wildly, “have you been in the country?”

[006-064] “Not for all that time,” answered Basil, smiling. “I have long given

[006-065] up my official position, my dear Philip, and have been living in a

[006-066] deliberate retirement. I hope I do not come at an inopportune moment.”

[006-067] “An inopportune moment,” cried the ardent gentleman. “You come at the

[006-068] most opportune moment I could imagine. Do you know who is here?”

[006-069] “I do not,” answered [[rupert-grant|Grant]], with gravity. Even as he spoke a roar of

[006-070] laughter came from the inner room.

[006-071] “Basil,” said Lord Beaumont solemnly, “I have [[wimpole|Wimpole]] here.”

[006-072] “And who is Wimpole?”

[006-073] “Basil,” cried the other, “you must have been in the country. You must

[006-074] have been in the antipodes. You must have been in the moon. Who is

[006-075] Wimpole? Who was Shakespeare?”

[006-076] “As to who Shakespeare was,” answered my friend placidly, “my views go

[006-077] no further than thinking that he was not Bacon. More probably he was

[006-078] Mary Queen of Scots. But as to who Wimpole is--” and his speech also was

[006-079] cloven with a roar of laughter from within.

[006-080] “Wimpole!” cried Lord Beaumont, in a sort of ecstasy. “Haven't you heard

[006-081] of the great modern wit? My dear fellow, he has turned conversation,

[006-082] I do not say into an art--for that, perhaps, it always was but into a

[006-083] great art, like the statuary of Michael Angelo--an art of masterpieces.

[006-084] His repartees, my good friend, startle one like a man shot dead. They

[006-085] are final; they are--”

[006-086] Again there came the hilarious roar from the room, and almost with the

[006-087] very noise of it, a big, panting apoplectic old gentleman came out of

[006-088] the inner house into the hall where we were standing.

[006-089] “Now, my dear chap,” began Lord Beaumont hastily.

[006-090] “I tell you, Beaumont, I won't stand it,” exploded the large old

[006-091] gentleman. “I won't be made game of by a twopenny literary adventurer

[006-092] like that. I won't be made a guy. I won't--”

[006-093] “Come, come,” said Beaumont feverishly. “Let me introduce you. This is

[006-094] Mr Justice Grant--that is, Mr Grant. Basil, I am sure you have heard of

[006-095] [[sir-walter-cholmondeliegh|Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh]].”

[006-096] “Who has not?” asked Grant, and bowed to the worthy old baronet, eyeing

[006-097] him with some curiosity. He was hot and heavy in his momentary anger,

[006-098] but even that could not conceal the noble though opulent outline of his

[006-099] face and body, the florid white hair, the Roman nose, the body stalwart

[006-100] though corpulent, the chin aristocratic though double. He was a

[006-101] magnificent courtly gentleman; so much of a gentleman that he could show

[006-102] an unquestionable weakness of anger without altogether losing dignity;

[006-103] so much of a gentleman that even his faux pas were well-bred.

[006-104] “I am distressed beyond expression, Beaumont,” he said gruffly, “to fail

[006-105] in respect to these gentlemen, and even more especially to fail in it in

[006-106] your house. But it is not you or they that are in any way concerned, but

[006-107] that flashy half-caste jackanapes--”

[006-108] At this moment a young man with a twist of red moustache and a sombre

[006-109] air came out of the inner room. He also did not seem to be greatly

[006-110] enjoying the intellectual banquet within.

[006-111] “I think you remember my friend and secretary, Mr Drummond,” said

[006-112] Lord Beaumont, turning to Grant, “even if you only remember him as a

[006-113] schoolboy.”

[006-114] “Perfectly,” said the other. Mr Drummond shook hands pleasantly and

[006-115] respectfully, but the cloud was still on his brow. Turning to Sir Walter

[006-116] Cholmondeliegh, he said:

[006-117] “I was sent by [[lady-beaumont|Lady Beaumont]] to express her hope that you were not going

[006-118] yet, Sir Walter. She says she has scarcely seen anything of you.”

[006-119] The old gentleman, still red in the face, had a temporary internal

[006-120] struggle; then his good manners triumphed, and with a gesture of

[006-121] obeisance and a vague utterance of, “If Lady Beaumont... a lady, of

[006-122] course,” he followed the young man back into the salon. He had scarcely

[006-123] been deposited there half a minute before another peal of laughter told

[006-124] that he had (in all probability) been scored off again.

[006-125] “Of course, I can excuse dear old Cholmondeliegh,” said Beaumont, as he

[006-126] helped us off with our coats. “He has not the modern mind.”

[006-127] “What is the modern mind?” asked Grant.

[006-128] “Oh, it's enlightened, you know, and progressive--and faces the facts

[006-129] of life seriously.” At this moment another roar of laughter came from

[006-130] within.

[006-131] “I only ask,” said Basil, “because of the last two friends of yours who

[006-132] had the modern mind; one thought it wrong to eat fishes and the other

[006-133] thought it right to eat men. I beg your pardon--this way, if I remember

[006-134] right.”

[006-135] “Do you know,” said Lord Beaumont, with a sort of feverish

[006-136] entertainment, as he trotted after us towards the interior, “I can never

[006-137] quite make out which side you are on. Sometimes you seem so liberal and

[006-138] sometimes so reactionary. Are you a modern, Basil?”

[006-139] “No,” said Basil, loudly and cheerfully, as he entered the crowded

[006-140] drawing-room.

[006-141] This caused a slight diversion, and some eyes were turned away from our

[006-142] slim friend with the Oriental face for the first time that afternoon.

[006-143] Two people, however, still looked at him. One was the daughter of the

[006-144] house, Muriel Beaumont, who gazed at him with great violet eyes and

[006-145] with the intense and awful thirst of the female upper [[society-and-class|class]] for verbal

[006-146] amusement and stimulus. The other was Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh, who

[006-147] looked at him with a still and sullen but unmistakable desire to throw

[006-148] him out of the window.

[006-149] He sat there, coiled rather than seated on the easy chair; everything

[006-150] from the curves of his smooth limbs to the coils of his silvered hair

[006-151] suggesting the circles of a serpent more than the straight limbs of a

[006-152] man--the unmistakable, splendid serpentine gentleman we had seen walking

[006-153] in North London, his eyes shining with repeated victory.

[006-154] “What I can't understand, Mr Wimpole,” said Muriel Beaumont eagerly,

[006-155] “is how you contrive to treat all this so easily. You say things quite

[006-156] philosophical and yet so wildly funny. If I thought of such things, I'm

[006-157] sure I should laugh outright when the thought first came.”

[006-158] “I agree with [[miss-beaumont|Miss Beaumont]],” said Sir Walter, suddenly exploding with

[006-159] indignation. “If I had thought of anything so futile, I should find it

[006-160] difficult to keep my countenance.”

[006-161] “Difficult to keep your countenance,” cried Mr Wimpole, with an air of

[006-162] alarm; “oh, do keep your countenance! Keep it in the British Museum.”

[006-163] Every one laughed uproariously, as they always do at an already admitted

[006-164] readiness, and Sir Walter, turning suddenly purple, shouted out:

[006-165] “Do you know who you are talking to, with your confounded tomfooleries?”

[006-166] “I never talk tomfooleries,” said the other, “without first knowing my

[006-167] audience.”

[006-168] Grant walked across the room and tapped the red-moustached secretary on

[006-169] the shoulder. That gentleman was leaning against the wall regarding

[006-170] the whole scene with a great deal of gloom; but, I fancied, with very

[006-171] particular gloom when his eyes fell on the young lady of the house

[006-172] rapturously listening to Wimpole.

[006-173] “May I have a word with you outside, Drummond?” asked Grant. “It is

[006-174] about business. Lady Beaumont will excuse us.”

[006-175] I followed my friend, at his own request, greatly wondering, to this

[006-176] strange external interview. We passed abruptly into a kind of side room

[006-177] out of the hall.

[006-178] “Drummond,” said Basil sharply, “there are a great many good people, and

[006-179] a great many sane people here this afternoon. Unfortunately, by a kind

[006-180] of coincidence, all the good people are mad, and all the sane people

[006-181] are wicked. You are the only person I know of here who is honest and has

[006-182] also some common sense. What do you make of Wimpole?”
