---
description: 
id: ch019
label: "Section 19"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[019-001] “My dear fellow,” I said, “I apologize; this is no time for arguing.

[019-002] What is to be done?”

[019-003] [[rupert-grant|Rupert Grant]] had a long clasp-knife naked and brilliant in his hand.

[019-004] “First of all,” he said, “house-breaking.” And he forced the blade into

[019-005] the crevice of the wood and broke away a huge splinter, leaving a gap

[019-006] and glimpse of the dark window-pane inside. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] room within was entirely

[019-007] unlighted, so that for the first few seconds the window seemed a dead

[019-008] and opaque surface, as dark as a strip of slate. Then came a realization

[019-009] which, though in a sense gradual, made us step back and catch our

[019-010] breath. Two large dim human eyes were so close to us that the window

[019-011] itself seemed suddenly to be a mask. A pale human face was pressed

[019-012] against the glass within, and with increased distinctness, with the

[019-013] increase of the opening came the words:

[019-014] “When shall I get out?”

[019-015] “What can all this be?” I said.

[019-016] Rupert made no answer, but lifting his walking-stick and pointing the

[019-017] ferrule like a fencing sword at the glass, punched a hole in it, smaller

[019-018] and more accurate than I should have supposed possible. The moment he

[019-019] had done so the voice spouted out of the hole, so to speak, piercing and

[019-020] querulous and clear, making the same demand for liberty.

[019-021] “Can't you get out, madam?” I said, drawing near the hole in some

[019-022] perturbation.

[019-023] “Get out? Of course I can't,” moaned the unknown female bitterly. “They

[019-024] won't let me. I told them I would be let out. I told them I'd call the

[019-025] police. But it's no good. Nobody knows, nobody comes. They could keep me

[019-026] as long as they liked only--”

[019-027] I was in the very act of breaking the window finally with my stick,

[019-028] incensed with this very sinister [[mystery-in-fiction|mystery]], when Rupert held my arm hard,

[019-029] held it with a curious, still, and [[secret-in-fiction|secret]] rigidity as if he desired to

[019-030] stop me, but did not desire to be observed to do so. I paused a moment,

[019-031] and in the act swung slightly round, so that I was facing the supporting

[019-032] wall of the front door steps. The act froze me into a sudden stillness

[019-033] like that of Rupert, for a figure almost as motionless as the pillars of

[019-034] the portico, but unmistakably human, had put his head out from between

[019-035] the doorposts and was gazing down into the area. One of the lighted

[019-036] lamps of the street was just behind his head, throwing it into abrupt

[019-037] darkness. Consequently, nothing whatever could be seen of his face

[019-038] beyond one fact, that he was unquestionably staring at us. I must say I

[019-039] thought Rupert's calmness magnificent. He rang the area bell quite idly,

[019-040] and went on talking to me with the easy end of a conversation which had

[019-041] never had any beginning. The black glaring figure in the portico did

[019-042] not stir. I almost thought it was really a statue. In another moment

[019-043] the grey area was golden with gaslight as the basement door was opened

[019-044] suddenly and a small and decorous housemaid stood in it.

[019-045] “Pray excuse me,” said Rupert, in a voice which he contrived to make

[019-046] somehow or other at once affable and underbred, “but we thought perhaps

[019-047] that you might do something for the Waifs and Strays. We don't expect--”

[019-048] “Not here,” said the small servant, with the incomparable severity of

[019-049] the menial of the non-philanthropic, and slammed the door in our faces.

[019-050] “Very sad, very sad--the indifference of these people,” said the

[019-051] philanthropist with gravity, as we went together up the steps. As we did

[019-052] so the motionless figure in the portico suddenly disappeared.

[019-053] “Well, what do you make of that?” asked Rupert, slapping his gloves

[019-054] together when we got into the street.

[019-055] I do not mind admitting that I was seriously upset. Under such

[019-056] conditions I had but one thought.

[019-057] “Don't you think,” I said a trifle timidly, “that we had better tell

[019-058] your brother?”

[019-059] “Oh, if you like,” said Rupert, in a lordly way. “He is quite near, as

[019-060] I promised to meet him at Gloucester Road Station. Shall we take a cab?

[019-061] Perhaps, as you say, it might amuse him.”

[019-062] Gloucester Road Station had, as if by accident, a somewhat deserted

[019-063] look. After a little looking about we discovered [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]] with his

[019-064] great head and his great white hat blocking the ticket-office window. I

[019-065] thought at first that he was taking a ticket for somewhere and being an

[019-066] astonishingly long time about it. As a matter of fact, he was discussing

[019-067] religion with the booking-office clerk, and had almost got his head

[019-068] through the hole in his excitement. When we dragged him away it was

[019-069] some time before he would talk of anything but the growth of an Oriental

[019-070] fatalism in modern thought, which had been well typified by some of the

[019-071] official's ingenious but perverse fallacies. At last we managed to get

[019-072] him to understand that we had made an astounding discovery. When he

[019-073] did listen, he listened attentively, walking between us up and down

[019-074] the lamp-lit street, while we told him in a rather feverish duet of the

[019-075] great house in South Kensington, of the equivocal milkman, of the lady

[019-076] imprisoned in the basement, and the man staring from the porch. At

[019-077] length he said:

[019-078] “If you're thinking of going back to look the thing up, you must be

[019-079] careful what you do. It's no good you two going there. To go twice on

[019-080] the same pretext would look dubious. To go on a different pretext would

[019-081] look worse. You may be quite certain that the inquisitive gentleman

[019-082] who looked at you looked thoroughly, and will wear, so to speak,

[019-083] your portraits next to his heart. If you want to find out if there

[019-084] is anything in this without a police raid I fancy you had better wait

[019-085] outside. I'll go in and see them.”

[019-086] His slow and reflective walk brought us at length within sight of the

[019-087] house. It stood up ponderous and purple against the last pallor of

[019-088] twilight. It looked like an ogre's castle. And so apparently it was.

[019-089] “Do you think it's safe, Basil,” said his brother, pausing, a little

[019-090] pale, under the lamp, “to go into that place alone? Of course we

[019-091] shall be near enough to hear if you yell, but these devils might do

[019-092] something--something sudden--or odd. I can't feel it's safe.”

[019-093] “I know of nothing that is safe,” said Basil composedly, “except,

[019-094] possibly--death,” and he went up the steps and rang at the bell. When

[019-095] the massive respectable door opened for an instant, cutting a square of

[019-096] gaslight in the gathering dark, and then closed with a bang, burying

[019-097] our friend inside, we could not repress a shudder. It had been like

[019-098] the heavy gaping and closing of the dim lips of some evil leviathan. A

[019-099] freshening night breeze began to blow up the street, and we turned up

[019-100] the collars of our coats. At the end of twenty minutes, in which we

[019-101] had scarcely moved or spoken, we were as cold as icebergs, but more, I

[019-102] think, from apprehension than the atmosphere. Suddenly Rupert made an

[019-103] abrupt movement towards the house.

[019-104] “I can't stand this,” he began, but almost as he spoke sprang back into

[019-105] the shadow, for the panel of gold was again cut out of the black house

[019-106] front, and the burly figure of Basil was silhouetted against it coming

[019-107] out. He was roaring with laughter and talking so loudly that you

[019-108] could have heard every syllable across the street. Another voice, or,

[019-109] possibly, two voices, were laughing and talking back at him from within.

[019-110] “No, no, no,” Basil was calling out, with a sort of hilarious hostility.

[019-111] “That's quite wrong. That's the most ghastly heresy of all. It's the

[019-112] soul, my dear chap, the soul that's the arbiter of cosmic forces. When

[019-113] you see a cosmic force you don't like, trick it, my boy. But I must

[019-114] really be off.”

[019-115] “Come and pitch into us again,” came the laughing voice from out of the

[019-116] house. “We still have some bones unbroken.”

[019-117] “Thanks very much, I will--good night,” shouted Grant, who had by this

[019-118] time reached the street.

[019-119] “Good night,” came the friendly call in reply, before the door closed.

[019-120] “Basil,” said Rupert Grant, in a hoarse whisper, “what are we to do?”

[019-121] The elder brother looked thoughtfully from one of us to the other.

[019-122] “What is to be done, Basil?” I repeated in uncontrollable excitement.

[019-123] “I'm not sure,” said Basil doubtfully. “What do you say to getting some

[019-124] dinner somewhere and going to the Court Theatre tonight? I tried to get

[019-125] those fellows to come, but they couldn't.”

[019-126] We stared blankly.

[019-127] “Go to the Court Theatre?” repeated Rupert. “What would be the good of

[019-128] that?”

[019-129] “Good? What do you mean?” answered Basil, staring also. “Have you turned

[019-130] Puritan or Passive Resister, or something? For fun, of course.”

[019-131] “But, great God in Heaven! What are we going to do, I mean!” cried

[019-132] Rupert. “What about the poor woman locked up in that house? Shall I go

[019-133] for the police?”

[019-134] Basil's face cleared with immediate comprehension, and he laughed.

[019-135] “Oh, that,” he said. “I'd forgotten that. That's all right. Some

[019-136] mistake, possibly. Or some quite trifling private affair. But I'm sorry

[019-137] those fellows couldn't come with us. Shall we take one of these green

[019-138] omnibuses? There is a restaurant in Sloane Square.”

[019-139] “I sometimes think you play the fool to frighten us,” I said irritably.

[019-140] “How can we leave that woman locked up? How can it be a mere private

[019-141] affair? How can [[crime-in-fiction|crime]] and kidnapping and murder, for all I know, be

[019-142] private affairs? If you found a corpse in a man's drawing-room, would

[019-143] you think it bad taste to talk about it just as if it was a confounded

[019-144] dado or an infernal etching?”

[019-145] Basil laughed heartily.

[019-146] “That's very forcible,” he said. “As a matter of fact, though, I know

[019-147] it's all right in this case. And there comes the green omnibus.”

[019-148] “How do you know it's all right in this ease?” persisted his brother

[019-149] angrily.

[019-150] “My dear chap, the thing's obvious,” answered Basil, holding a return

[019-151] ticket between his teeth while he fumbled in his waistcoat pocket.

[019-152] “Those two fellows never committed a crime in their lives. They're not

[019-153] the kind. Have either of you chaps got a halfpenny? I want to get a

[019-154] paper before the omnibus comes.”

[019-155] “Oh, curse the paper!” cried Rupert, in a fury. “Do you mean to tell

[019-156] me, Basil Grant, that you are going to leave a fellow creature in pitch

[019-157] darkness in a private dungeon, because you've had ten minutes' talk with

[019-158] the keepers of it and thought them rather good men?”

[019-159] “Good men do commit crimes sometimes,” said Basil, taking the ticket

[019-160] out of his mouth. “But this kind of good man doesn't commit that kind of

[019-161] crime. Well, shall we get on this omnibus?”

[019-162] The great green vehicle was indeed plunging and lumbering along the

[019-163] dim wide street towards us. Basil had stepped from the curb, and for an

[019-164] instant it was touch and go whether we should all have leaped on to it

[019-165] and been borne away to the restaurant and the theatre.

[019-166] “Basil,” I said, taking him firmly by the shoulder, “I simply won't

[019-167] leave this street and this house.”

[019-168] “Nor will I,” said Rupert, glaring at it and biting his fingers.

[019-169] “There's some black [[profession-and-trade|work]] going on there. If I left it I should never

[019-170] sleep again.”

[019-171] Basil Grant looked at us both seriously.

[019-172] “Of course if you feel like that,” he said, “we'll investigate further.

[019-173] You'll find it's all right, though. They're only two young Oxford

[019-174] fellows. Extremely nice, too, though rather infected with this

[019-175] pseudo-Darwinian business. Ethics of evolution and all that.”

[019-176] “I think,” said Rupert darkly, ringing the bell, “that we shall

[019-177] enlighten you further about their [[moral-philosophy|ethics]].”

[019-178] “And may I ask,” said Basil gloomily, “what it is that you propose to

[019-179] do?”
