---
description: 
id: ch014
label: "Section 14"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[014-001] [[basil-grant|Basil]] went on in front with his coat collar turned up, looking in the

[014-002] gloom rather like a grotesque Napoleon. We crossed swell after swell

[014-003] of the windy common in increasing darkness and entire silence. Suddenly

[014-004] Basil stopped and turned to us, his hands in his pockets. Through the

[014-005] dusk I could just detect that he wore a broad grin as of comfortable

[014-006] success.

[014-007] “Well,” he cried, taking his heavily gloved hands out of his pockets and

[014-008] slapping them together, “here we are at last.”

[014-009] [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] wind swirled sadly over the homeless heath; two desolate elms rocked

[014-010] above us in the sky like shapeless clouds of grey. There was not a sign

[014-011] of man or beast to the sullen circle of the horizon, and in the midst of

[014-012] that wilderness Basil [[rupert-grant|Grant]] stood rubbing his hands with the air of an

[014-013] innkeeper standing at an open door.

[014-014] “How jolly it is,” he cried, “to get back to civilization. That notion

[014-015] that civilization isn't poetical is a civilised delusion. Wait till

[014-016] you've really lost yourself in nature, among the devilish woodlands and

[014-017] the cruel flowers. Then you'll know that there's no star like the red

[014-018] star of man that he lights on his hearthstone; no river like the red

[014-019] river of man, the good red wine, which you, Mr Rupert Grant, if I

[014-020] have any knowledge of you, will be drinking in two or three minutes in

[014-021] enormous quantities.”

[014-022] Rupert and I exchanged glances of fear. Basil went on heartily, as the

[014-023] wind died in the dreary trees.

[014-024] “You'll find our host a much more simple kind of fellow in his own

[014-025] house. I did when I visited him when he lived in the cabin at Yarmouth,

[014-026] and again in the loft at the city warehouse. He's really a very good

[014-027] fellow. But his greatest [[moral-philosophy|virtue]] remains what I said originally.”

[014-028] “What do you mean?” I asked, finding his speech straying towards a sort

[014-029] of [[madness-and-sanity|sanity]]. “What is his greatest virtue?”

[014-030] “His greatest virtue,” replied Basil, “is that he always tells the

[014-031] literal [[truth-and-fiction|truth]].”

[014-032] “Well, really,” cried Rupert, stamping about between cold and anger,

[014-033] and slapping himself like a cabman, “he doesn't seem to have been very

[014-034] literal or truthful in this case, nor you either. Why the deuce, may I

[014-035] ask, have you brought us out to this infernal place?”

[014-036] “He was too truthful, I confess,” said Basil, leaning against the tree;

[014-037] “too hardly veracious, too severely accurate. He should have indulged in

[014-038] a little more suggestiveness and legitimate [[adventure-in-fiction|romance]]. But come, it's time

[014-039] we went in. We shall be late for dinner.”

[014-040] Rupert whispered to me with a white face:

[014-041] “Is it a hallucination, do you think? Does he really fancy he sees a

[014-042] house?”

[014-043] “I suppose so,” I said. Then I added aloud, in what was meant to be

[014-044] a cheery and sensible voice, but which sounded in my ears almost as

[014-045] strange as the wind:

[014-046] “Come, come, Basil, my dear fellow. Where do you want us to go?”

[014-047] “Why, up here,” cried Basil, and with a bound and a swing he was above

[014-048] our heads, swarming up the grey column of the colossal tree.

[014-049] “Come up, all of you,” he shouted out of the darkness, with the voice of

[014-050] a schoolboy. “Come up. You'll be late for dinner.”

[014-051] The two great elms stood so close together that there was scarcely a

[014-052] yard anywhere, and in some places not more than a foot, between them.

[014-053] Thus occasional branches and even bosses and boles formed a series of

[014-054] footholds that almost amounted to a rude natural ladder. They must, I

[014-055] supposed, have been some sport of growth, Siamese twins of vegetation.

[014-056] Why we did it I cannot think; perhaps, as I have said, the [[mystery-in-fiction|mystery]] of

[014-057] the waste and dark had brought out and made primary something wholly

[014-058] mystical in Basil's supremacy. But we only felt that there was a giant's

[014-059] staircase going somewhere, perhaps to the stars; and the victorious

[014-060] voice above called to us out of heaven. We hoisted ourselves up after

[014-061] him.

[014-062] Half-way up some cold tongue of the night air struck and sobered me

[014-063] suddenly. The hypnotism of the madman above fell from me, and I saw the

[014-064] whole map of our silly actions as clearly as if it were printed. I saw

[014-065] three modern men in black coats who had begun with a perfectly sensible

[014-066] suspicion of a doubtful adventurer and who had ended, God knows how,

[014-067] half-way up a naked tree on a naked moorland, far from that adventurer

[014-068] and all his works, that adventurer who was at that moment, in all

[014-069] probability, laughing at us in some dirty Soho restaurant. He had plenty

[014-070] to laugh at us about, and no doubt he was laughing his loudest; but when

[014-071] I thought what his laughter would be if he knew where we were at that

[014-072] moment, I nearly let go of the tree and fell.

[014-073] “[[charles-swinburne|Swinburne]],” said Rupert suddenly, from above, “what are we doing? Let's

[014-074] get down again,” and by the mere sound of his voice I knew that he too

[014-075] felt the shock of wakening to reality.

[014-076] “We can't leave poor Basil,” I said. “Can't you call to him or get hold

[014-077] of him by the leg?”

[014-078] “He's too far ahead,” answered Rupert; “he's nearly at the top of the

[014-079] beastly thing. Looking for Lieutenant Keith in the rooks' nests, I

[014-080] suppose.”

[014-081] We were ourselves by this time far on our frantic vertical journey. The

[014-082] mighty trunks were beginning to sway and shake slightly in the wind.

[014-083] Then I looked down and saw something which made me feel that we were far

[014-084] from the world in a sense and to a degree that I cannot easily describe.

[014-085] I saw that the almost straight lines of the tall elm trees diminished a

[014-086] little in perspective as they fell. I was used to seeing parallel lines

[014-087] taper towards the sky. But to see them taper towards the earth made me

[014-088] feel lost in space, like a falling star.

[014-089] “Can nothing be done to stop Basil?” I called out.

[014-090] “No,” answered my fellow climber. “He's too far up. He must get to the

[014-091] top, and when he finds nothing but wind and leaves he may go sane again.

[014-092] Hark at him above there; you can just hear him talking to himself.”

[014-093] “Perhaps he's talking to us,” I said.

[014-094] “No,” said Rupert, “he'd shout if he was. I've never known him to talk

[014-095] to himself before; I'm afraid he really is bad tonight; it's a known

[014-096] sign of the brain going.”

[014-097] “Yes,” I said sadly, and listened. Basil's voice certainly was sounding

[014-098] above us, and not by any means in the rich and riotous tones in which

[014-099] he had hailed us before. He was speaking quietly, and laughing every now

[014-100] and then, up there among the leaves and stars.

[014-101] After a silence mingled with this murmur, Rupert Grant suddenly said,

[014-102] “My God!” with a violent voice.

[014-103] “What's the matter--are you hurt?” I cried, alarmed.

[014-104] “No. Listen to Basil,” said the other in a very strange voice. “He's not

[014-105] talking to himself.”

[014-106] “Then he is talking to us,” I cried.

[014-107] “No,” said Rupert simply, “he's talking to somebody else.”

[014-108] Great branches of the elm loaded with leaves swung about us in a

[014-109] sudden burst of wind, but when it died down I could still hear the

[014-110] conversational voice above. I could hear two voices.

[014-111] Suddenly from aloft came Basil's boisterous hailing voice as before:

[014-112] “Come up, you fellows. Here's Lieutenant Keith.”

[014-113] And a second afterwards came the half-American voice we had heard in our

[014-114] chambers more than once. It called out:

[014-115] “Happy to see you, gentlemen; pray come in.”

[014-116] Out of a hole in an enormous dark egg-shaped thing, pendent in the

[014-117] branches like a wasps' nest, was protruding the pale face and fierce

[014-118] moustache of the lieutenant, his teeth shining with that slightly

[014-119] Southern air that belonged to him.

[014-120] Somehow or other, stunned and speechless, we lifted ourselves heavily

[014-121] into the opening. We fell into the full glow of a lamp-lit, cushioned,

[014-122] tiny room, with a circular wall lined with books, a circular table,

[014-123] and a circular seat around it. At this table sat three people. One was

[014-124] Basil, who, in the instant after alighting there, had fallen into an

[014-125] attitude of marmoreal ease as if he had been there from boyhood; he was

[014-126] smoking a cigar with a slow pleasure. The second was Lieutenant Drummond

[014-127] Keith, who looked happy also, but feverish and doubtful compared with

[014-128] his granite guest. The third was the little bald-headed house-agent with

[014-129] the wild whiskers, who called himself Montmorency. The spears, the

[014-130] green umbrella, and the cavalry sword hung in parallels on the wall. The

[014-131] sealed jar of strange wine was on the mantelpiece, the enormous rifle

[014-132] in the corner. In the middle of the table was a magnum of champagne.

[014-133] Glasses were already set for us.

[014-134] The wind of the night roared far below us, like an ocean at the foot

[014-135] of a light-house. The room stirred slightly, as a cabin might in a mild

[014-136] sea.

[014-137] Our glasses were filled, and we still sat there dazed and dumb. Then

[014-138] Basil spoke.

[014-139] “You seem still a little doubtful, Rupert. Surely there is no further

[014-140] question about the cold veracity of our injured host.”

[014-141] “I don't quite grasp it all,” said Rupert, blinking still in the sudden

[014-142] glare. “Lieutenant Keith said his address was--”

[014-143] “It's really quite right, sir,” said Keith, with an open smile. “The

[014-144] bobby asked me where I lived. And I said, quite truthfully, that I lived

[014-145] in the elms on Buxton Common, near Purley. So I do. This gentleman, Mr

[014-146] Montmorency, whom I think you have met before, is an agent for houses

[014-147] of this kind. He has a special line in arboreal villas. It's being kept

[014-148] rather quiet at present, because the people who want these houses don't

[014-149] want them to get too common. But it's just the sort of thing a fellow

[014-150] like myself, racketing about in all sorts of queer corners of London,

[014-151] naturally knocks up against.”

[014-152] “Are you really an agent for arboreal villas?” asked Rupert eagerly,

[014-153] recovering his ease with the [[romance-as-adventure|romance]] of reality.

[014-154] Mr Montmorency, in his embarrassment, fingered one of his pockets and

[014-155] nervously pulled out a snake, which crawled about the table.

[014-156] “W-well, yes, sir,” he said. “The fact was--er--my people wanted me very

[014-157] much to go into the house-agency business. But I never cared myself for

[014-158] anything but natural history and botany and things like that. My poor

[014-159] parents have been dead some years now, but--naturally I like to respect

[014-160] their wishes. And I thought somehow that an arboreal villa agency was

[014-161] a sort of--of compromise between being a botanist and being a

[014-162] house-agent.”

[014-163] Rupert could not help laughing. “Do you have much custom?” he asked.

[014-164] “N-not much,” replied Mr Montmorency, and then he glanced at Keith, who

[014-165] was (I am convinced) his only client. “But what there is--very select.”

[014-166] “My dear friends,” said Basil, puffing his cigar, “always remember two

[014-167] facts. The first is that though when you are guessing about any one

[014-168] who is sane, the sanest thing is the most likely; when you are guessing

[014-169] about any one who is, like our host, insane, the maddest thing is the

[014-170] most likely. The second is to remember that very plain literal fact

[014-171] always seems fantastic. If Keith had taken a little brick box of a house

[014-172] in Clapham with nothing but railings in front of it and had written 'The

[014-173] Elms' over it, you wouldn't have thought there was anything fantastic

[014-174] about that. Simply because it was a great blaring, swaggering lie you

[014-175] would have believed it.”

[014-176] “Drink your wine, gentlemen,” said Keith, laughing, “for this confounded

[014-177] wind will upset it.”

[014-178] We drank, and as we did so, although the hanging house, by a cunning

[014-179] mechanism, swung only slightly, we knew that the great head of the elm

[014-180] tree swayed in the sky like a stricken thistle.
