---
description: 
id: ch010
label: "Section 10"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[010-001] “My desperate coup saved me. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] policeman had me hard by the back of

[010-002] the neck.

[010-003] “'You come along with me,' he began, but Bill cut in with his perfect

[010-004] imitation of a lady's finnicking voice.

[010-005] “'Oh, pray, constable, don't make a disturbance with our poor friend. We

[010-006] will get her quietly home. She does drink too much, but she is quite a

[010-007] lady--only eccentric.'

[010-008] “'She butted me in the stomach,' said the policeman briefly.

[010-009] “'Eccentricities of genius,' said Sam earnestly.

[010-010] “'Pray let me take her home,' reiterated Bill, in the resumed character

[010-011] of Miss [[james|James]], 'she wants looking after.' 'She does,' said the

[010-012] policeman, 'but I'll look after her.'

[010-013] “'That's no good,' cried Bill feverishly. 'She wants her friends. She

[010-014] wants a particular medicine we've got.'

[010-015] “'Yes,' assented [[miss-mowbray|Miss Mowbray]], with excitement, 'no other medicine any

[010-016] good, constable. Complaint quite unique.'

[010-017] “'I'm all righ'. Cutchy, cutchy, coo!' remarked, to his eternal shame,

[010-018] the Vicar of Chuntsey.

[010-019] “'Look here, ladies,' said the constable sternly, 'I don't like the

[010-020] [[madness-and-sanity|eccentricity]] of your friend, and I don't like 'er songs, or 'er 'ead in

[010-021] my stomach. And now I come to think of it, I don't like the looks of you.

[010-022] I've seen many as quiet dressed as you as was wrong 'uns. Who are you?'

[010-023] “'We've not our cards with us,' said Miss Mowbray, with indescribable

[010-024] dignity. 'Nor do we see why we should be insulted by any Jack-in-office

[010-025] who chooses to be rude to ladies, when he is paid to protect them. If

[010-026] you choose to take advantage of the weakness of our unfortunate friend,

[010-027] no doubt you are legally entitled to take her. But if you fancy you have

[010-028] any legal right to bully us, you will find yourself in the wrong box.'

[010-029] “The [[truth-and-fiction|truth]] and dignity of this staggered the policeman for a moment.

[010-030] Under cover of their advantage my five persecutors turned for an instant

[010-031] on me faces like faces of the damned and then swished off into the

[010-032] darkness. When the constable first turned his lantern and his suspicions

[010-033] on to them, I had seen the telegraphic look flash from face to face

[010-034] saying that only retreat was possible now.

[010-035] “By this time I was sinking slowly to the pavement, in a state of acute

[010-036] reflection. So long as the ruffians were with me, I dared not quit the

[010-037] role of drunkard. For if I had begun to talk reasonably and explain the

[010-038] real case, the officer would merely have thought that I was slightly

[010-039] recovered and would have put me in charge of my friends. Now, however,

[010-040] if I liked I might safely undeceive him.

[010-041] “But I confess I did not like. The chances of life are many, and it may

[010-042] doubtless sometimes lie in the narrow path of duty for a clergyman of

[010-043] the Church of England to pretend to be a drunken old woman; but

[010-044] such necessities are, I imagine, sufficiently rare to appear to many

[010-045] improbable. Suppose the [[fiction-as-truth|story]] got about that I had pretended to be

[010-046] drunk. Suppose people did not all think it was pretence!

[010-047] “I lurched up, the policeman half-lifting me. I went along weakly and

[010-048] quietly for about a hundred yards. The officer evidently thought that

[010-049] I was too sleepy and feeble to effect an escape, and so held me lightly

[010-050] and easily enough. Past one turning, two turnings, three turnings, four

[010-051] turnings, he trailed me with him, a limp and slow and reluctant figure.

[010-052] At the fourth turning, I suddenly broke from his hand and tore down the

[010-053] street like a maddened stag. He was unprepared, he was heavy, and it was

[010-054] dark. I ran and ran and ran, and in five minutes' running, found I was

[010-055] gaining. In half an hour I was out in the fields under the holy and

[010-056] blessed stars, where I tore off my accursed shawl and bonnet and buried

[010-057] them in clean earth.”

[010-058] The old gentleman had finished his story and leant back in his chair.

[010-059] Both the matter and the manner of his narration had, as time went on,

[010-060] impressed me favourably. He was an old duffer and pedant, but behind

[010-061] these things he was a country-bred man and gentleman, and had showed

[010-062] courage and a sporting instinct in the hour of desperation. He had told

[010-063] his story with many quaint formalities of diction, but also with a very

[010-064] convincing realism.

[010-065] “And now--” I began.

[010-066] “And now,” said Shorter, leaning forward again with something like

[010-067] servile energy, “and now, Mr [[charles-swinburne|Swinburne]], what about that unhappy man

[010-068] Hawker. I cannot tell what those men meant, or how far what they said

[010-069] was real. But surely there is danger. I cannot go to the police, for

[010-070] reasons that you perceive. Among other things, they wouldn't believe me.

[010-071] What is to be done?”

[010-072] I took out my watch. It was already half past twelve.

[010-073] “My friend [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]],” I said, “is the best man we can go to. He and I

[010-074] were to have gone to the same dinner tonight; but he will just have come

[010-075] back by now. Have you any objection to taking a cab?”

[010-076] “Not at all,” he replied, rising politely, and gathering up his absurd

[010-077] plaid shawl.

[010-078] A rattle in a hansom brought us underneath the sombre pile of workmen's

[010-079] flats in [[lambeth|Lambeth]] which [[rupert-grant|Grant]] inhabited; a climb up a wearisome wooden

[010-080] staircase brought us to his garret. When I entered that wooden and

[010-081] scrappy interior, the white gleam of Basil's shirt-front and the lustre

[010-082] of his fur coat flung on the wooden settle, struck me as a contrast. He

[010-083] was drinking a glass of wine before retiring. I was right; he had come

[010-084] back from the dinner-party.

[010-085] He listened to the repetition of the story of the [[shorter|Rev. Ellis Shorter]]

[010-086] with the genuine simplicity and respect which he never failed to exhibit

[010-087] in dealing with any human being. When it was over he said simply:

[010-088] “Do you know a man named [[captain-fraser|Captain Fraser]]?”

[010-089] I was so startled at this totally irrelevant reference to the worthy

[010-090] collector of chimpanzees with whom I ought to have dined that evening,

[010-091] that I glanced sharply at Grant. The result was that I did not look at

[010-092] Mr Shorter. I only heard him answer, in his most nervous tone, “No.”

[010-093] Basil, however, seemed to find something very curious about his answer

[010-094] or his demeanour generally, for he kept his big blue eyes fixed on the

[010-095] old clergyman, and though the eyes were quite quiet they stood out more

[010-096] and more from his head.

[010-097] “You are quite sure, Mr Shorter,” he repeated, “that you don't know

[010-098] Captain Fraser?”

[010-099] “Quite,” answered the vicar, and I was certainly puzzled to find him

[010-100] returning so much to the timidity, not to say the demoralization, of his

[010-101] tone when he first entered my presence.

[010-102] Basil sprang smartly to his feet.

[010-103] “Then our course is clear,” he said. “You have not even begun your

[010-104] investigation, my dear Mr Shorter; the first thing for us to do is to go

[010-105] together to see Captain Fraser.”

[010-106] “When?” asked the clergyman, stammering.

[010-107] “Now,” said Basil, putting one arm in his fur coat.

[010-108] The old clergyman rose to his feet, quaking all over.

[010-109] “I really do not think that it is necessary,” he said.

[010-110] Basil took his arm out of the fur coat, threw it over the chair again,

[010-111] and put his hands in his pockets.

[010-112] “Oh,” he said, with emphasis. “Oh--you don't think it necessary; then,”

[010-113] and he added the words with great clearness and deliberation, “then, Mr

[010-114] Ellis Shorter, I can only say that I would like to see you without your

[010-115] whiskers.”

[010-116] And at these words I also rose to my feet, for the great tragedy of my

[010-117] life had come. Splendid and exciting as life was in continual contact

[010-118] with an intellect like Basil's, I had always the feeling that that

[010-119] splendour and excitement were on the borderland of sanity. He lived

[010-120] perpetually near the vision of the reason of things which makes men lose

[010-121] their reason. And I felt of his insanity as men feel of the death of

[010-122] friends with heart disease. It might come anywhere, in a field, in a

[010-123] hansom cab, looking at a sunset, smoking a cigarette. It had come now.

[010-124] At the very moment of delivering a judgement for the salvation of a

[010-125] fellow creature, Basil Grant had gone mad.

[010-126] “Your whiskers,” he cried, advancing with blazing eyes. “Give me your

[010-127] whiskers. And your bald head.”

[010-128] The old vicar naturally retreated a step or two. I stepped between.

[010-129] “Sit down, Basil,” I implored, “you're a little excited. Finish your

[010-130] wine.”

[010-131] “Whiskers,” he answered sternly, “whiskers.”

[010-132] And with that he made a dash at the old gentleman, who made a dash for

[010-133] the door, but was intercepted. And then, before I knew where I was

[010-134] the quiet room was turned into something between a pantomime and a

[010-135] pandemonium by those two. Chairs were flung over with a crash, tables

[010-136] were vaulted with a noise like thunder, screens were smashed, crockery

[010-137] scattered in smithereens, and still Basil Grant bounded and bellowed

[010-138] after the Rev. Ellis Shorter.

[010-139] And now I began to perceive something else, which added the last

[010-140] half-witted touch to my mystification. The Rev. Ellis Shorter, of

[010-141] Chuntsey, in Essex, was by no means behaving as I had previously noticed

[010-142] him to behave, or as, considering his age and station, I should have

[010-143] expected him to behave. His power of dodging, leaping, and fighting

[010-144] would have been amazing in a lad of seventeen, and in this doddering old

[010-145] vicar looked like a sort of farcical fairy-tale. Moreover, he did not

[010-146] seem to be so much astonished as I had thought. There was even a look of

[010-147] something like enjoyment in his eyes; so there was in the eye of Basil.

[010-148] In fact, the unintelligible truth must be told. They were both laughing.

[010-149] At length Shorter was cornered.

[010-150] “Come, come, Mr Grant,” he panted, “you can't do anything to me. It's

[010-151] quite legal. And it doesn't do any one the least harm. It's only a

[010-152] social fiction. A result of our complex [[club-as-institution|society]], Mr Grant.”

[010-153] “I don't blame you, my man,” said Basil coolly. “But I want your

[010-154] whiskers. And your bald head. Do they belong to Captain Fraser?”

[010-155] “No, no,” said Mr Shorter, laughing, “we provide them ourselves. They

[010-156] don't belong to Captain Fraser.”

[010-157] “What the deuce does all this mean?” I almost screamed. “Are you all

[010-158] in an infernal nightmare? Why should Mr Shorter's bald head belong to

[010-159] Captain Fraser? How could it? What the deuce has Captain Fraser to

[010-160] do with the affair? What is the matter with him? You dined with him,

[010-161] Basil.”

[010-162] “No,” said Grant, “I didn't.”

[010-163] “Didn't you go to Mrs Thornton's dinner-party?” I asked, staring. “Why

[010-164] not?”

[010-165] “Well,” said Basil, with a slow and singular smile, “the fact is I was

[010-166] detained by a visitor. I have him, as a point of fact, in my bedroom.”

[010-167] “In your bedroom?” I repeated; but my imagination had reached that point

[010-168] when he might have said in his coal scuttle or his waistcoat pocket.

[010-169] Grant stepped to the door of an inner room, flung it open and walked in.

[010-170] Then he came out again with the last of the bodily wonders of that wild

[010-171] night. He introduced into the sitting-room, in an apologetic manner,

[010-172] and by the nape of the neck, a limp clergyman with a bald head, white

[010-173] whiskers and a plaid shawl.

[010-174] “Sit down, gentlemen,” cried Grant, striking his hands heartily. “Sit

[010-175] down all of you and have a glass of wine. As you say, there is no harm

[010-176] in it, and if Captain Fraser had simply dropped me a hint I could have

[010-177] saved him from dropping a good sum of money. Not that you would have

[010-178] liked that, eh?”

[010-179] The two duplicate clergymen, who were sipping their Burgundy with two

[010-180] duplicate grins, laughed heartily at this, and one of them carelessly

[010-181] pulled off his whiskers and laid them on the table.
