---
description: 
id: ch011
label: "Section 11: The Singular Speculation of the House-Agent"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[011-001] “[[basil-grant|Basil]],” I said, “if you are my friend, save me. What is all this?”

[011-002] He laughed again.

[011-003] “Only another addition, Cherub, to your collection of [[queer-trades|Queer Trades]].

[011-004] These two gentlemen (whose health I have now the pleasure of drinking)

[011-005] are Professional Detainers.”

[011-006] “And what on earth's that?” I asked.

[011-007] “It's really very simple, Mr [[charles-swinburne|Swinburne]],” began he who had once been

[011-008] the [[shorter|Rev. Ellis Shorter]], of Chuntsey, in Essex; and it gave me a shock

[011-009] indescribable to hear out of that pompous and familiar form come no

[011-010] longer its own pompous and familiar voice, but the brisk sharp tones of

[011-011] a young city man. “It is really nothing very important. We are paid by

[011-012] our clients to detain in conversation, on some harmless pretext, people

[011-013] whom they want out of the way for a few hours. And [[captain-fraser|Captain Fraser]]--” and

[011-014] with that he hesitated and smiled.

[011-015] Basil smiled also. He intervened.

[011-016] “[[the-reverend-vicar|The]] fact is that Captain Fraser, who is one of my best friends, wanted

[011-017] us both out of the way very much. He is sailing tonight for East Africa,

[011-018] and the lady with whom we were all to have dined is--er--what is I

[011-019] believe described as 'the [[adventure-in-fiction|romance]] of his life'. He wanted that two hours

[011-020] with her, and employed these two reverend gentlemen to detain us at our

[011-021] houses so as to let him have the field to himself.”

[011-022] “And of course,” said the late Mr Shorter apologetically to me, “as I

[011-023] had to keep a gentleman at home from keeping an appointment with a lady,

[011-024] I had to come with something rather hot and strong--rather urgent. It

[011-025] wouldn't have done to be tame.”

[011-026] “Oh,” I said, “I acquit you of tameness.”

[011-027] “Thank you, sir,” said the man respectfully, “always very grateful for

[011-028] any recommendation, sir.”

[011-029] The other man idly pushed back his artificial bald head, revealing close

[011-030] red hair, and spoke dreamily, perhaps under the influence of Basil's

[011-031] admirable Burgundy.

[011-032] “It's wonderful how common it's getting, gentlemen. Our office is busy

[011-033] from morning till night. I've no doubt you've often knocked up against

[011-034] us before. You just take notice. When an old bachelor goes on boring you

[011-035] with hunting stories, when you're burning to be introduced to somebody,

[011-036] he's from our bureau. When a lady calls on parish [[profession-and-trade|work]] and stops hours,

[011-037] just when you wanted to go to the Robinsons', she's from our bureau. The

[011-038] Robinson hand, sir, may be darkly seen.”

[011-039] “There is one thing I don't understand,” I said. “Why you are both

[011-040] vicars.”

[011-041] A shade crossed the brow of the temporary incumbent of Chuntsey, in

[011-042] Essex.

[011-043] “That may have been a mistake, sir,” he said. “But it was not our fault.

[011-044] It was all the munificence of Captain Fraser. He requested that the

[011-045] highest price and talent on our tariff should be employed to detain

[011-046] you gentlemen. Now the highest payment in our office goes to those who

[011-047] impersonate vicars, as being the most respectable and more of a strain.

[011-048] We are paid five guineas a visit. We have had the good fortune to

[011-049] satisfy the firm with our work; and we are now permanently vicars.

[011-050] Before that we had two years as colonels, the next in our scale.

[011-051] Colonels are four guineas.”

[011-052] Chapter 4. The Singular Speculation of the House-Agent

[011-053] [[lieutenant-keith|Lieutenant Drummond Keith]] was a man about whom conversation always burst

[011-054] like a thunderstorm the moment he left the room. This arose from many

[011-055] separate touches about him. He was a light, loose person, who wore

[011-056] light, loose clothes, generally white, as if he were in the tropics; he

[011-057] was lean and graceful, like a panther, and he had restless black eyes.

[011-058] He was very impecunious. He had one of the habits of the poor, in a

[011-059] degree so exaggerated as immeasurably to eclipse the most miserable of

[011-060] the unemployed; I mean the habit of continual change of lodgings. There

[011-061] are inland tracts of London where, in the very heart of artificial

[011-062] civilization, humanity has almost become nomadic once more. But in that

[011-063] restless interior there was no ragged tramp so restless as the elegant

[011-064] officer in the loose white clothes. He had shot a great many things in

[011-065] his time, to judge from his conversation, from partridges to elephants,

[011-066] but his slangier acquaintances were of opinion that “the moon” had been

[011-067] not unfrequently amid the victims of his victorious rifle. The phrase is

[011-068] a fine one, and suggests a mystic, elvish, nocturnal hunting.

[011-069] He carried from house to house and from parish to parish a kit which

[011-070] consisted practically of five articles. Two odd-looking, large-bladed

[011-071] spears, tied together, the weapons, I suppose, of some savage tribe, a

[011-072] green umbrella, a huge and tattered copy of the Pickwick Papers, a big

[011-073] game rifle, and a large sealed jar of some unholy Oriental wine. These

[011-074] always went into every new lodging, even for one night; and they went in

[011-075] quite undisguised, tied up in wisps of string or straw, to the delight

[011-076] of the poetic gutter boys in the little grey streets.

[011-077] I had forgotten to mention that he always carried also his old

[011-078] regimental sword. But this raised another odd question about him. Slim

[011-079] and active as he was, he was no longer very young. His hair, indeed, was

[011-080] quite grey, though his rather wild almost Italian moustache retained its

[011-081] blackness, and his face was careworn under its almost Italian gaiety.

[011-082] To find a middle-aged man who has left the Army at the primitive rank

[011-083] of lieutenant is unusual and not necessarily encouraging. With the

[011-084] more cautious and solid this fact, like his endless flitting, did the

[011-085] mysterious gentleman no good.

[011-086] Lastly, he was a man who told the kind of adventures which win a man

[011-087] admiration, but not respect. They came out of queer places, where a good

[011-088] man would scarcely find himself, out of opium dens and gambling hells;

[011-089] they had the heat of the thieves' kitchens or smelled of a strange

[011-090] smoke from cannibal incantations. These are the kind of stories which

[011-091] discredit a person almost equally whether they are believed or no. If

[011-092] Keith's tales were false he was a liar; if they were true he had had, at

[011-093] any rate, every opportunity of being a scamp.

[011-094] He had just left the room in which I sat with Basil [[rupert-grant|Grant]] and his

[011-095] brother Rupert, the voluble [[detective-in-fiction|amateur detective]]. And as I say was

[011-096] invariably the case, we were all talking about him. Rupert Grant was

[011-097] a clever young fellow, but he had that tendency which youth and

[011-098] cleverness, when sharply combined, so often produce, a somewhat

[011-099] extravagant scepticism. He saw doubt and guilt everywhere, and it

[011-100] was meat and drink to him. I had often got irritated with this boyish

[011-101] incredulity of his, but on this particular occasion I am bound to say

[011-102] that I thought him so obviously right that I was astounded at Basil's

[011-103] opposing him, however banteringly.

[011-104] I could swallow a good deal, being naturally of a simple turn, but I

[011-105] could not swallow Lieutenant Keith's autobiography.

[011-106] “You don't seriously mean, Basil,” I said, “that you think that that

[011-107] fellow really did go as a stowaway with Nansen and pretend to be the Mad

[011-108] Mullah and--”

[011-109] “He has one fault,” said Basil thoughtfully, “or [[moral-philosophy|virtue]], as you may

[011-110] happen to regard it. He tells the [[truth-and-fiction|truth]] in too exact and bald a style;

[011-111] he is too veracious.”

[011-112] “Oh! if you are going to be paradoxical,” said Rupert contemptuously,

[011-113] “be a bit funnier than that. Say, for instance, that he has lived all

[011-114] his life in one ancestral manor.”

[011-115] “No, he's extremely fond of change of scene,” replied Basil

[011-116] dispassionately, “and of living in odd places. That doesn't prevent his

[011-117] chief trait being verbal exactitude. What you people don't understand is

[011-118] that telling a thing crudely and coarsely as it happened makes it sound

[011-119] frightfully strange. The sort of things Keith recounts are not the sort

[011-120] of things that a man would make up to cover himself with honour; they

[011-121] are too absurd. But they are the sort of things that a man would do if

[011-122] he were sufficiently filled with the soul of skylarking.”

[011-123] “So far from [[paradox-in-fiction|paradox]],” said his brother, with something rather like a

[011-124] sneer, “you seem to be going in for journalese proverbs. Do you believe

[011-125] that truth is stranger than [[fiction-as-truth|fiction]]?”

[011-126] “Truth must of necessity be stranger than fiction,” said Basil placidly.

[011-127] “For fiction is the creation of the human mind, and therefore is

[011-128] congenial to it.”

[011-129] “Well, your lieutenant's truth is stranger, if it is truth, than

[011-130] anything I ever heard of,” said Rupert, relapsing into flippancy. “Do

[011-131] you, on your soul, believe in all that about the shark and the camera?”

[011-132] “I believe Keith's words,” answered the other. “He is an honest man.”

[011-133] “I should like to question a regiment of his landladies,” said Rupert

[011-134] cynically.

[011-135] “I must say, I think you can hardly regard him as unimpeachable merely

[011-136] in himself,” I said mildly; “his mode of life--”

[011-137] Before I could complete the sentence the door was flung open and

[011-138] Drummond Keith appeared again on the threshold, his white Panama on his

[011-139] head.

[011-140] “I say, Grant,” he said, knocking off his cigarette ash against the

[011-141] door, “I've got no money in the world till next April. Could you lend me

[011-142] a hundred pounds? There's a good chap.”

[011-143] Rupert and I looked at each other in an ironical silence. Basil, who was

[011-144] sitting by his desk, swung the chair round idly on its screw and picked

[011-145] up a quill-pen.

[011-146] “Shall I cross it?” he asked, opening a cheque-book.

[011-147] “Really,” began Rupert, with a rather nervous loudness, “since

[011-148] Lieutenant Keith has seen fit to make this suggestion to Basil before

[011-149] his family, I--”

[011-150] “Here you are, Ugly,” said Basil, fluttering a cheque in the direction

[011-151] of the quite nonchalant officer. “Are you in a hurry?”

[011-152] “Yes,” replied Keith, in a rather abrupt way. “As a matter of fact I

[011-153] want it now. I want to see my--er--business man.”

[011-154] Rupert was eyeing him sarcastically, and I could see that it was on

[011-155] the tip of his tongue to say, inquiringly, “Receiver of stolen goods,

[011-156] perhaps.” What he did say was:

[011-157] “A business man? That's rather a general description, Lieutenant Keith.”

[011-158] Keith looked at him sharply, and then said, with something rather like

[011-159] ill-temper:

[011-160] “He's a thingum-my-bob, a house-agent, say. I'm going to see him.”

[011-161] “Oh, you're going to see a house-agent, are you?” said Rupert Grant

[011-162] grimly. “Do you know, Mr Keith, I think I should very much like to go

[011-163] with you?”

[011-164] Basil shook with his soundless laughter. Lieutenant Keith started a

[011-165] little; his brow blackened sharply.

[011-166] “I beg your pardon,” he said. “What did you say?”

[011-167] Rupert's face had been growing from stage to stage of ferocious irony,

[011-168] and he answered:

[011-169] “I was saying that I wondered whether you would mind our strolling along

[011-170] with you to this house-agent's.”

[011-171] The visitor swung his stick with a sudden whirling violence.

[011-172] “Oh, in God's name, come to my house-agent's! Come to my bedroom. Look

[011-173] under my bed. Examine my dust-bin. Come along!” And with a furious

[011-174] energy which took away our breath he banged his way out of the room.

[011-175] Rupert Grant, his restless blue eyes dancing with his detective

[011-176] excitement, soon shouldered alongside him, talking to him with that

[011-177] transparent camaraderie which he imagined to be appropriate from the

[011-178] disguised policeman to the disguised [[crime-in-fiction|criminal]]. His interpretation

[011-179] was certainly corroborated by one particular detail, the unmistakable

[011-180] unrest, annoyance, and nervousness of the man with whom he walked. Basil

[011-181] and I tramped behind, and it was not necessary for us to tell each other

[011-182] that we had both noticed this.

[011-183] Lieutenant Drummond Keith led us through very extraordinary and

[011-184] unpromising neighbourhoods in the search for his remarkable house-agent.

[011-185] Neither of the brothers Grant failed to notice this fact. As the streets

[011-186] grew closer and more crooked and the roofs lower and the gutters grosser

[011-187] with mud, a darker curiosity deepened on the brows of Basil, and the

[011-188] figure of Rupert seen from behind seemed to fill the street with a

[011-189] gigantic swagger of success. At length, at the end of the fourth or

[011-190] fifth lean grey street in that sterile district, we came suddenly to a

[011-191] halt, the mysterious lieutenant looking once more about him with a

[011-192] sort of sulky desperation. Above a row of shutters and a door, all

[011-193] indescribably dingy in appearance and in size scarce sufficient even for

[011-194] a penny toyshop, ran the inscription: “[[mr-montmorency|P. Montmorency]], House-Agent.”
