---
description: 
id: ch015
label: "Section 15: The Noticeable Conduct of Professor Chadd"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[015-001] Chapter 5. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] Noticeable Conduct of [[professor-chadd|Professor Chadd]]

[015-002] [[basil-grant|Basil Grant]] had comparatively few friends besides myself; yet he was

[015-003] the reverse of an unsociable man. He would talk to any one anywhere, and

[015-004] talk not only well but with perfectly genuine concern and enthusiasm for

[015-005] that person's affairs. He went through the world, as it were, as if he

[015-006] were always on the top of an omnibus or waiting for a train. Most of

[015-007] these chance acquaintances, of course, vanished into darkness out of his

[015-008] life. A few here and there got hooked on to him, so to speak, and became

[015-009] his lifelong intimates, but there was an accidental look about all of

[015-010] them as if they were windfalls, samples taken at random, goods fallen

[015-011] from a goods train or presents fished out of a bran-pie. One would

[015-012] be, let us say, a veterinary surgeon with the appearance of a jockey;

[015-013] another, a mild prebendary with a white beard and vague views; another,

[015-014] a young captain in the Lancers, seemingly exactly like other captains

[015-015] in the Lancers; another, a small dentist from Fulham, in all reasonable

[015-016] certainty precisely like every other dentist from Fulham. [[major-brown|Major]]

[015-017] Brown, small, dry, and dapper, was one of these; Basil had made his

[015-018] acquaintance over a discussion in a hotel cloak-room about the right

[015-019] hat, a discussion which reduced the little major almost to a kind of

[015-020] masculine hysterics, the compound of the selfishness of an old bachelor

[015-021] and the scrupulosity of an old maid. They had gone home in a cab

[015-022] together and then dined with each other twice a week until they died. I

[015-023] myself was another. I had met [[rupert-grant|Grant]] while he was still a judge, on the

[015-024] balcony of the National Liberal Club, and exchanged a few words about

[015-025] the weather. Then we had talked for about an hour about politics and

[015-026] God; for men always talk about the most important things to total

[015-027] strangers. It is because in the total stranger we perceive man himself;

[015-028] the image of God is not disguised by resemblances to an uncle or doubts

[015-029] of the [[philosophy-and-detection|wisdom]] of a moustache.

[015-030] One of the most interesting of Basil's motley group of acquaintances was

[015-031] Professor Chadd. He was known to the ethnological world (which is a very

[015-032] interesting world, but a long way off this one) as the second greatest,

[015-033] if not the greatest, authority on the relations of savages to language.

[015-034] He was known to the neighbourhood of Hart Street, Bloomsbury, as a

[015-035] bearded man with a bald head, spectacles, and a patient face, the face

[015-036] of an unaccountable Nonconformist who had forgotten how to be angry. He

[015-037] went to and fro between the British Museum and a selection of blameless

[015-038] tea-shops, with an armful of books and a poor but honest umbrella. He

[015-039] was never seen without the books and the umbrella, and was supposed (by

[015-040] the lighter wits of the Persian MS. room) to go to bed with them in his

[015-041] little brick villa in the neighbourhood of Shepherd's Bush. There

[015-042] he lived with three sisters, ladies of solid [[moral-philosophy|goodness]], but sinister

[015-043] demeanour. His life was happy, as are almost all the lives of methodical

[015-044] students, but one would not have called it exhilarating. His only hours

[015-045] of exhilaration occurred when his friend, Basil Grant, came into the

[015-046] house, late at night, a tornado of conversation.

[015-047] Basil, though close on sixty, had moods of boisterous babyishness, and

[015-048] these seemed for some [[madness-and-sanity|reason]] or other to descend upon him particularly

[015-049] in the house of his studious and almost dingy friend. I can remember

[015-050] vividly (for I was acquainted with both parties and often dined with

[015-051] them) the gaiety of Grant on that particular evening when the strange

[015-052] calamity fell upon the professor. Professor Chadd was, like most of

[015-053] his particular [[society-and-class|class]] and type (the class that is at once academic and

[015-054] middle-class), a Radical of a solemn and old-fashioned type. Grant was

[015-055] a Radical himself, but he was that more discriminating and not uncommon

[015-056] type of Radical who passes most of his time in abusing the Radical

[015-057] party. Chadd had just contributed to a magazine an article called “Zulu

[015-058] Interests and the New Makango Frontier”, in which a precise scientific

[015-059] report of his study of the customs of the people of T'Chaka was

[015-060] reinforced by a severe protest against certain interferences with these

[015-061] customs both by the British and the Germans. He was sitting with the

[015-062] magazine in front of him, the lamplight shining on his spectacles, a

[015-063] wrinkle in his forehead, not of anger, but of perplexity, as Basil Grant

[015-064] strode up and down the room, shaking it with his voice, with his high

[015-065] spirits and his heavy tread.

[015-066] “It's not your opinions that I object to, my esteemed Chadd,” he was

[015-067] saying, “it's you. You are quite right to champion the Zulus, but for

[015-068] all that you do not sympathize with them. No doubt you know the Zulu way

[015-069] of cooking tomatoes and the Zulu prayer before blowing one's nose; but

[015-070] for all that you don't understand them as well as I do, who don't know

[015-071] an assegai from an alligator. You are more learned, Chadd, but I am more

[015-072] Zulu. Why is it that the jolly old barbarians of this earth are always

[015-073] championed by people who are their antithesis? Why is it? You are

[015-074] sagacious, you are benevolent, you are well informed, but, Chadd, you

[015-075] are not savage. Live no longer under that rosy illusion. Look in the

[015-076] glass. Ask your sisters. Consult the librarian of the British Museum.

[015-077] Look at this umbrella.” And he held up that sad but still respectable

[015-078] article. “Look at it. For ten mortal years to my certain knowledge you

[015-079] have carried that object under your arm, and I have no sort of doubt

[015-080] that you carried it at the age of eight months, and it never occurred to

[015-081] you to give one wild yell and hurl it like a javelin--thus--”

[015-082] And he sent the umbrella whizzing past the professor's bald head,

[015-083] so that it knocked over a pile of books with a crash and left a vase

[015-084] rocking.

[015-085] Professor Chadd appeared totally unmoved, with his face still lifted to

[015-086] the lamp and the wrinkle cut in his forehead.

[015-087] “Your mental processes,” he said, “always go a little too fast. And they

[015-088] are stated without method. There is no kind of inconsistency”--and

[015-089] no words can convey the time he took to get to the end of the

[015-090] word--“between valuing the right of the aborigines to adhere to their

[015-091] stage in the evolutionary process, so long as they find it congenial

[015-092] and requisite to do so. There is, I say, no inconsistency between this

[015-093] concession which I have just described to you and the view that the

[015-094] evolutionary stage in question is, nevertheless, so far as we can form

[015-095] any estimate of values in the variety of cosmic processes, definable in

[015-096] some degree as an inferior evolutionary stage.”

[015-097] Nothing but his lips had moved as he spoke, and his glasses still shone

[015-098] like two pallid moons.

[015-099] Grant was shaking with laughter as he watched him.

[015-100] “True,” he said, “there is no inconsistency, my son of the red spear.

[015-101] But there is a great deal of incompatibility of temper. I am very far

[015-102] from being certain that the Zulu is on an inferior evolutionary stage,

[015-103] whatever the blazes that may mean. I do not think there is anything

[015-104] stupid or ignorant about howling at the moon or being afraid of devils

[015-105] in the dark. It seems to me perfectly philosophical. Why should a man

[015-106] be thought a sort of idiot because he feels the [[mystery-in-fiction|mystery]] and peril of

[015-107] existence itself? Suppose, my dear Chadd, suppose it is we who are the

[015-108] idiots because we are not afraid of devils in the dark?”

[015-109] Professor Chadd slit open a page of the magazine with a bone paper-knife

[015-110] and the intent reverence of the bibliophile.

[015-111] “Beyond all question,” he said, “it is a tenable hypothesis. I allude

[015-112] to the hypothesis which I understand you to entertain, that our

[015-113] civilization is not or may not be an advance upon, and indeed (if I

[015-114] apprehend you), is or may be a retrogression from states identical with

[015-115] or analogous to the state of the Zulus. Moreover, I shall be inclined

[015-116] to concede that such a proposition is of the nature, in some degree at

[015-117] least, of a primary proposition, and cannot adequately be argued, in the

[015-118] same sense, I mean, that the primary proposition of pessimism, or the

[015-119] primary proposition of the non-existence of matter, cannot adequately

[015-120] be argued. But I do not conceive you to be under the impression that you

[015-121] have demonstrated anything more concerning this proposition than that it

[015-122] is tenable, which, after all, amounts to little more than the statement

[015-123] that it is not a [[paradox-in-fiction|contradiction]] in terms.”

[015-124] Basil threw a book at his head and took out a cigar.

[015-125] “You don't understand,” he said, “but, on the other hand, as a

[015-126] compensation, you don't mind smoking. Why you don't object to that

[015-127] disgustingly barbaric rite I can't think. I can only say that I began it

[015-128] when I began to be a Zulu, about the age of ten. What I maintained was

[015-129] that although you knew more about Zulus in the sense that you are a

[015-130] scientist, I know more about them in the sense that I am a savage. For

[015-131] instance, your theory of the origin of language, something about its

[015-132] having come from the formulated [[secret-in-fiction|secret]] language of some individual

[015-133] creature, though you knocked me silly with facts and scholarship in its

[015-134] favour, still does not convince me, because I have a feeling that that

[015-135] is not the way that things happen. If you ask me why I think so I can

[015-136] only answer that I am a Zulu; and if you ask me (as you most certainly

[015-137] will) what is my definition of a Zulu, I can answer that also. He is one

[015-138] who has climbed a Sussex apple-tree at seven and been afraid of a ghost

[015-139] in an English lane.”

[015-140] “Your process of thought--” began the immovable Chadd, but his speech

[015-141] was interrupted. His sister, with that masculinity which always in such

[015-142] families concentrates in sisters, flung open the door with a rigid arm

[015-143] and said:

[015-144] “[[james|James]], Mr Bingham of the British Museum wants to see you again.”

[015-145] The philosopher rose with a dazed look, which always indicates in

[015-146] such men the fact that they regard philosophy as a familiar thing, but

[015-147] practical life as a weird and unnerving vision, and walked dubiously out

[015-148] of the room.

[015-149] “I hope you do not mind my being aware of it, Miss Chadd,” said Basil

[015-150] Grant, “but I hear that the British Museum has recognized one of the

[015-151] men who have deserved well of their commonwealth. It is true, is it

[015-152] not, that Professor Chadd is likely to be made keeper of Asiatic

[015-153] manuscripts?”

[015-154] The grim face of the spinster betrayed a great deal of pleasure and a

[015-155] great deal of pathos also. “I believe it's true,” she said. “If it is,

[015-156] it will not only be great glory which women, I assure you, feel a great

[015-157] deal, but great relief, which they feel more; relief from worry from a

[015-158] lot of things. James' health has never been good, and while we are as

[015-159] poor as we are he had to do journalism and coaching, in addition to his

[015-160] own dreadful grinding notions and discoveries, which he loves more than

[015-161] man, woman, or child. I have often been afraid that unless something of

[015-162] this kind occurred we should really have to be careful of his brain. But

[015-163] I believe it is practically settled.”

[015-164] “I am delighted,” began Basil, but with a worried face, “but these

[015-165] red-tape negotiations are so terribly chancy that I really can't advise

[015-166] you to build on hope, only to be hurled down into bitterness. I've

[015-167] known men, and good men like your brother, come nearer than this and be

[015-168] disappointed. Of course, if it is true--”
