---
description: 
id: ch018
label: "Section 18: The Eccentric Seclusion of the Old Lady"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[018-001] “But why does he dance?” cried the despairing Bingham. “Why doesn't he

[018-002] answer us? Why hasn't he spoken to his family?”

[018-003] “[[the-reverend-vicar|The]] devil knows,” said Dr Colman coolly. “I'm paid to judge of

[018-004] lunatics, but not of fools. The man's not mad.”

[018-005] “What on earth can it mean? Can't we make him listen?” said Mr Bingham.

[018-006] “Can none get into any kind of communication with him?”

[018-007] [[basil-grant|Grant]]'s voice struck in sudden and clear, like a steel bell:

[018-008] “I shall be very happy,” he said, “to give him any message you like to

[018-009] send.”

[018-010] Both men stared at him.

[018-011] “Give him a message?” they cried simultaneously. “How will you give him

[018-012] a message?”

[018-013] Basil smiled in his slow way.

[018-014] “If you really want to know how I shall give him your message,” he

[018-015] began, but Bingham cried:

[018-016] “Of course, of course,” with a sort of frenzy.

[018-017] “Well,” said Basil, “like this.” And he suddenly sprang a foot into the

[018-018] air, coming down with crashing boots, and then stood on one leg.

[018-019] His face was stern, though this effect was slightly spoiled by the fact

[018-020] that one of his feet was making wild circles in the air.

[018-021] “You drive me to it,” he said. “You drive me to betray my friend. And I

[018-022] will, for his own sake, betray him.”

[018-023] The sensitive face of Bingham took on an extra expression of distress as

[018-024] of one anticipating some disgraceful disclosure. “Anything painful, of

[018-025] course--” he began.

[018-026] Basil let his loose foot fall on the carpet with a crash that struck

[018-027] them all rigid in their feeble attitudes.

[018-028] “Idiots!” he cried. “Have you seen the man? Have you looked at [[james|James]]

[018-029] [[professor-chadd|Chadd]] going dismally to and fro from his dingy house to your miserable

[018-030] library, with his futile books and his confounded umbrella, and never

[018-031] seen that he has the eyes of a fanatic? Have you never noticed, stuck

[018-032] casually behind his spectacles and above his seedy old collar, the face

[018-033] of a man who might have burned heretics, or died for the philosopher's

[018-034] stone? It is all my fault, in a way: I lit the dynamite of his deadly

[018-035] faith. I argued against him on the score of his famous theory about

[018-036] language--the theory that language was complete in certain individuals

[018-037] and was picked up by others simply by watching them. I also chaffed him

[018-038] about not [[philosophy-and-detection|understanding]] things in rough and ready practice. What has

[018-039] this glorious bigot done? He has answered me. He has worked out a system

[018-040] of language of his own (it would take too long to explain); he has made

[018-041] up, I say, a language of his own. And he has sworn that till people

[018-042] understand it, till he can speak to us in this language, he will not

[018-043] speak in any other. And he shall not. I have understood, by taking

[018-044] careful notice; and, by heaven, so shall the others. This shall not be

[018-045] blown upon. He shall finish his experiment. He shall have £800 a year

[018-046] from somewhere till he has stopped dancing. To stop him now is an

[018-047] infamous war on a great idea. It is religious persecution.”

[018-048] Mr Bingham held out his hand cordially.

[018-049] “I thank you, Mr [[rupert-grant|Grant]],” he said. “I hope I shall be able to answer for

[018-050] the source of the £800 and I fancy that I shall. Will you come in my

[018-051] cab?”

[018-052] “No, thank you very much, Mr Bingham,” said Grant heartily. “I think I

[018-053] will go and have a chat with the professor in the garden.”

[018-054] The conversation between Chadd and Grant appeared to be personal and

[018-055] friendly. They were still dancing when I left.

[018-056] Chapter 6. The Eccentric Seclusion of the Old Lady

[018-057] The conversation of Rupert Grant had two great elements of

[018-058] interest--first, the long fantasias of [[detective-in-fiction|detective]] deduction in which he

[018-059] was engaged, and, second, his genuine [[romance-as-adventure|romantic]] interest in the life of

[018-060] London. His brother Basil said of him: “His reasoning is particularly

[018-061] cold and clear, and invariably leads him wrong. But his poetry comes

[018-062] in abruptly and leads him right.” Whether this was true of Rupert as a

[018-063] whole, or no, it was certainly curiously supported by one [[fiction-as-truth|story]] about

[018-064] him which I think worth telling.

[018-065] We were walking along a lonely terrace in Brompton together. The street

[018-066] was full of that bright blue twilight which comes about half past eight

[018-067] in summer, and which seems for the moment to be not so much a coming of

[018-068] darkness as the turning on of a new azure illuminator, as if the earth

[018-069] were lit suddenly by a sapphire sun. In the cool blue the lemon tint of

[018-070] the lamps had already begun to flame, and as Rupert and I passed them,

[018-071] Rupert talking excitedly, one after another the pale sparks sprang out

[018-072] of the dusk. Rupert was talking excitedly because he was trying to

[018-073] prove to me the nine hundred and ninety-ninth of his amateur detective

[018-074] theories. He would go about London, with this mad logic in his brain,

[018-075] seeing a conspiracy in a cab accident, and a special providence in a

[018-076] falling fusee. His suspicions at the moment were fixed upon an unhappy

[018-077] milkman who walked in front of us. So arresting were the incidents which

[018-078] afterwards overtook us that I am really afraid that I have forgotten

[018-079] what were the main outlines of the milkman's [[crime-in-fiction|crime]]. I think it had

[018-080] something to do with the fact that he had only one small can of milk to

[018-081] carry, and that of that he had left the lid loose and walked so quickly

[018-082] that he spilled milk on the pavement. This showed that he was not

[018-083] thinking of his small burden, and this again showed that he anticipated

[018-084] some other than lacteal business at the end of his walk, and this (taken

[018-085] in conjunction with something about muddy boots) showed something else

[018-086] that I have entirely forgotten. I am afraid that I derided this detailed

[018-087] revelation unmercifully; and I am afraid that Rupert Grant, who,

[018-088] though the best of fellows, had a good deal of the sensitiveness of the

[018-089] artistic temperament, slightly resented my derision. He endeavoured to

[018-090] take a whiff of his cigar, with the placidity which he associated with

[018-091] his [[profession-and-trade|profession]], but the cigar, I think, was nearly bitten through.

[018-092] “My dear fellow,” he said acidly, “I'll bet you half a crown that

[018-093] wherever that milkman comes to a real stop I'll find out something

[018-094] curious.”

[018-095] “My resources are equal to that risk,” I said, laughing. “Done.”

[018-096] We walked on for about a quarter of an hour in silence in the trail of

[018-097] the mysterious milkman. He walked quicker and quicker, and we had some

[018-098] ado to keep up with him; and every now and then he left a splash of

[018-099] milk, silver in the lamplight. Suddenly, almost before we could note it,

[018-100] he disappeared down the area steps of a house. I believe Rupert really

[018-101] believed that the milkman was a fairy; for a second he seemed to accept

[018-102] him as having vanished. Then calling something to me which somehow took

[018-103] no hold on my mind, he darted after the mystic milkman, and disappeared

[018-104] himself into the area.

[018-105] I waited for at least five minutes, leaning against a lamp-post in the

[018-106] lonely street. Then the milkman came swinging up the steps without his

[018-107] can and hurried off clattering down the road. Two or three minutes more

[018-108] elapsed, and then Rupert came bounding up also, his face pale but yet

[018-109] laughing; a not uncommon [[paradox-in-fiction|contradiction]] in him, denoting excitement.

[018-110] “My friend,” he said, rubbing his hands, “so much for all your

[018-111] scepticism. So much for your philistine ignorance of the possibilities

[018-112] of a romantic city. Two and sixpence, my boy, is the form in which your

[018-113] prosaic good nature will have to express itself.”

[018-114] “What?” I said incredulously, “do you mean to say that you really did

[018-115] find anything the matter with the poor milkman?”

[018-116] His face fell.

[018-117] “Oh, the milkman,” he said, with a miserable affectation at having

[018-118] misunderstood me. “No, I--I--didn't exactly bring anything home to the

[018-119] milkman himself, I--”

[018-120] “What did the milkman say and do?” I said, with inexorable sternness.

[018-121] “Well, to tell the [[truth-and-fiction|truth]],” said Rupert, shifting restlessly from

[018-122] one foot to another, “the milkman himself, as far as merely physical

[018-123] appearances went, just said, 'Milk, Miss,' and handed in the can. That

[018-124] is not to say, of course, that he did not make some [[secret-in-fiction|secret]] sign or

[018-125] some--”

[018-126] I broke into a violent laugh. “You idiot,” I said, “why don't you own

[018-127] yourself wrong and have done with it? Why should he have made a secret

[018-128] sign any more than any one else? You own he said nothing and did nothing

[018-129] worth mentioning. You own that, don't you?”

[018-130] His face grew grave.

[018-131] “Well, since you ask me, I must admit that I do. It is possible that

[018-132] the milkman did not betray himself. It is even possible that I was wrong

[018-133] about him.”

[018-134] “Then come along with you,” I said, with a certain amicable anger, “and

[018-135] remember that you owe me half a crown.”

[018-136] “As to that, I differ from you,” said Rupert coolly. “The milkman's

[018-137] remarks may have been quite innocent. Even the milkman may have been.

[018-138] But I do not owe you half a crown. For the terms of the bet were, I

[018-139] think, as follows, as I propounded them, that wherever that milkman came

[018-140] to a real stop I should find out something curious.”

[018-141] “Well?” I said.

[018-142] “Well,” he answered, “I jolly well have. You just come with me,” and

[018-143] before I could speak he had turned tail once more and whisked through

[018-144] the blue dark into the moat or basement of the house. I followed almost

[018-145] before I made any decision.

[018-146] When we got down into the area I felt indescribably foolish literally,

[018-147] as the saying is, in a hole. There was nothing but a closed door,

[018-148] shuttered windows, the steps down which we had come, the ridiculous

[018-149] well in which I found myself, and the ridiculous man who had brought me

[018-150] there, and who stood there with dancing eyes. I was just about to turn

[018-151] back when Rupert caught me by the elbow.

[018-152] “Just listen to that,” he said, and keeping my coat gripped in his right

[018-153] hand, he rapped with the knuckles of his left on the shutters of the

[018-154] basement window. His air was so definite that I paused and even inclined

[018-155] my head for a moment towards it. From inside was coming the murmur of an

[018-156] unmistakable human voice.

[018-157] “Have you been talking to somebody inside?” I asked suddenly, turning to

[018-158] Rupert.

[018-159] “No, I haven't,” he replied, with a grim smile, “but I should very much

[018-160] like to. Do you know what somebody is saying in there?”

[018-161] “No, of course not,” I replied.

[018-162] “Then I recommend you to listen,” said Rupert sharply.

[018-163] In the dead silence of the aristocratic street at evening, I stood a

[018-164] moment and listened. From behind the wooden partition, in which there

[018-165] was a long lean crack, was coming a continuous and moaning sound which

[018-166] took the form of the words: “When shall I get out? When shall I get out?

[018-167] Will they ever let me out?” or words to that effect.

[018-168] “Do you know anything about this?” I said, turning upon Rupert very

[018-169] abruptly.

[018-170] “Perhaps you think I am the criminal,” he said sardonically, “instead

[018-171] of being in some small sense the detective. I came into this area two or

[018-172] three minutes ago, having told you that I knew there was something funny

[018-173] going on, and this woman behind the shutters (for it evidently is a

[018-174] woman) was moaning like mad. No, my dear friend, beyond that I do

[018-175] not know anything about her. She is not, startling as it may seem, my

[018-176] disinherited daughter, or a member of my secret seraglio. But when

[018-177] I hear a human being wailing that she can't get out, and talking to

[018-178] herself like a mad woman and beating on the shutters with her fists,

[018-179] as she was doing two or three minutes ago, I think it worth mentioning,

[018-180] that is all.”
