---
description: 
id: ch016
label: "Section 16"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[016-001] “If it is true,” said the woman fiercely, “it means that people who have

[016-002] never lived may make an attempt at living.”

[016-003] Even as she spoke the professor came into the room still with the dazed

[016-004] look in his eyes.

[016-005] “Is it true?” asked [[basil-grant|Basil]], with burning eyes.

[016-006] “Not a bit true,” answered [[professor-chadd|Chadd]] after a moment's bewilderment. “Your

[016-007] argument was in three points fallacious.”

[016-008] “What do you mean?” demanded [[rupert-grant|Grant]].

[016-009] “Well,” said the professor slowly, “in saying that you could possess a

[016-010] knowledge of the essence of Zulu life distinct from--”

[016-011] “Oh! confound Zulu life,” cried Grant, with a burst of laughter. “I

[016-012] mean, have you got the post?”

[016-013] “You mean the post of keeper of the Asiatic manuscripts,” he said,

[016-014] opening his eye with childlike wonder. “Oh, yes, I got that. But the

[016-015] real objection to your argument, which has only, I admit, occurred to me

[016-016] since I have been out of the room, is that it does not merely presuppose

[016-017] a Zulu [[truth-and-fiction|truth]] apart from the facts, but infers that the discovery of it

[016-018] is absolutely impeded by the facts.”

[016-019] “I am crushed,” said Basil, and sat down to laugh, while the professor's

[016-020] sister retired to her room, possibly to laugh, possibly not.

[016-021] It was extremely late when we left the Chadds, and it is an extremely

[016-022] long and tiresome journey from Shepherd's Bush to [[lambeth|Lambeth]]. This may

[016-023] be our excuse for the fact that we (for I was stopping the night with

[016-024] Grant) got down to breakfast next day at a time inexpressibly [[crime-in-fiction|criminal]],

[016-025] a time, in point of fact, close upon noon. Even to that belated meal

[016-026] we came in a very lounging and leisurely fashion. Grant, in particular,

[016-027] seemed so dreamy at table that he scarcely saw the pile of letters by

[016-028] his plate, and I doubt if he would have opened any of them if there

[016-029] had not lain on the top that one thing which has succeeded amid modern

[016-030] carelessness in being really urgent and coercive--a telegram. This he

[016-031] opened with the same heavy distraction with which he broke his egg and

[016-032] drank his tea. When he read it he did not stir a hair or say a word, but

[016-033] something, I know not what, made me feel that the motionless figure

[016-034] had been pulled together suddenly as strings are tightened on a slack

[016-035] guitar. Though he said nothing and did not move, I knew that he had been

[016-036] for an instant cleared and sharpened with a shock of cold water. It was

[016-037] scarcely any surprise to me when a man who had drifted sullenly to his

[016-038] seat and fallen into it, kicked it away like a cur from under him and

[016-039] came round to me in two strides.

[016-040] “What do you make of that?” he said, and flattened out the wire in front

[016-041] of me.

[016-042] It ran: “Please come at once. [[james|James]]' mental state dangerous. Chadd.”

[016-043] “What does the woman mean?” I said after a pause, irritably. “Those

[016-044] women have been saying that the poor old professor was mad ever since he

[016-045] was born.”

[016-046] “You are mistaken,” said Grant composedly. “It is true that all sensible

[016-047] women think all studious men mad. It is true, for the matter of that,

[016-048] all women of any kind think all men of any kind mad. But they don't put

[016-049] it in telegrams, any more than they wire to you that grass is green or

[016-050] God all-merciful. These things are truisms, and often private ones at

[016-051] that. If Miss Chadd has written down under the eye of a strange woman

[016-052] in a post-office that her brother is off his head you may be perfectly

[016-053] certain that she did it because it was a matter of life and death, and

[016-054] she can think of no other way of forcing us to come promptly.”

[016-055] “It will force us of course,” I said, smiling.

[016-056] “Oh, yes,” he replied; “there is a cab-rank near.”

[016-057] Basil scarcely said a word as we drove across Westminster Bridge,

[016-058] through Trafalgar Square, along Piccadilly, and up the Uxbridge Road.

[016-059] Only as he was opening the gate he spoke.

[016-060] “I think you will take my word for it, my friend,” he said; “this is

[016-061] one of the most queer and complicated and astounding incidents that ever

[016-062] happened in London or, for that matter, in any high civilization.”

[016-063] “I confess with the greatest sympathy and reverence that I don't quite

[016-064] see it,” I said. “Is it so very extraordinary or complicated that a

[016-065] dreamy somnambulant old invalid who has always walked on the borders of

[016-066] the inconceivable should go mad under the shock of great joy? Is it so

[016-067] very extraordinary that a man with a head like a turnip and a soul

[016-068] like a spider's web should not find his strength equal to a confounding

[016-069] change of fortunes? Is it, in short, so very extraordinary that James

[016-070] Chadd should lose his wits from excitement?”

[016-071] “It would not be extraordinary in the least,” answered Basil, with

[016-072] placidity. “It would not be extraordinary in the least,” he repeated,

[016-073] “if the professor had gone mad. That was not the extraordinary

[016-074] circumstance to which I referred.”

[016-075] “What,” I asked, stamping my foot, “was the extraordinary thing?”

[016-076] “[[the-reverend-vicar|The]] extraordinary thing,” said Basil, ringing the bell, “is that he has

[016-077] not gone mad from excitement.”

[016-078] The tall and angular figure of the eldest Miss Chadd blocked the doorway

[016-079] as the door opened. Two other Miss Chadds seemed in the same way to be

[016-080] blocking the narrow passage and the little parlour. There was a general

[016-081] sense of their keeping something from view. They seemed like three

[016-082] black-clad ladies in some strange play of Maeterlinck, veiling the

[016-083] catastrophe from the audience in the manner of the Greek chorus.

[016-084] “Sit down, won't you?” said one of them, in a voice that was somewhat

[016-085] rigid with pain. “I think you had better be told first what has

[016-086] happened.”

[016-087] Then, with her bleak face looking unmeaningly out of the window, she

[016-088] continued, in an even and mechanical voice:

[016-089] “I had better state everything that occurred just as it occurred. This

[016-090] morning I was clearing away the breakfast things, my sisters were both

[016-091] somewhat unwell, and had not come down. My brother had just gone out

[016-092] of the room, I believe, to fetch a book. He came back again, however,

[016-093] without it, and stood for some time staring at the empty grate. I said,

[016-094] 'Were you looking for anything I could get?' He did not answer, but

[016-095] this constantly happens, as he is often very abstracted. I repeated my

[016-096] question, and still he did not answer. Sometimes he is so wrapped up

[016-097] in his studies that nothing but a touch on the shoulder would make him

[016-098] aware of one's presence, so I came round the table towards him. I really

[016-099] do not know how to describe the sensation which I then had. It seems

[016-100] simply silly, but at the moment it seemed something enormous, upsetting

[016-101] one's brain. The fact is, James was standing on one leg.”

[016-102] Grant smiled slowly and rubbed his hands with a kind of care.

[016-103] “Standing on one leg?” I repeated.

[016-104] “Yes,” replied the dead voice of the woman without an inflection to

[016-105] suggest that she felt the fantasticality of her statement. “He was

[016-106] standing on the left leg and the right drawn up at a sharp angle, the

[016-107] toe pointing downwards. I asked him if his leg hurt him. His only

[016-108] answer was to shoot the leg straight at right angles to the other, as

[016-109] if pointing to the other with his toe to the wall. He was still looking

[016-110] quite gravely at the fireplace.

[016-111] “'James, what is the matter?' I cried, for I was thoroughly frightened.

[016-112] James gave three kicks in the air with the right leg, flung up the

[016-113] other, gave three kicks in the air with it also and spun round like a

[016-114] teetotum the other way. 'Are you mad?' I cried. 'Why don't you answer

[016-115] me?' He had come to a standstill facing me, and was looking at me as he

[016-116] always does, with his lifted eyebrows and great spectacled eyes. When

[016-117] I had spoken he remained a second or two motionless, and then his only

[016-118] reply was to lift his left foot slowly from the floor and describe

[016-119] circles with it in the air. I rushed to the door and shouted for

[016-120] Christina. I will not dwell on the dreadful hours that followed. All

[016-121] three of us talked to him, implored him to speak to us with appeals that

[016-122] might have brought back the dead, but he has done nothing but hop

[016-123] and dance and kick with a solemn silent face. It looks as if his legs

[016-124] belonged to some one else or were possessed by devils. He has never

[016-125] spoken to us from that time to this.”

[016-126] “Where is he now?” I said, getting up in some agitation. “We ought not

[016-127] to leave him alone.”

[016-128] “Doctor Colman is with him,” said Miss Chadd calmly. “They are in the

[016-129] garden. Doctor Colman thought the air would do him good. And he can

[016-130] scarcely go into the street.”

[016-131] Basil and I walked rapidly to the window which looked out on the garden.

[016-132] It was a small and somewhat smug suburban garden; the flower beds a

[016-133] little too neat and like the pattern of a coloured carpet; but on this

[016-134] shining and opulent summer day even they had the exuberance of something

[016-135] natural, I had almost said tropical. In the middle of a bright and

[016-136] verdant but painfully circular lawn stood two figures. One of them was a

[016-137] small, sharp-looking man with black whiskers and a very polished hat (I

[016-138] presume Dr Colman), who was talking very quietly and clearly, yet with

[016-139] a nervous twitch, as it were, in his face. The other was our old friend,

[016-140] listening with his old forbearing expression and owlish eyes, the strong

[016-141] sunlight gleaming on his glasses as the lamplight had gleamed the

[016-142] night before, when the boisterous Basil had rallied him on his studious

[016-143] decorum. But for one thing the figure of this morning might have been

[016-144] the identical figure of last night. That one thing was that while the

[016-145] face listened reposefully the legs were industriously dancing like the

[016-146] legs of a marionette. The neat flowers and the sunny glitter of

[016-147] the garden lent an indescribable sharpness and incredibility to

[016-148] the prodigy--the prodigy of the head of a hermit and the legs of a

[016-149] harlequin. For miracles should always happen in broad daylight. The

[016-150] night makes them credible and therefore commonplace.

[016-151] The second sister had by this time entered the room and came somewhat

[016-152] drearily to the window.

[016-153] “You know, Adelaide,” she said, “that Mr Bingham from the Museum is

[016-154] coming again at three.”

[016-155] “I know,” said Adelaide Chadd bitterly. “I suppose we shall have to tell

[016-156] him about this. I thought that no good fortune would ever come easily to

[016-157] us.”

[016-158] Grant suddenly turned round. “What do you mean?” he said. “What will you

[016-159] have to tell Mr Bingham?”

[016-160] “You know what I shall have to tell him,” said the professor's sister,

[016-161] almost fiercely. “I don't know that we need give it its wretched name.

[016-162] Do you think that the keeper of Asiatic manuscripts will be allowed to

[016-163] go on like that?” And she pointed for an instant at the figure in the

[016-164] garden, the shining, listening face and the unresting feet.

[016-165] Basil Grant took out his watch with an abrupt movement. “When did you

[016-166] say the British Museum man was coming?” he said.

[016-167] “Three o'clock,” said Miss Chadd briefly.

[016-168] “Then I have an hour before me,” said Grant, and without another word

[016-169] threw up the window and jumped out into the garden. He did not walk

[016-170] straight up to the doctor and lunatic, but strolling round the garden

[016-171] path drew near them cautiously and yet apparently carelessly. He stood

[016-172] a couple of feet off them, seemingly counting halfpence out of his

[016-173] trousers pocket, but, as I could see, looking up steadily under the

[016-174] broad brim of his hat.
