---
description: 
id: ch020
label: "Section 20"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[020-001] “I propose, first of all,” said [[rupert-grant|Rupert]], “to get into this house;

[020-002] secondly, to have a look at these nice young Oxford men; thirdly, to

[020-003] knock them down, bind them, gag them, and search the house.”

[020-004] [[basil-grant|Basil]] stared indignantly for a few minutes. Then he was shaken for an

[020-005] instant with one of his sudden laughs.

[020-006] “Poor little boys,” he said. “But it almost serves them right for

[020-007] holding such silly views, after all,” and he quaked again with amusement

[020-008] “there's something confoundedly Darwinian about it.”

[020-009] “I suppose you mean to help us?” said Rupert.

[020-010] “Oh, yes, I'll be in it,” answered Basil, “if it's only to prevent your

[020-011] doing the poor chaps any harm.”

[020-012] He was standing in the rear of our little procession, looking

[020-013] indifferent and sometimes even sulky, but somehow the instant the door

[020-014] opened he stepped first into the hall, glowing with urbanity.

[020-015] “So sorry to haunt you like this,” he said. “I met two friends outside

[020-016] who very much want to know you. May I bring them in?”

[020-017] “Delighted, of course,” said a young voice, the unmistakable voice

[020-018] of the Isis, and I realized that the door had been opened, not by the

[020-019] decorous little servant girl, but by one of our hosts in person. He was

[020-020] a short, but shapely young gentleman, with curly dark hair and a

[020-021] square, snub-nosed face. He wore slippers and a sort of blazer of some

[020-022] incredible college purple.

[020-023] “This way,” he said; “mind the steps by the staircase. This house is

[020-024] more crooked and old-fashioned than you would think from its snobbish

[020-025] exterior. There are quite a lot of odd corners in the place really.”

[020-026] “That,” said Rupert, with a savage smile, “I can quite believe.”

[020-027] We were by this time in the study or back parlour, used by the young

[020-028] inhabitants as a sitting-room, an apartment littered with magazines

[020-029] and books ranging from Dante to [[detective-in-fiction|detective]] stories. [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] other youth, who

[020-030] stood with his back to the fire smoking a corncob, was big and burly,

[020-031] with dead brown hair brushed forward and a Norfolk jacket. He was that

[020-032] particular type of man whose every feature and action is heavy and

[020-033] clumsy, and yet who is, you would say, rather exceptionally a gentleman.

[020-034] “Any more arguments?” he said, when introductions had been effected. “I

[020-035] must say, Mr Grant, you were rather severe upon eminent men of science

[020-036] such as we. I've half a mind to chuck my D.Sc. and turn minor poet.”

[020-037] “Bosh,” answered Grant. “I never said a word against eminent men of

[020-038] science. What I complain of is a vague popular [[philosophy-and-detection|philosophy]] which supposes

[020-039] itself to be scientific when it is really nothing but a sort of new

[020-040] religion and an uncommonly nasty one. When people talked about the fall

[020-041] of man they knew they were talking about a [[mystery-in-fiction|mystery]], a thing they didn't

[020-042] understand. Now that they talk about the survival of the fittest they

[020-043] think they do understand it, whereas they have not merely no notion,

[020-044] they have an elaborately false notion of what the words mean. The

[020-045] Darwinian movement has made no difference to mankind, except that,

[020-046] instead of talking unphilosophically about philosophy, they now talk

[020-047] unscientifically about science.”

[020-048] “That is all very well,” said the big young man, whose name appeared

[020-049] to be [[burrows|Burrows]]. “Of course, in a sense, science, like mathematics or

[020-050] the violin, can only be perfectly understood by specialists. Still, the

[020-051] rudiments may be of public use. Greenwood here,” indicating the little

[020-052] man in the blazer, “doesn't know one note of music from another. Still,

[020-053] he knows something. He knows enough to take off his hat when they play

[020-054] 'God Save the King'. He doesn't take it off by mistake when they play

[020-055] 'Oh, Dem Golden Slippers'. Just in the same way science--”

[020-056] Here Mr Burrows stopped abruptly. He was interrupted by an argument

[020-057] uncommon in philosophical controversy and perhaps not wholly legitimate.

[020-058] Rupert Grant had bounded on him from behind, flung an arm round his

[020-059] throat, and bent the giant backwards.

[020-060] “Knock the other fellow down, [[charles-swinburne|Swinburne]],” he called out, and before I

[020-061] knew where I was I was locked in a grapple with the man in the purple

[020-062] blazer. He was a wiry fighter, who bent and sprang like a whalebone, but

[020-063] I was heavier and had taken him utterly by surprise. I twitched one of

[020-064] his feet from under him; he swung for a moment on the single foot, and

[020-065] then we fell with a crash amid the litter of newspapers, myself on top.

[020-066] My attention for a moment released by victory, I could hear Basil's

[020-067] voice finishing some long sentence of which I had not heard the

[020-068] beginning.

[020-069] “... wholly, I must confess, unintelligible to me, my dear sir, and

[020-070] I need not say unpleasant. Still one must side with one's old friends

[020-071] against the most fascinating new ones. Permit me, therefore, in tying

[020-072] you up in this antimacassar, to make it as commodious as handcuffs can

[020-073] reasonably be while...”

[020-074] I had staggered to my feet. The gigantic Burrows was toiling in the

[020-075] garotte of Rupert, while Basil was striving to master his mighty hands.

[020-076] Rupert and Basil were both particularly strong, but so was Mr Burrows;

[020-077] how strong, we knew a second afterwards. His head was held back by

[020-078] Rupert's arm, but a convulsive heave went over his whole frame. An

[020-079] instant after his head plunged forward like a bull's, and Rupert Grant

[020-080] was slung head over heels, a catherine wheel of legs, on the floor in

[020-081] front of him. Simultaneously the bull's head butted Basil in the chest,

[020-082] bringing him also to the ground with a crash, and the monster, with a

[020-083] Berserker roar, leaped at me and knocked me into the corner of the

[020-084] room, smashing the waste-paper basket. The bewildered Greenwood sprang

[020-085] furiously to his feet. Basil did the same. But they had the best of it

[020-086] now.

[020-087] Greenwood dashed to the bell and pulled it violently, sending peals

[020-088] through the great house. Before I could get panting to my feet, and

[020-089] before Rupert, who had been literally stunned for a few moments,

[020-090] could even lift his head from the floor, two footmen were in the room.

[020-091] Defeated even when we were in a majority, we were now outnumbered.

[020-092] Greenwood and one of the footmen flung themselves upon me, crushing me

[020-093] back into the corner upon the wreck of the paper basket. The other two

[020-094] flew at Basil, and pinned him against the wall. Rupert lifted himself on

[020-095] his elbow, but he was still dazed.

[020-096] In the strained silence of our helplessness I heard the voice of Basil

[020-097] come with a loud incongruous cheerfulness.

[020-098] “Now this,” he said, “is what I call enjoying oneself.”

[020-099] I caught a glimpse of his face, flushed and forced against the bookcase,

[020-100] from between the swaying limbs of my captors and his. To my astonishment

[020-101] his eyes were really brilliant with pleasure, like those of a child

[020-102] heated by a favourite game.

[020-103] I made several apoplectic efforts to rise, but the servant was on top of

[020-104] me so heavily that Greenwood could afford to leave me to him. He turned

[020-105] quickly to come to reinforce the two who were mastering Basil. The

[020-106] latter's head was already sinking lower and lower, like a leaking ship,

[020-107] as his enemies pressed him down. He flung up one hand just as I thought

[020-108] him falling and hung on to a huge tome in the bookcase, a volume, I

[020-109] afterwards discovered, of St Chrysostom's theology. Just as Greenwood

[020-110] bounded across the room towards the group, Basil plucked the ponderous

[020-111] tome bodily out of the shelf, swung it, and sent it spinning through the

[020-112] air, so that it struck Greenwood flat in the face and knocked him over

[020-113] like a rolling ninepin. At the same instant Basil's stiffness broke, and

[020-114] he sank, his enemies closing over him.

[020-115] Rupert's head was clear, but his body shaken; he was hanging as best he

[020-116] could on to the half-prostrate Greenwood. They were rolling over each

[020-117] other on the floor, both somewhat enfeebled by their falls, but Rupert

[020-118] certainly the more so. I was still successfully held down. The floor

[020-119] was a sea of torn and trampled papers and magazines, like an immense

[020-120] waste-paper basket. Burrows and his companion were almost up to the

[020-121] knees in them, as in a drift of dead leaves. And Greenwood had his leg

[020-122] stuck right through a sheet of the Pall Mall Gazette, which clung to it

[020-123] ludicrously, like some fantastic trouser frill.

[020-124] Basil, shut from me in a human prison, a prison of powerful bodies,

[020-125] might be dead for all I knew. I fancied, however, that the broad back of

[020-126] Mr Burrows, which was turned towards me, had a certain bend of effort in

[020-127] it as if my friend still needed some holding down. Suddenly that broad

[020-128] back swayed hither and thither. It was swaying on one leg; Basil,

[020-129] somehow, had hold of the other. Burrows' huge fists and those of the

[020-130] footman were battering Basil's sunken head like an anvil, but nothing

[020-131] could get the giant's ankle out of his sudden and savage grip. While his

[020-132] own head was forced slowly down in darkness and great pain, the right

[020-133] leg of his captor was being forced in the air. Burrows swung to and

[020-134] fro with a purple face. Then suddenly the floor and the walls and the

[020-135] ceiling shook together, as the colossus fell, all his length seeming to

[020-136] fill the floor. Basil sprang up with dancing eyes, and with three blows

[020-137] like battering-rams knocked the footman into a cocked hat. Then he

[020-138] sprang on top of Burrows, with one antimacassar in his hand and another

[020-139] in his teeth, and bound him hand and foot almost before he knew clearly

[020-140] that his head had struck the floor. Then Basil sprang at Greenwood, whom

[020-141] Rupert was struggling to hold down, and between them they secured him

[020-142] easily. The man who had hold of me let go and turned to his rescue, but

[020-143] I leaped up like a spring released, and, to my infinite satisfaction,

[020-144] knocked the fellow down. The other footman, bleeding at the mouth

[020-145] and quite demoralized, was stumbling out of the room. My late captor,

[020-146] without a word, slunk after him, seeing that the battle was won.

[020-147] Rupert was sitting astride the pinioned Mr Greenwood, Basil astride the

[020-148] pinioned Mr Burrows.

[020-149] To my surprise the latter gentleman, lying bound on his back, spoke in a

[020-150] perfectly calm voice to the man who sat on top of him.

[020-151] “And now, gentlemen,” he said, “since you have got your own way, perhaps

[020-152] you wouldn't mind telling us what the deuce all this is?”

[020-153] “This,” said Basil, with a radiant face, looking down at his captive,

[020-154] “this is what we call the survival of the fittest.”

[020-155] Rupert, who had been steadily collecting himself throughout the latter

[020-156] phases of the fight, was intellectually altogether himself again at the

[020-157] end of it. Springing up from the prostrate Greenwood, and knotting a

[020-158] handkerchief round his left hand, which was bleeding from a blow, he

[020-159] sang out quite coolly:

[020-160] “Basil, will you mount guard over the captive of your bow and spear and

[020-161] antimacassar? Swinburne and I will clear out the prison downstairs.”

[020-162] “All right,” said Basil, rising also and seating himself in a leisured

[020-163] way in an armchair. “Don't hurry for us,” he said, glancing round at the

[020-164] litter of the room, “we have all the illustrated papers.”

[020-165] Rupert lurched thoughtfully out of the room, and I followed him even

[020-166] more slowly; in fact, I lingered long enough to hear, as I passed

[020-167] through the room, the passages and the kitchen stairs, Basil's voice

[020-168] continuing conversationally:

[020-169] “And now, Mr Burrows,” he said, settling himself sociably in the chair,

[020-170] “there's no [[madness-and-sanity|reason]] why we shouldn't go on with that amusing argument.

[020-171] I'm sorry that you have to express yourself lying on your back on the

[020-172] floor, and, as I told you before, I've no more notion why you are there

[020-173] than the man in the moon. A conversationalist like yourself, however,

[020-174] can scarcely be seriously handicapped by any bodily posture. You were

[020-175] saying, if I remember right, when this incidental fracas occurred, that

[020-176] the rudiments of science might with advantage be made public.”
