---
description: 
id: ch022
label: "Section 22"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[022-001] [[the-reverend-vicar|The]] captive made another reverence. “I have never complained of

[022-002] your injustice,” she said. “I need scarcely say what I think of your

[022-003] generosity.”

[022-004] And before our staring eyes could blink she had passed out of the room,

[022-005] [[basil-grant|Basil]] holding the door open for her.

[022-006] He turned to Greenwood with a relapse into joviality. “This will be a

[022-007] relief to you,” he said.

[022-008] “Yes, it will,” replied that immovable young gentleman with a face like

[022-009] a sphinx.

[022-010] We found ourselves outside in the dark blue night, shaken and dazed as

[022-011] if we had fallen into it from some high tower.

[022-012] “Basil,” said [[rupert-grant|Rupert]] at last, in a weak voice, “I always thought you

[022-013] were my brother. But are you a man? I mean--are you only a man?”

[022-014] “At present,” replied Basil, “my mere humanity is proved by one of the

[022-015] most unmistakable symbols--hunger. We are too late for the theatre in

[022-016] Sloane Square. But we are not too late for the restaurant. Here comes

[022-017] the green omnibus!” and he had leaped on it before we could speak.

[022-018] ------------------------------------------------------------------------

[022-019] As I said, it was months after that Rupert Grant suddenly entered my

[022-020] room, swinging a satchel in his hand and with a general air of having

[022-021] jumped over the garden wall, and implored me to go with him upon the

[022-022] latest and wildest of his expeditions. He proposed to himself no less

[022-023] a thing than the discovery of the actual origin, whereabouts, and

[022-024] headquarters of the source of all our joys and sorrows--the Club of

[022-025] [[queer-trades|Queer Trades]]. I should expand this [[fiction-as-truth|story]] for ever if I explained how

[022-026] ultimately we ran this strange entity to its lair. The process meant a

[022-027] hundred interesting things. The tracking of a member, the bribing of

[022-028] a cabman, the fighting of roughs, the lifting of a paving stone, the

[022-029] finding of a cellar, the finding of a cellar below the cellar, the

[022-030] finding of the subterranean passage, the finding of the Club of Queer

[022-031] Trades.

[022-032] I have had many strange experiences in my life, but never a stranger

[022-033] one than that I felt when I came out of those rambling, sightless, and

[022-034] seemingly hopeless passages into the sudden splendour of a sumptuous and

[022-035] hospitable dining-room, surrounded upon almost every side by faces

[022-036] that I knew. There was Mr Montmorency, the Arboreal House-Agent, seated

[022-037] between the two brisk young men who were occasionally vicars, and always

[022-038] Professional Detainers. There was Mr [[northover|P. G. Northover]], founder of the

[022-039] [[adventure-and-romance-agency|Adventure and Romance Agency]]. There was [[professor-chadd|Professor Chadd]], who invented

[022-040] the Dancing Language.

[022-041] As we entered, all the members seemed to sink suddenly into their

[022-042] chairs, and with the very action the vacancy of the presidential seat

[022-043] gaped at us like a missing tooth.

[022-044] “The president's not here,” said Mr P. G. Northover, turning suddenly to

[022-045] Professor Chadd.

[022-046] “N-no,” said the philosopher, with more than his ordinary vagueness. “I

[022-047] can't imagine where he is.”

[022-048] “Good heavens,” said Mr Montmorency, jumping up, “I really feel a little

[022-049] nervous. I'll go and see.” And he ran out of the room.

[022-050] An instant after he ran back again, twittering with a timid ecstasy.

[022-051] “He's there, gentlemen--he's there all right--he's coming in now,”

[022-052] he cried, and sat down. Rupert and I could hardly help feeling the

[022-053] beginnings of a sort of wonder as to who this person might be who

[022-054] was the first member of this insane brotherhood. Who, we thought

[022-055] indistinctly, could be maddest in this world of madmen: what fantastic

[022-056] was it whose shadow filled all these fantastics with so loyal an

[022-057] expectation?

[022-058] Suddenly we were answered. The door flew open and the room was filled

[022-059] and shaken with a shout, in the midst of which Basil Grant, smiling and

[022-060] in evening dress, took his seat at the head of the table.

[022-061] How we ate that dinner I have no idea. In the common way I am a person

[022-062] particularly prone to enjoy the long luxuriance of the [[club-as-institution|club]] dinner. But

[022-063] on this occasion it seemed a hopeless and endless string of courses.

[022-064] Hors-d'oeuvre sardines seemed as big as herrings, soup seemed a sort

[022-065] of ocean, larks were ducks, ducks were ostriches until that dinner was

[022-066] over. The cheese course was maddening. I had often heard of the moon

[022-067] being made of green cheese. That night I thought the green cheese was

[022-068] made of the moon. And all the time Basil Grant went on laughing and

[022-069] eating and drinking, and never threw one glance at us to tell us why he

[022-070] was there, the king of these capering idiots.

[022-071] At last came the moment which I knew must in some way enlighten us, the

[022-072] time of the club speeches and the club toasts. Basil Grant rose to his

[022-073] feet amid a surge of songs and cheers.

[022-074] “Gentlemen,” he said, “it is a custom in this [[society-and-class|society]] that the

[022-075] president for the year opens the proceedings not by any general toast

[022-076] of sentiment, but by calling upon each member to give a brief account of

[022-077] his [[profession-and-trade|trade]]. We then drink to that calling and to all who follow it. It

[022-078] is my business, as the senior member, to open by stating my claim to

[022-079] membership of this club. Years ago, gentlemen, I was a judge; I did my

[022-080] best in that capacity to do justice and to administer the law. But it

[022-081] gradually dawned on me that in my work, as it was, I was not touching

[022-082] even the fringe of justice. I was seated in the seat of the mighty, I

[022-083] was robed in scarlet and ermine; nevertheless, I held a small and lowly

[022-084] and futile post. I had to go by a mean rule as much as a postman, and

[022-085] my red and gold was worth no more than his. Daily there passed before me

[022-086] taut and passionate problems, the stringency of which I had to pretend

[022-087] to relieve by silly imprisonments or silly damages, while I knew all the

[022-088] time, by the light of my living common sense, that they would have

[022-089] been far better relieved by a kiss or a thrashing, or a few words of

[022-090] explanation, or a duel, or a tour in the West Highlands. Then, as this

[022-091] grew on me, there grew on me continuously the sense of a mountainous

[022-092] frivolity. Every word said in the court, a whisper or an oath, seemed

[022-093] more connected with life than the words I had to say. Then came the time

[022-094] when I publicly blasphemed the whole bosh, was classed as a madman and

[022-095] melted from public life.”

[022-096] Something in the atmosphere told me that it was not only Rupert and I

[022-097] who were listening with intensity to this statement.

[022-098] “Well, I discovered that I could be of no real use. I offered myself

[022-099] privately as a purely [[moral-philosophy|moral]] judge to settle purely moral differences.

[022-100] Before very long these unofficial courts of honour (kept strictly

[022-101] [[secret-in-fiction|secret]]) had spread over the whole of society. People were tried before

[022-102] me not for the practical trifles for which nobody cares, such as

[022-103] committing a murder, or keeping a dog without a licence. My criminals

[022-104] were tried for the faults which really make social life impossible. They

[022-105] were tried before me for selfishness, or for an impossible vanity, or

[022-106] for scandalmongering, or for stinginess to guests or dependents. Of

[022-107] course these courts had no sort of real coercive powers. The fulfilment

[022-108] of their punishments rested entirely on the honour of the ladies and

[022-109] gentlemen involved, including the honour of the culprits. But you would

[022-110] be amazed to know how completely our orders were always obeyed. Only

[022-111] lately I had a most pleasing example. A maiden lady in South Kensington

[022-112] whom I had condemned to solitary confinement for being the means of

[022-113] breaking off an engagement through backbiting, absolutely refused

[022-114] to leave her prison, although some well-meaning persons had been

[022-115] inopportune enough to rescue her.”

[022-116] Rupert Grant was staring at his brother, his mouth fallen agape. So, for

[022-117] the matter of that, I expect, was I. This, then, was the explanation of

[022-118] the old lady's strange discontent and her still stranger content with

[022-119] her lot. She was one of the culprits of his [[voluntary-criminal-court|Voluntary Criminal Court]].

[022-120] She was one of the clients of his Queer Trade.

[022-121] We were still dazed when we drank, amid a crash of glasses, the health

[022-122] of Basil's new judiciary. We had only a confused sense of everything

[022-123] having been put right, the sense men will have when they come into the

[022-124] presence of God. We dimly heard Basil say:

[022-125] “Mr P. G. Northover will now explain the Adventure and Romance Agency.”

[022-126] And we heard equally dimly Northover beginning the statement he had made

[022-127] long ago to [[major-brown|Major Brown]]. Thus our epic ended where it had begun, like a

[022-128] true cycle.

[022-129] End of Project Gutenberg's [[the-club-of-queer-trades-org|The Club of Queer Trades]], by G. K. Chesterton

[022-130] *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CLUB OF QUEER TRADES ***

[022-131] Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will

[022-132] be renamed.

[022-133] Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright

[022-134] law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

[022-135] so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United

[022-136] States without permission and without paying copyright

[022-137] royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

[022-138] of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

[022-139] Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™

[022-140] concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

[022-141] and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

[022-142] the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

[022-143] of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for

[022-144] copies of this eBo
