---
description: Montesquieu on the structural advantages enabling Roman expansion
id: ch03
label: 'Chapter 3: How the Romans were able to aggrandize themselves'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[003-001]MONTESQUIEU.] OF THE ROMANS. Q1 CHAPTEE III. HOW THE EOMANS WEEE ABLE TO AGGEANDIZE THEMSELVES. As at the present time the peoples of Europe have nearly the same arts, the same arms, the same disciphne, and the same method of conducting war, the prodigious fortune of the Komans appears incredible to us. There is besides at the present day such a disproportion of power among the nations of Europe, that it is not possible for a small state to rise by its own force from the humble condition in which Providence has placed it.' It is needful that we should reflect upon this; or else we shall look upon events without comprehending them ; and, not properly appreciating the difference of circumstances, be led to believe, while reading ancient history, that we see other men than ourselves. ■ In modem Europe, constant experience has proved that a prince who has a million subjects cannot, without ruining himself, support an army exceeding ' See my Note at the end of this chapter. — Translator.

[003-002]62 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [moniesqcieu. ten thousand men. It is therefore only great nations that can have considerable armies. It was not the same with the ancient republics; for, the ratio of the soldiers to the rest of the population, which is at present as one to a hundred, might easily be as one to eight among them." The founders of these republics had made an equal division of the lands. That alone constituted ■ a strong people — that is to say, a weU regulated society. That also secured a good army — each individual having an equal interest, and a very great interest, in defending his country. When the [[roman-law|laws]] ceased to be rigidly observed, things came to the same pass in which they are at present among us. The avarice of some and the prodigality of others caused the lands to accumulate in the hands of a few; and straightway those arts were introduced which served to accommodate the mutual wants of the rich and the poor. The result was that there were but few citizens or soldiers any longer; for the lands, formerly set apart for the support of the latter, were employed now for the maintenance of slaves and artisans — instruments of the luxury of the new possessors, without which the state— necessarily continuing to exist notwithstanding its disorders — would have perished. Before [[political-corruption|corruption]] set in, the primitive revenues of the state were divided among the soldiers, that is, among the labor" See idem.

[003-003]CHAP, ni.] OF THE ROMANS. 63 ers. After the [[roman-republic|republic]] had become corrupt, these revenues passed at once into the hands of rich men, who disbursed them upon slaves and artisans, reserving a portion, by means of tributes, for the support of the soldiers. Such men were little adapted to war. They were cowardly, being already corrupted -by the luxury of the cities, and often by the very arts which they followed ; besides which, as they had properly speaking no country, and as they plied their industry everywhere, they had but little to lose or preserve. In a census of Home which was taken some time after the expulsion of the kings,' and in that which Demetrius Phalerius made of Athens,\* there is found nearly the same number of inhabitants. The population of Home was four hundred and forty thousand, of Athens, four hundred and thirty-one thousand. But this census of Kome was taken at a time when she was yet in the fall force of her institutions, and that of Athens at a time when she had become thoroughly corrupt. "We find, in the case of Home, that the number of citizens who had attained the age of puberty constituted one fourth of the inhabitants, whilst at Athens this class of citizens amounted to a little less than one twentieth of the whole number. ' This is the census of which Dionysius of Halicamassua speaks in Book IX, art. 25, and it appears to me to be the same as the one which he cites at the end of his 6th Book, and which was taken sixteen yeara after the expulsion of the kings. ^ Cetesicles, in Athenceus, lib. vi, oh. xix.

[003-004]64 GRANDEUE AND DECADENCE [mostesquieu. The power of Eome tlien was to the power of Athens, at these respective times, nearly as one fourth is to one twentieth — that is to say, it was five times as great. The kings Agis and Cleomenes seeing that instead of the nine thousand citizens which Sparta contained at the time of Lycurgus," there were at their time not more than seven hundred, of whom scarcely one hundred possessed lands,' and that all the rest were nothing more than a cowardly populace, they imdertook to re-estabhsh the laws in this respect;' and Lacedsemon resumed her ancient power, and became once more formidable to all Greece. It was the equal division of lands that rendered Eome capable of rising at once from her original feebleness. This is plainly seen after she became corrupt. She was yet a small republic when, the Latins having refused the contingent of troops which they were obligated to furnish, ten legions were immediately raised in the city.' " At the present time," says Livy, "when all the world may not contain Rome, she could hardly do as much if an enemy should appear suddenly before her walls — proof evident that we have not become greater, but that we ^ These were citizens of the town, and properly called Spartam. Lycurgus made for them nine thousand shares, and thirty thousand for the other inhabitants. ' See Plutarch, lAves of Agis and Cleomenes. ' See ibid. 8 Livy, First Decade, liv. vii. That was some time after the capture of Rome — under the consulate of L. Furius Camillus and App. Claudius Crassus.

[003-005]CHAP, m.] OF THE ROMANS. 65 have only augmented the wealtli and the luxury which encumber us." " Tell me," said [[tiberius-gracchus|Tiberius Gracchus]] to the Nobles,' " which is the more worth, a citizen or a perpetual slave ? a soldier or a man who is useless in war ? In order to hold some acres of land more than the other citizens, will you renounce the hope of the conquest of the rest of the world ? or place yourselves in danger of seeing those very lands which you refuse to us, taken from you by the enemies of your eountiy?" ' Appias, on the Civil War, lib. 1, ch. xi.

[003-006]66 GEANDEUK AND DECADENCE [baker. NOTE BY THE TEANSLATOE. The author's remarks respecting the different degrees of difficulty experienced in ancient and in modern times by a weak nation seeking to become a powerful one — his statement of the comparative ratios of military force among the ancient republics and the modern states of Europe — and finally, his brief references to the land system of the Eomans — seem to call for some further observations, partly critical, and partly of a supplementary character. 1. Montesquieu says there is "at the present day such a disproportion of power among the nations of Europe that it is not possible for a small state to rise by its own force from the humble condition in which Providence has placed it." This statement appears to be somewhat too strong. It is doubtless true, as a general proposition, that the modem is less favorable than the ancient condition of Europe to the aggrandizement of a small state. This appears due in a good measure to causes similar to those which render it so difficult for an individual to advance his fortunes in a society in which all the

[003-007]Nont.] OF THE EOMAKS. 67 posts of power, wealth and influence are strongly preoccupied against him. And it may be said in addition to this, that aggrandizement by force was much more in harmony with ancient than it is with modern ideas — a fact which, in ancient times, was at once more favorable to the achievement of conquest, and to acquiescence in its exactions. Yet, there is a first class power in Europe to-day which proceeded from small beginnings, and which is of recent formation. It may certainly be said with justice that, at the time Montesquieu published these Considerations, (1734,) Prussia occupied a comparatively humble position in the European system of states — ^possessing as she did a total population of less than two and a quarter millions, and a domain of no more than 2,160 German square miles. Since that time she has steadily extended her power in presence of her great neighbors — ^Kussia, Austria, and France — until at length she stands at the head of an empire of forty millions of people, and performs for the time the leading role of Europe.' 2. The standing military ratio, as given by Montesquieu for the nations of modem Europe — one soldier to a hundred of the population — and which he thinks cannot be exceeded without serious injury to the nation, sustains a curious relation to the late statistics of the more powerful class of the European ' See Meyer's ffand-Zexikon des Allgemdnm Wissens, 1872, Zur Karte Sistorisclie Ikiwickdimg von Freussen,

[003-008]68 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [bases. states. In the following table I have embodied a statement of the populations and standing military forces of the seven principal powers of Europe, together with the proportions between the two for each of these states taken separately, and between their sums for all taken together : Population. No. of men in Army and Navy on peace footing. No. of people to one soldier and Bailor. Spain, including colonies (1870). Army (1870) 295,000 | Nayy (1869-70)... 22,117) Itai.t(1870) Army (1869) 198,232 ) Navy (1869-70). . . 18,812 j France (1871) Army (1869) 404,794 ) Navy (1869-70). . . 67,969 ) AnsTKiA (1868) Army (1871) 254,031 ) Navy (1871) 5,702 f Geb. Empire (1871) Army (1871) 404,636 ) Navy (1869-70)... 13,361 j Gb. Britain (1871) Army (1869-70). . .191,433 ) Navy (1869-70)... 59,830) Russia (1867) Army (1871) 765,879 ) Navy (1869-70)... 64,021 j Total 23,219,526 25,766,217 36,594,845 35,904,435 40,144,295 31,465,480 82,159,630 317,117 217,044 472,763 259,733 417,997 251,263 829,900 276,254,428 2,765,817 74 119 78 139 97 122 99 100 For the statistics of population, and of land and naval forces here given, compare Meyer's Band-Lexir Icon des Allgemeinen Wissens, 1872, articles Spanien, Italien, Frankreioh, &c., and Chambers' Enc., Phila., 1873, articles Armies, Nmies, Spain, Italy, France,

[003-009]NOTE.] OF THE ROMANS. 69 &c. I have myself reduced the proportions which are exhibited in the last column, counting the surplus fraction as unity in each case. Thus, the exact result for Spain is Y3 and a fraction — set down in the table at 74; for Italy 118 and a fraction — set down at 119 ; and so of the rest. In view of the considerable discrepancy in the proportions as shown ' by the table, varying as these do from one in 74 in the case of Spain, to one in 139 in that of Austria, it is a curious, and certainly an unexpected result, that the aggregate proportion for the European system— as represented by these seven great states — should be (me soldier and sailor to one hundred of ths jpopulation — the proportion stated by Montesquieu. If we turn now to the United States of America, we shall see how immensely our country differs from the monarchies of Europe in respect to the proportion of its citizens detailed for military duty on the peace footing: Population of the United States (18Y0). 38,925,598 Army (1873), as limited by law (but actually still less). . 30,000 Navy (1869-70) 11,000 — showing a proportion of 950 of the total population to one soldier and sailor. But, in view of our large subsequent increase in population, it is safe to assume at the present time — 1876 — that the military ratio imposed by our republic in time of peace

[003-010]70 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [bakeb. does not exceed one tenth of the average Eii/ropean rate} Tlie Komans started, and for a long time continued in, tliat immature social state in which, no standing army existed among them — ^for the reason that all were equally soldiers; and, under the influence of the intense military spirit which prevailed during the greater part of this period, they may have been capable of recruiting a force as great as stated by Montesquieu — one in every eight of the entire population. But no such force could have been other than temporary — like the vast citizen armies which on occasions of pressing emergency are raised in modern states. With the coming in of the empire, they finally adopted the system of standing armies and permanent naVal establishments. It will be seen by reference to my note at the end of Chapter XV that the ratio between their peace establishment and their entire population after this was done approximated the proportion of one to two hundred and sixty-six — a ratio which, while being nearly three times less than that of the principal states of modem Europe, was nearly four times greater than that of the United States. 3. The statements of Montesquieu respecting the equal division of lands among the early Komans and other ancient peoples — ^the massing of the lands '^ See Compendium of (lie Ninth Census of the United Slates, p. 20 ; Message and Documents, War Department, ISIS-H, Part I, p. 25 ; and Chambers' Ihtc., art. Navies,

[003-011]NOTE.] OF THE EOMANS. 71 at a later period in the hands of a few — and the closing reference to the agrarian law which agitated Eome at the time of the Gracchi — are scarcely sufficient to give an adequate general idea of the Koman land system as now understood. It appears to be true that, by the original organization of the Koman state, an equal division of land among the citizens was provided for ; and indeed such equal allotment of land may be regarded as a fundamental principle of organization among the ancient republics generally. " It seems to have been a notion generally entertained in the ancient world," says Dr. Arnold, " that every citizen of a country should be a landholder, and that the territory of a state, so far as it was not left unenclosed or reserved for public purposes, should be divided in equal portions amongst the citizens." ' In order to avoid misapprehension, however, it must be kept in view that these early communities abounded in slaves and subjugated classes, and that those who answered to the character of citizens constituted but a minor part of the entire population of the state. The shares thus set apart to Homan citizens were small, not exceeding it would seem seven jugera, or about fonr and one third English acres.\* Besides the lands so allotted to the citizens, there was an unallotted public domain, kept in reserve, and belonging, like our public lands, to the state. ' Hist, of Rome, N. Y., ISBT, p. 59. \* Idem, p. 33.

[003-012]72 GRAKDEUR AND DECADENCE [baker. Now, it was not only by absorbing these small private estates, as Montesquieu appears to suppose, but also by occupying and claiming a large part of the public lands, that the ricb class of citizens came to be sucb disproportionate landholders ; and the Agrarian Laws, which among other things were designed to remedy this mischief, seem to have been intended to apply exclusively to the last species of lands. Formerly, these laws were regarded, even among the best scholars, as having in view the confiscation of lands to which the rich were entitled in their own private right; and the result of this misconception has been, that the term "agrarian" has become intimately associated with the arbitrary seizure of the property of the more wealthy for the benefit of the poorer class of citizens. It may be indeed that agrarian laws were proposed, which looked to the confiscation of private estates in lands, although I find no direct and conclusive evidence that such was the case. From the context of [[cicero|Cicero]] in Book II chapter 21 of his Offices, it may be inferred that the law brought forward, but afterwards abandoned, by the tribune Philippus, was of this character. But it now appears certain at all events that the actual agrarian laws of Eoman history were intended to have no other application than to lands which were in fact owned by the state. For the correction of the former misconception as to the real nature of this class of laws we are main 

[003-013]NOTE.] OF THE EOMANS. Y3 ly indebted to Niebuhr. " If," eays Dr. Arnold, " amongst Mebnhr's countless services to Koman history, any single one may claim our gratitude beyond the rest, it is his explanation of the true nature and character of the agrarian laws." ' In the most general sense, the agrarian laws of the Romans were simply their pvMic land laws. From the time of the earliest kings, it was their constant policy to appropriate some part of the lands of the defeated enemy ; and sometimes the state acquired lands by purchase. These lands, whether acquired in the one way or the other, became the exclusive property of the state, and were from time to time allotted among citizens — who were removed to and colonized upon them. For the most part this system of gratuitous distribution of the public lands worked harmoniously ; but there was one point upon which angry controversies and even violent collisions in the bosom of the state arose. It was. the custom of the government to allow individuals to enter upon and occupy unallotted public lands, paying to the state a certain moderate rent therefor. Under this usage a great portion of the public lands came to be occupied by the rich class of citizens ; and even the payment of the reserved rent came to be much neglected. By the agrarian law of Licinius Stolo — passed about 369 years before Christ — which was the model for all ^ Idem, p. 59. 4

[003-014]74 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [baker. subsequent legislation of tlie kind, and wliicli is nowunderstood to have related solely to public landsno individual was allowed to occupy more than 500 jugera, or about 311i English acres of such land; and any excess above this amount was to be allotted among the poorer class of citizens at the rate of 1 jugera to each. In the legal aspect of the case, such occupants of the public lands were tenants at will of the state, and acquired no title whatever, as against the latter, to the lands which they were thus permitted to possess and to use. But, as Dr. Arnold remarks, "although the land was undoubtedly the property of the state, and although the occupiers of it were in relation to the state mere tenants at will, yet it is in human nature that a long undisturbed possession should give a feeling of ownership, the znore so as, while the state's claim lay dormant, the possessor was in fact the proprietor ; and the land would thus be repeatedly passing by regular sale from one occupier to another." ° It hence resulted that the passage of the Licinian law was resisted with great bitterness by the patricians and the richer class of citizens. After having in a great measure corrected the evil which it was intended to remedy, this law of Licinius finally fell into disuse; and many of the wealthier citizens, in total disregard of the limitation imposed by the law, occupied immense tracts of " Idem, p. 60.

[003-015]NOTE.] OF THE ROMANS. 75 public land in addition to their private estates, wliilst many of tlie poorer citizens were without lands. In this state of things, and to remedy this enormous abuse, Tiberius Gracchus — b. c. 132 — caused the Licinian law to be revived in a modified form. In its new form, the law, while retaining the old limitation of 500 jugera of public land to each occupant, allowed 250 jugera in addition to be occupied for each son of the family ; and, whilst providing that in all cases any excess should be resumed by the state for allotment among the poorer class of citizens, it also provided that payment should be made for the improvements which had been put upon the lands thus resumed. Such, in substance, appear to have been the main features of the agrarian laws. The disturbance which followed the enactment of the law of Tiberius Gracchus, and- in which that great statesman perished, was not so much a sedition of the people as a sedition of the patricians — in their spirit of hostility to a just and wholesome law.' ' Livy, Book TI, chs. 35-42 ; Arnold's Hist, of Rome, chs. ix and xxvi; Niebuhr's Rom. Geschichte, Berlin, 1853, pp. 22-lr-240; Chambers' Enc, art. Agrarian Law ; Anthon'a Clas. Die, articles Agrarice Leges and Lieinius.
