---
description: Montesquieu on the establishment of the Principate under Augustus
id: ch13
label: 'Chapter 13: Augustus'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[013-001]258 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [montesquieu. CHAPTEE XIII. AUGUSTirS. Sextus Pompet held Sicily and Sardinia. He was master of the sea, and had with him an immense number of fugitives and proscribed citizens who fought for their last hopes. Octavius prosecuted two very laborious wars against him, and, after many bad successes, .finally vanquished him by means of the ability of Agrippa. The conspirators had nearly all ended their lives unhappily.' It was very natural that men who were at the head of a party which was so often beaten, and that, too, in civil wars in which no quarter was given, should perish by violence. From this circumstance, however, was drawn the conclusion of a divine vengeance, which pursued the murderers of Caesar, and proscribed their cause. Octavius gained the soldiers of Lepidus, and despoiled him of the powers of the triumvirate. He ' In our times, nearly all those wto condemned CHarlea I came to a tragic end. The reason was, that it is scarcely possible to do such things without raising up mortal enemies on all sides, and, consequently, •without incurring an infinity of dangers.

[013-002]CHAP. XIII.] OF THE ROMANS. 259 even envied him the consolation of leading an obscure life, and forced him to assume an humble appearance in the assemblies of the people. We feel quite content in witnessing the humiliation of this man. He was the most wicked citizen of the [[roman-republic|republic]], always first to commence disturbances, and incessantly forming mischievous projects in which he was obliged to associate abler men than himself. A modem author," who has been pleased to write his eulogy, cites Anthony, who, in one of his letters, gives Lepidus the name of an honest man ; but an honest man for Anthony should not be much so for others. I believe that Octavius is the only one of all the Roman commanders who succeeded in gaining the affection of his soldiers while giving them incessant proofs of natural cowardice. At this time, however, the soldiers placed a higher estimate upon the liberality than upon the courage of their general. Perhaps it was even fortunate for Octavius that he did not possess that valor which is capable of giving empire; and it may be — inasmuch as he was less feared — that he was borne to it by this veiy defect in his character. It is not impossible that the qualities which dishonored him most served him best. If he had at once shown a great soul, all men would have been apprehensive of him. If he had possessed a bold spirit, he would not have » The Abb6 do Saint-Ri5al.

[013-003]2g0 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [montesquku. given Anthony time to ruin himself by his extravagances. Whilst preparing for war against Octavius, Anthony bound himself by an oath to his soldiers, that within two months after he should achieve victory he would re-establish the republic ; from which it is easy to see that the soldiers themselves were jealous of the [[roman-liberty|liberty]] of their country, although they were constantly destroying it — there being nothing so blind as an army. The battle of Actium took place; Cleopatra fled, and drew Anthony with her. It is certain that in the end she betrayed him.' It may be that, influenced by that inconceivable spirit of coquetry which belongs to women, she had formed the design of bringing yet a third master of the world to her feet. A woman for whom Anthony had sacrificed the world betrayed him ; the numerous captains and kings whom he had either aggrandized or set np deserted him; but, as if generosity were allied to servitude, a troop of gladiators stood by him with heroic fidehty. Cover a man with benefits, and you at once inspire him with the idea of looking about for the means of preserving them; they are new interests which you have given him to defend. That which is surprising in these wars is the fact that one battle nearly always decided the affair, and that defeats were not repaired. ' See Dion, Book LI.

[013-004]CHAP. XIII.] OF THE ROMANS. 261 Properly speaking, the Koman soldiers were not actuated by the spirit of party. They did not fight for a certain thing, but for a certain person. They knew only their chief, who engaged them by immense expectations. But once beaten, the chief being no longer in a condition to fulfill his promises, they passed over to another side. The provinces entered into the quarrel with no more sincerity; for it imported very little to them whether the senate or the people had the upper hand. Thus it was that, as soon as one of the chiefs was beaten, they gave themselves to the other ; ' for it was necessary that each city should take care to justify itself before the conqueror, who, having vast promises to keep with his soldiers, would sacrifice to them the most culpable communities. "We have had two sorts of civil wars in France. Those which had [[roman-religion|religion]] for a pretext were long ones; for the motive from which they sprung continued to exist after a victory was gained. The other class of our civil wars had, properly speaking, no motive, but were excited by the folly or the ambition of some great persons; and these were speedily terminated. [[augustus|Augustus]] — for this is the name which flattery gave to Octavius — established order; that is to say, lasting servitude;' for, when the sovereign power '' No garrisons had been stationed in the cities for the purpose of holding them ; the Komans had needed no other means than armies and colonies for the security of their empire. ' [Most ambitious men who elevate themselves take new titles in

[013-005]262 GEAiJDEUE AND DECADENCE [montesquieu. comes to be usurped in a free state, whatever tends to establish the unlimited authority of the usurper takes the name of order, whilst, on the other hand, whatever tends to maintain the honest liberty of his subjects is called disorder, dissension, bad government. All those who had heretofore cherished ambitious projects had labored to throw the republic into a species of anarchy. Pompey, Crassus, and Csesar succeeded marvelously in this. They established an impunity for every variety of public crimes. All that might have a tendency to arrest the [[political-corruption|corruption]] of manners, all that might aid in maintaining an efficient police, they abolished; and, as good legislators seek to render their fellow-citizens better, these labored to make them worse. They, therefore, introduced the custom of corrupting the people with money ; and when an accusation for the offence was preferred, they corrupted the- judges also. They caused the elections to be disturbed by all sorts of violence ; and when the offenders were brought to justice, they furthermore intimidated the courts." Even the authority of the people was annihilated. Witness the proceeding of Gabinius, who, after having employed his army — in disregard of the will of order to authorize new power. Rut Augustus desired to conceal new power under known names and ordinary dignities. He had himself called emperor, in order to preserve his authority over the legions; he had himself created tribune, as a means of controlling the people ; and prince of (he senate, in order to govern that body. (Saint-Eteemond.)] « This is very apparent in the LMeis of [[cicero|Cicero]] to Atticus.

[013-006]CHAP, xiii.] OF THE ROMANS. 263 the people — for the purpose of re-establishing Ptolemy, coolly returned and demanded the honors of a [[roman-triumph|triumph]].' The first men of the republic had sought to disgust the people with their own power, and to render themselves necessary by aggravating the inconveniences of republican government. But when Augustus was once master, policy induced him to labor for the re-establishment of order, to the end that the conveniences of a despotic government might be felt. So long as Augustus was yet contending for ascendency in the field, he feared revolts among the soldiers, and not conspiracies among the citizens. It was for this reason that he temporized with the former and was so cruel to the latter. When, however, peace was established, he feared conspiracies; and having the destiny of Caesar constantly before his eyes, he was studious to abstain from his conduct in order to avoid his fate. This is the key to the whole life of Augustus. He attended the sittings of the senate with a cuirass under his robe; he refused the name of [[roman-dictatorship|dictator]]; and, whereas C^sar had insolently said that the republic was nothing, and that his word was law, Augustus spoke incessantly of the dignity of the senate, and of the respect which he had for the republic. He was careful, therefore, to establish a government which would be in the greatest pos' Csesar made war upon the Gauls, and Crassus upon the Parthians, without any deliberation of the senate or decree of the people. See Dion.

[013-007]264 GEANDEUE AND DECADENCE [montesquieu. sible degree acceptable to others without interfering with his own interests ; and the result was that, while the government which he organized was an aristocracy in its relation to civil affairs, it was a monarchy in its relation to the military power. This ambiguous government, not being upheld by its own proper force, could only stand during the pleasure of the monarch; and it was, consequently, completely monarchical at bottom. The question has been raised, whether or not Augustus did in reality cherish a design of abdicating the empire. But who does not see that, if he had so desired, it was impossible that he should not have succeeded in executiag his purpose? The circumstance that he asked every ten years to be relieved from the weight Of government, and yet always continued to carry the burden, makes it manifest that he was only acting. It was a piece of small finesse, in order to have given to him anew, that which he did not believe he had sufficiently acquired. I am determined in this judgment by the entire life of Augustus; and although men are capable of being extremely capricious, yet it rarely happens that a man renounces in a moment an object upon which he has reflected during his whole life. All the acts, all the regulations of Augustus, tended visibly to the establishment of a monarchy. SyUa voluntarily laid down the dictatorship ; but in the entire life of this man — even in the midst of his excesses — we see a re 

[013-008]CBAP. XIII.] OF THE ROMANS. 265 publican spirit. All his measures, although tyrannically executed, tended constantly to a certain form of republic. Sylla was an intensely passionate man ; and he carried the Romans to liberty with violence. Augustus was a cunning tyrant;\* and he conducted them gently to servitude. Whilst under Sylla the republic regained its powers, all the world raised the cry of tyranny; whilst under Augustus tyranny fortified itself, men only spoke of liberty. The custom of triumphs, which had contributed so much to the grandeur of Rome, was lost under Augustus ; or, rather, this honor became a privilege of sovereignty.' For the most part, the course which affairs took under the emperors had its origin in the regimen of the republic ; '° and it is necessary to consider the one in connection with the other. He alone had the right to demand a triumph under whose auspices the war had been conducted ; " but it was always conducted under the auspices of the \* I here employ this word in tlie sense of the Greelcs and Eomans, who gave the name of tyrant to all who had overthrown a democratic government. ' Only the triumphal ornaments were thenceforth given to generals. (Dion, in Aug.) '" The Eomans having changed their government without having been invaded, the same customs continued after the change ; and even the form of the government remained nearly the same. " Dion, in Aug., Book LIT, says that Agrippa, influenced by modesty, neglected to render to the senate an account of his expedition against the nations of the Bosporus, and even refused a triumph — and that after him no person of his rank triumphed ; but this was- a favor which Augustus desired to confer upon Agrippa, and which Anthony did not confer upon Ventidius the first time the latter vanquished the Parthians. 12

[013-009]2gg GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [montesquied. chief, and consequently — after the fall of the republic—under those of the emperor, who was the head of all the armies of the empire. As, during the time of the republic the governing principle had been to carry on incessant war, under the emperors the cultivation of peace was a leading maxim of state. With armies which might set too high a price upon their services, victories were only regarded as subjects of disquietude. Those who held commands feared to undertake too great achievements. It was necessary so to moderate their own glory that it might awaken the attention without arousing the jealousy of the prince, and not to appear before him with an eclat which his eyes could not endure. Augustus was very cautious in extending the right of Koman citizenship;" he made [[roman-law|laws]]" to prevent the emancipation of too many slaves ; " he recommended in his testament the future observance of these two maxims, and also that his successors should not seek to extend the empire by new wars. These three parts of policy were intimately connected. From the moment that there should be no more wars there would be no further necessity for new citizens, nor for the emancipation of slaves. Whilst Rome was engaged in a constant succession of wars, it was necessary that she should con" Suetonius, in Aug. '^ SnExomus, ibid. See Institutes, lib. i. " Dion, in Aug.

[013-010]CHAP, xin.] OF THE ROMANS. 267 tinually replenisii her population. At the commencement of her career she appropriated a part of the inhabitants of conquered towns. In process of time, many citizens of the neighboring towns came to Kome for the purpose of participating in the right of suffrage; they established themselves in such great numbers that, upon the remonstrance of allies, the Eomans were often obliged to return them ; and, finally, the inhabitants of the provinces arrived in crowds. The laws favored marriages, and even rendered them necessary. In the course of her numerous wars, Rome acquired a prodigious number of slaves; and when her citizens came to be loaded with wealth, they purchased them everywhere; but, influenced by generosity, avarice, or weakness, they emancipated them in great numbers." Some desired to reward faithful slaves; the motive of others was to obtain, in the name of their emancipated slaves, the grain which the republic distributed to poor citizens ; and others yet were influenced by the desire of having their funeral pageants followed by numerous trains of attendants bearing garlands of flowers. The people were composed almost wholly of freedmen;'° so that these masters of the world, not only in their beginning, but in the whole course of their history, were for the most part of servile origin. When the common people — consisting as they '^ DioNTS. Hal., lib. iv. " See Tacitus, Annales, lib. xiii, ch. xxvii, late fumm in corpus, etc.

[013-011]268 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [montesquieu. did all but entirely of freedmen or sons of freedmen — became inconveniently numerous, they were colonized; and by this means the fidelity of the provinces was guaranteed. There was thus a circulation of the men of all nations. Eome received them as slaves and returned them as Komans. Under pretext of some riots which took place during the elections, Augustus placed a governor and a garrison in the city. He made the legions perpetual; he stationed them on the frontiers; he established particular funds for their pay ; and he ordered that the veterans should receive their recompense in money and not in lands." Many bad effects had resulted from that distribution of lands which had been made since the time of Sylla. The property of citizens was rendered insecure. If the soldiers of a cohort were not located in the same place, they became disgusted with their establishment, left their allotments uncultivated, and became dangerous citizens ; " whilst, on the other hand, if the lands were distributed by legions, ambitious men could in a moment find the material for armies against the republic. Augustus provided fixed establishments for the marine. As before his time the Eomans had no " He provided that the praetorian soldiers should receive five thousand drachms : two thousand after sixteen years of service, and the other three thousand at the expiration of twenty years. (Dion, in Aug.) " See Tacitus, Annales, lib. xiv, ch. xxvii, in respect to the soldiers who were taken to Tarentum and Antium.

[013-012]CHAP, xm.] OF THE KOMANS. 269 perpetual bodies of troops for service on land, neither had they any permanent organization for service on the sea. The principal object of the fleets of Augustus was to serve as security for convoys, and to establish communication between the diflTerent parts of the empire ; for in other respects the Romans were masters of the whole of the Mediterranean; this was the only sea then navigated; and they had no enemy to fear. Dion has well remarked that after the establishment of the empire it was more difficult to write history. All became secret. All dispatches from the provinces were carried into the cabinet of the emperors; and no more was known than what the folly or the hardihood of tyrants did not care to conceal, or — what the historians conjectured.

[013-013]270 GKANDEUR AND DECADENCE [bakeb. NOTE BY THE TRAISTSLATOE. The establishment of standing military and naval bodies at tbe commencement of tbe empire, and the greatly increased material and mental intereommunication which at the same time ensued throughout the Koman world, are two phenomena of such capital importance that I shall here bestow a few remarks upon the reason of the one, and the comparative value of the other. 1. Paradoxical as the statement may at first sight appear, it may be accepted, as a general principle, that the institution of standing armies is the accompaniment of a diminished military spirit. In the early stages of the ancient societies every able-bodied man was a soldier. The profession of arms, therefore, and consequently the military spirit, was equally diffused through the whole society. Such was the normal condition of the Eoman state down to the time of the emperors. "With annual enlistments from the body of the people, with no establishment which answers to our idea of a standing army, the military spirit was supreme, and the career of conquest uninter 

[013-014]NOTE.] OF THE ROMANS. 271 nipted. Under Augustus — when the love of war had become a less salient feature of the Koman character— the military and naval establishments became permanent ; and, in the time of the Antonines, when peace was the prevailing condition of the Koman world, the standing land force of the empire consisted of about three hundred and ninety -five thousand men.' A similar order of facts has been repeated in Europe since the fall of the Western Empire. Erom the fifth to the fifteeth century the military spirit was relatively much more dominant than it has since been; and yet, during the former period, standing armies were not, properly speaking, an institution of European society. That vast system of permanent military organizations which we now see in Europe has grown up within the last three or four centuries ; and, what is especially noteworthy, it has grown up beside the still greater industrial and civil interests which characterize our modern society, and which, by virtue of this division of social functions, have been left to work with less interrupted energy. These interests of peace — in other words, these interests orf the higher as opposed to the lower powers of man — are gradually acquiring a stronger hold upon the spirit of Europe ; and the outlook for the future clearly indicates an ultimate and great diminution of those immense military bodies which occupy a ra' See Gibbon's Borne, ch. i.

[013-015]272 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [baker. tional but transitory place in the career of human development. Roman society had traveled a long way in reaching a condition characterized by standing armies and navies, and in which, consequently, the great mass of the people were relegated to the pursuits of peace. Eut, when it had gone thus far, it could not take the next forward step — it could not stiU. further release itself from the military spirit; and this, in the main, for two prominent reasons : it was too corrupt and too ignorant to preserve voluntary order; and it stood in presence of a formidable outlying force of barbarism. European society has reached the corresponding stage; but, unlike the Eoman, it gives sign of passing through it. Though old, this society is fuU of progressive forces. It feels the impulse of growing science and expanding culture. Its public opinion is becoming more enlightened and more vigorous. Its public life is being more and more influenced by rational motives. It is acquiring the faculty for voluntary order; it is threatened by no great external force ; the fears and jealousies which exist between its independent states, and which are the chief motives for heavy armed preparation, must gradually succumb to a growing culture ; and the promise, therefore, is that its enormous standing armies — themselves an indication of a half-vanquished military spirit — will finally shrink to very greatly re 

[013-016]SOTE.] OF THE ROMANS. 273 duced proportions; perhaps to the proportions of police establishments. 2. In respect to intercommunication, the ancient world may be regarded as having reached its maximum during the period which extended from the beginning of the reign of Augustus to the close of the reign of Marcus Antoninus. The sphere of intercommunication which had been opened up by the Greeks, and which culminated in the empire of Alexander and his successors, was considerably less in extent, and very much less complete in its appointments. And, when we ascend to stiU earlier periods, and consider the character of intercommunication that centered in Assyria, Babylonia, Phoenicia, Egypt, we find in each case that it was sensibly less expansive and important than that which was established by the Greeks. Thus, in the course of that great procession of ancient nations and civilizations which was led by the Egyptians and closed by the Eomans, we detect a progressive development of intercommunication among mankind, attaining its highest result in the last. But — standing as it did in advance of all other ancient attainments of the sort — how does Roman intercommunication compare with that of modem times? Two parallels will go a great way towards supplying an answer. Uoman navigation, with its small nautical attainments, was mostly limited to one inland sea; modern navigation, with its greatly en 

[013-017]274 GKANDEUE AND DECADENCE [baker. larged science, art, and power, extends to all tlie oceans of the globe. Under the sway of Koman appliances, the Mediterranean states were brought into a circle of xmitnal relations ; under the sway of modem appliances, all the nations of the earth have been placed in connection. And, if we descend to intercommunication in particular states, we shall readily see that the famous stone roads of Eome, viewed as a means of transit and circulation in a great empire, are incomparably excelled by the present railway systems of Europe and the United States — especially by the latter, which, although still in a very immature stage of development, has already attained proportions so enormous as to greatly surpass any other system of intercommunication in a single nation which has heretofore had place in the world. •And all this is to say nothing of those marvelous discoveries and inventions of our most recent times — the Electric Telegraph- and the Submarine Cable, by means of whose subtle force — the practical uses of which were not so much as imagined by the ancients — human thought is transmitted with the celerity of lightning across continents and oceans. In all that regards intercommunication respecting the material, business, and social interests of men, there is something vastly more gigantic in the reach and movement of the modern spirit; whilst, in aU that regards intercommimication respecting their

[013-018]NOTB.] OF THE ROMANS. 275 higher intellectual interests, the contrast between ancient and modern times is equally striking. Quetelet remarks that " That which above all characterizes our modern times is the substitution of associations in place of individuals, whenever the latter, in their narrow circle, have exhausted their means of action." He adds that "examples of this are numerous in all that belongs to the sphere of intelligence, and especially so in that which pertains to the study of our globe.'" And he then refers to the French Academy of Sciences, and to the Koyal Societies of London and Berlin, as illustrations of modern associated intelligence, working with the aid of many hands, many minds, and singleness of purpose, in all parts of the earth. Through such associations a system of intellectual circulation is established, by which the mental results of the race are speedily translated to and from every country, and by which the intellect of the world is rapidly becoming one immense organism. The table of excha/nges of any one of the hundreds of institutions for the promotion of knowledge is exceedingly suggestive. One from the Smithsonian Institution, now before me, is a study.' The annual contribution of intelligence comes to the institution at Washington from all parts of the globe. Every country of Europe is liberally represented, with Germany at the head, which alone sends the contributions of five hundred and seventy-three institu' Sysieme Sociale, Par's, 1848, p. 229. ' Smithsonian Report, 18V1, p. 19.

[013-019]276 GRANDEUR AND DECADENCE [sAKBai. tions. South America is represented by thirty-three; British America by twenty-seven ; Asia by thirty-six ; Turkey by eleven; Africa by eighteen; Australia by twenty-six ; ]Srew Zealand by eleven ; the West Indies by eleven; Mexico by eight; Central Ainerica by one ; Polynesia by one ; and even from the snows of Iceland come the contributions of two institutions to take their place along with those from Melbourne, Calcutta, and the Cape of Good Hope. Thus, the modern world may be regarded as dotted over with nuclei of intelligence, the number of which is constantly increasing, and all of which maintain a growing sympathy and communication with each other — somewhat like the ganglia of a vast nervous system which is developing into a completer individuality. All the ancient representatives of this aspect of modern civilization were very decidedly inferior. The best ones are seen in the schools of Greece, in the Museum of Alexandria, and in that informal college of poets and literary men which flourished at Home under the [[patron-client-relationship|patronage]] of Augustus and the favor of Maecenas. But the spheres of associated intelligence which centered in Athens, Alexandria, and Rome — great as they were for ancient timesmust be regarded as very limited in extent, and inchoate in character, when compared with those which radiate from London, Paris, and Berlin — especially when we keep in view that mental network of which I have spoken, and through "which all coun 

[013-020]NOTE.] OP THE ROMANS. 277 tries are brought into relation with these, as yet, principal intellectual centers of the modern world. In studying the phenomena of history, we can never fully master their meaning by looking directly at them. It is only when put in comparison with the similar phenomena which have preceded and followed, that their just place and value become apparent. Viewed in this way, it is seen on the one hand that the age of Augustus marks the opening of a period of about two centuries, during which the civilization of the ancient world, dominated by Home, made its nearest approach to the cosmopolitan character; whilst it is equally seen on the other hand that this character is very much more completely realized by the civilization of modem times.
