---
description: "The nature and logical function of negative judgment"
id: ch03-the-negative-judgment
label: "Chapter III: The Negative Judgment"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[003-001]1 109 CHAPTER III. THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT. § i, After the long discussion of the preceding chapter, we are so familiar with the general character of judgment that we can afford to deal rapidly with particular applications. Like every other variety, the negative judgment depends on the real which appears in perception. In the end it consists in the declared refusal of that subject to accept an ideal content The suggestion of the real as qualified and determined in a certain way, and the exclusion of that suggestion by its application to actual reality, is the proper essence of the negative judgment. § 2. Though denial, as we shall see, can not be reduced to or derived from affirmation, yet it would probably be wrong to consider the two as co-ordinate species. It is not merely as we shall see lower down (§ 7), that negation presupposes a positive ground. It stands at a different level of reflection. For in affirmative judgment we are able to attribute the content directly to the real itself. To have an idea, or a synthesis of ideas, and to refer this as a quality to the fact that appears in presentation, was all that we wanted. But, in negative judgment, this very reference of content to reality must itself be an idea. Given X the fact, and an idea a-&, you may at once attribute a— b to X ; but you can not deny a-b of X, so long as you have merely X and a-b. For, in order to deny, you must have the suggestion of an affirmative relation. The idea of X, as qualified by a-b, which we may write x (a - £), is the ideal content which X repels, and is what we deny in our negative judgment. It may be said no doubt that in affirmative judgment the real subject is always idealized. We select from the whole that appears in presentation, and mean an element that we do not

[003-002]
no THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I mention (Book III. I. Chap. VI. § 12). When we point to a tree and apply the word "green," it may be urged that the subject is just as ideal as when the same object rejects the offered suggestion "yellow." But this would ignore an important difference. The tree, in its presented unity with reality, can accept at once the suggested quality. I am not always forced to suspend my decision, to wait and consider the whole as ideal, to ask in the first place, Is the tree green ? and then decide that the tree is a green tree. But in the negative judgment where "yellow" is denied, the positive relation of "yellow" to the tree must precede the exclusion of that relation. The judgment can never anticipate the question. I must always be placed at that stage of reflection which sometimes I avoid in affirmative judgment § 3. And this distinction becomes obvious, if we go back to origins and consider the early developement of each kind. rThe primitive basis of affirmation is the coalescence of idea with perception. But mere non-coalescence of an idea with perception is a good deal further removed from negation. It is not the mere presence of an unreferred idea, nor its unobserved difference, but it is the failure to refer it, or identify it, which is the foundation of our first denial. The exclusion by presented fact of an idea, which attempted to qualify it, is what denial starts from. What negation must begin with is the attempt on reality, the baffled approach of a qualification. And in the consciousness of this attempt is implied not only the suggestion that is made, but the subject to which that suggestion is offered. Thus in the scale of reflection negation stands higher than mere affirmation, It is in one sense more ideal, and it comes into existence at a later stage of the developement of the soul* § 4. But the perception of this truth must not lead us into error. We must never say that negation is the denial of an existing judgment For judgment, as we know, implies belief; a^d it is not the case that what we deny we must once have believed. And again, since belief and disbelief are incompatible, the negative judgment would in this way be made to depend * Compare on this whole subject Sigwart, Logik> I. 119 and foil. I 4o not, however, wholly accept his views*


CHAP. Ill ] THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT. 1 1 1 on an element which, alike by its existence or its disappearance, would remove the negation itself. What we deny is not the reference of the idea to actual fact. It is the mere idea of the fact, as so qualified, which negation excludes ; it repels the suggested synthesis, not the real judgment § 5. From this we may pass to a counterpart error. If it is a mistake to say that an affirmative judgment is presupposed in denial, it is no less a mistake to hold that the predicate alone is affected, and that negation itself is a kind of affirmation. We shall hereafter recognize the truth which this doctrine embodies, but, in the form it here assumes, we can not accept it The exclusion by fact of an approaching quality is a process which calls for its own special expression. And when we are asked to simplify matters by substituting "A is Not-B " for "A is not B," we find an obvious difficulty, In order to know that A accepts Not-B, must we not already have somehow learnt that A excludes B ? And, if so, we reduce negation to affirmation by first of all denying, and then asserting that we have denied, — a process which no doubt is quite legitimate, but is scarcely reduction or simplification. § 6. There is a further objection we shall state hereafter (§ 1 6) to the use of Not-B as an independent predicate. But at present we must turn to clear the ground of another error. We may be told that negation " affects only the copula ; " and it is necessary first to ask what this means. If it means what it says, we may dismiss it at once, since the copula may be wanting. If the copula is not there when I positively say "Wolf," so also it is absent when I negatively say " No wolf." But, if what ir meant is that denial and assertion are two sorts of judgment, which stand on a level, then the statement once again needs correction. It is perfectly true that these two different sorts of judgment exist The affirmative judgment qualifies a subject by the attribution of a quality, and the negative judgment qualifies a subject by the explicit rejection of that same quality. We have thus two kinds of asserted relation. But the mistake arises when we place them on a level It is not only true that, as a condition of denial, we must have already a

[003-003]
II2 THE PBTNCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Boo* I. suggested synthesis, but there is in addition another objection. The truth of the negative may be seen in the end to lie in the affirmation of a positive quality; and hence assertion and denial cannot stand on one level. In " A is not B" the real fact is a character x belonging to A, and which is incompatible with B. The basis of negation Is really the assertion of a quality that excludes (or). Tt is not, as we saw, the mere assertion of the quality of exclusion (Not-B). § 7. Every negation must have a ground, and this ground is positive. It is that quality x in the subject which is incompatible with the suggested idea. A is not B because A is such that, if it were B, it would cease to be itself. Its quality would be altered if it accepted B ; and it is by virtue of this quality, which B would destroy, that A maintains itself and rejects the suggestion. In other words its quality x and B are disparate or discrepant. And we cannot deny B without affirming in A the pre-existence of this disparate quality. But in negative judgment x is not made explicit We do not say what there is in A which makes B incompatible. We often, if asked, should be unable to point out and to distinguish this latent hindrance : and in certain cases no effort we could make would enable us to do this. If B is accepted, A loses its character ; and in these cases we know no more. The ground is not merely unstated but is unknown. § 8. The distinctions of u privation " and " opposition " (Sigwart, 128 foil) do not alter the essence of what we have laid down. In a privative judgment the predicate " red " would be denied of the subject simply on the ground that red was not there. The subject might be wholly colourless and dark, But if " red " were denied on the ground that the subject was coloured green, it would be the presence of an opposite quality that would exclude, and the judgment would then be based on positive opposition. This distinction we shall find in another context to be most material (cf. Chap. VI. and Book III. II. Chap. HI, § 20) ; but, for our present purpose, it may be called irrelevant. In the one case as in the other, the subject is taken with a certain character ; and by addition as well as by


CHAP, III.] THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT. 113 diminution that individual character may be destroyed If a body is not red because it is uncoloured, then the adding-on of colour would destroy that body as at present we regard it We may fairly say that, if the predicate were accepted, the subject would no longer be the subject it is. And, if so, in the end our denial in both cases will start from a discrepant quality and character. § 9. It may be answered, no doubt, that the subject, as it is now and as we now regard it, is not the same thing as the subject itself. In the one case, the subject rejects a suggestion through a quality of its own, in the other it may reject on the strength of our failure. But I must persist in denying that this objection is relevant. In both cases alike the subject is taken as somehow determined ; and it is this determination which (whatever it comes from) does give the subject a positive character, which in both cases lies at the base of the denial. No subject could repel an offered suggestion simply on the strength of what it was not. It is because the "not-this" must mean " something else" that we are able to make absence a ground for deiial. We shall all agree that the nothing which is nothing can not possibly do anything, or be a reason for aught. These distinctions do not touch the principle we stand upon, but I admit they give rise to most serious difficulties. And, mainly for the sake of future chapters, it may be well if we attempt here to clear our ideas. And (i) first, when we have a case of " opposition," there the subject repels the offered predicate because it has in its content a positive quality, filling the space which the predicate would occupy, and so expelling it. If a man has blue eyes, then that quality of blueness is incompatible with the quality brown. But (ii), when we come to privation, two cases are possible. In the first of these (a) within the content of the subject there is empty space where a quality should be. Thus, a man being eyeless, in this actual content lies the place where his eyes would be if he had them. And this void can not possibly be a literal blank. You must represent the orbits as somehow occupied, by peaceful eyelids, or unnatural appearance, And so the content itself gets a quality, which, in contrast to the I

[003-004]
114 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Booz I. presence of eyes, may be nothing,* but which by itself, has a positive character, which serves to repel the suggestion of sight § 10. But privation can rest on another basis (£). The content of the subject may contain no space which could possibly be qualified by the presence of the predicate. What rejects the predicate is no other determination of the content itself, but is, so far as that content itself is concerned, an absolute blank. It is difficult to find illustrations of this instance. If I say "A stone does not feel or see," it may rightly be urged "Yes, because it is a stone, and not simply because it is nothing else." But we can find an example of the privation we want in the abstract universal. The universal idea (cf. Sigwart, 130), if you keep it in abstraction, repels every possible extension of its character. Thus " triangle," if you mean by it the mere abstraction, can neither be isosceles nor scalene nor rectangular ; for, if it were, it would cease to be undetermined We may invent a stupid reductio ad absurdum : This isosceles figure is certainly a triangle, but a triangle is certainly not isosceles, therefore  . If we release the universal from this unnatural abstraction, and use it as an attribute of real existence, then it can not support such a privative judgment For, when referred to reality, we know it must be qualified, though we perhaps can not state its qualification. Once predicate triangle of any figure, and we no longer can deny every other quality. The triangle is determinate, though we are not able to say how. It is only the triangle as we happen not to know it, which repels the suggestion of offered predicates. It is our ignorance, in short, and not the idea, which supports our exclusion of every suggestion. § ii. In a judgment of this kind the base of denial is neither the content of the subject itself, nor is it that content plus a simple absence ; for a simple absence is nothing at all. * I may mention that, though contrast can not always be taken as holding true of the things contrasted, yet for all that it may rest on a positive quality. Thus, even in the case of a word like blindness, we should be wrong if we assumed that the blind man is qualified simply by the absence of sight from the part which should furnish vision. His mind, we can not doubt, has a positive character which it would lose if another sense were added.

[003-005]
. HL] THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT. US The genuine subject is the content of the idea plus *#y psychological state of mind. The universal abstraction, ostensibly unqualified, is determined by my mental repulsion of qualities. And the positive area which excludes the predicate really lies in that mental condition of mine. My ignorance, or again my wilful abstraction, is never a bare defect of knowledge. It is a positive psychological state And it is by virtue of relation to this state, which is used as content to qualify the subject, that the abstraction, or the ignorance, is able to become a subject of privation. We shall see that, in this form, the universal may more truly be called particular (Chap. VI. § 35) ; for it is determined and qualified, not by any developement of the content, but simply by extraneous psychological relation. § 12. The various kinds of negative judgment follow closely the varieties of affirmation. The immediate subject may be part of the content of present perception (" This stone is not wet " ) ; or it may be found in some part of the series of space, or again of time, which we do not perceive (" Marseilles is not the capital of France," " It did not freeze last night "). Again what is denied may be a general connection (" A metal need not be heavier than water Jl). In this last case it is of course the unexpressed quality at the base of the hypothesis (Chap. II. § 50) which the real excludes. But, in all negative judgment, the ultimate subject is the reality that comes to us in presentation. We affirm in all alike that the quality of the real excludes an ideal content that is o'ffered. And so every judgment, positive or negative, is in the end existential. In existential judgment, as we saw before (Chap. II. § 42), the apparent is not the actual subject. Let us take such a denial as "Chimeras are non-existent" "Chimaeras" is here ostensibly the subject, but is really the predicate. It is the quality of harbouring chimseras which is denied of the nature of things. And we deny this because, if chimeras existed, we should have to alter our view of the world. In some cases that view, no doubt, can be altered, but, so long as we hold it, we are bound to refuse all predicates it excludes. The positive quality of the ultimate reality may remain occult or be made explicit, but this, and nothing else, lies always at the base of a negative judgment I 2


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Boos I. § 13. For logical negation can not be so directly related to fact as Is logical assertion. We might say that, as such and in its own strict character, it is simply "subjective :" it does not hold good outside my thinking. The reality repels the suggested alteration ; but the suggestion is not any movement of the fact, nor in fact does the given subject maintain itself against the actual attack of a disparate quality. The process takes place in the unsubstantial region of ideal experiment And the steps of that experiment are not even asserted to exist in the world outside our heads The result remains, and is true of the teal, but its truth, as we have seen, is something other than its first appearance. The reality is determined by negative judgments, but it can not be said to be directly determined. The exclusion, as such, can not be ascribed to it, and hence a variety of exclusions may be based on one single quality. The soul is not an elephant, nor a ship in full sail, nor a colour, nor a fireshovel ; and, in all these negations, we do make an assertion about the soul But you can hardly say that the subject is determined by these exclusions as such, unless you will maintain that, after the first, the remainder must yield some fresh piece of knowledge. You may hold that "all negation is determination," if you are prepared to argue that, in the i ejection of each1 new absurd suggestion, the soul exhibits a fresh side of its being, and in each case performs the special exclusion by means of a new quality. But it seems better to say that nothing is added by additional exclusions. The developement and application of these may proceed ad infinitum, but the process is arbitrary and, in the end, unreal. The same quality of the soul which repels one predicate, repels here all the rest, and the exclusion itself takes place only in our heads, I do not mean to deny that a thing may be qualified by the exclusion of others, that the real character of a fact may depend on what may be called a negative relation. What I mean to say is that the negative judgment will not express this. It asserts that a predicate is incompatible, but it does not say that either the predicate, or the incompatibility, are real facts. If you wish to say this you must transcend the sphere of the negative judgment.


CHAP III] THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT. 117 § 14. We must not, if we can help it, introduce into logic the problems of the " dialectical " view. It ma}' be, after all, that everything is just so far as it is not, and again is not just so far as it is. Everything is determined by all negation ; for it is what it is as a member of the whole, and its relation to all other members is negative. Each element in the whole, itself the whole ideally while actually finite, transcends itself by mere self-assertion, and by mere self-emphasis brings forth the other that characterizes and negates it If everything thus has its disparate in itself, then everything in a, sense must be its own discrepancy. Negation is not only one side of reality, but in the end it is either side we please. On this view it would be doubtful if even the whole is positive ; for it is just so far as by position it disperses itself in its own negation, and begets from its dispei sion the opposite extreme. It is doubtful if we may not transform the saying that "Everything is nothing except by position/1 into "Everything by position is its proper contrary, and nothing by position is all and everything." If this is 30, there would remain no quality which is simply positive ; and logical negation, in another sense than we have given it above, becomes the soul and, we sometimes are inclined to think, the body of the real world. But we are not called upon to discuss this view (cf. Chap V.), for our result will stand in any case, I think, in its principal outline. A mere logical negation, it is fully admitted by the dialectical method, need not express a real relation And, this being so, it seems the better course to consider it by itself as merely subjective, and to express the real implication of exclusives by an affirmative judgment, ™hich sets forth that fact. What denial tells us is merely this, that, when we bring the disparate up, it is rejected. Whether what repels it is entirely independent, or whether it has itself produced or solicited what it excludes, is quite irrelevant, And it is still more irrelevant to ask the question if the first rejection is merely coquettish, and will lead in the end to a deeper surrender. This all goes beyond what denial expresses, for that, merely by itself, is not asserted beyond our minds. The dialectical method, in its unmodified form, may be

[003-006]
THE PRINCIPLES Otf LOGIC. [BOOK I, untenable. It has, however, made a serious attempt to deal with the relation of thought to reality. We can hardly say that of those eminent writers who are sure that logic is the counterpart of things, and have never so much as asked themselves the question, if the difference and identity, with which logic operates, are existing relations between actual phenomena. § 15. To resume, logical negation always contradicts, but never asserts the existence of the contradictory. To say « A is not B *' is merely the same as to deny that « A is B," or to assert that " A is B " is false. And, since it can not go beyond this result, a mere denial of B can never assert that the contradictory Not-B is real. The fact it does assert is the existence of an opposite incompatible quality,* either in the immediate or ultimate subject. This is the reason why the suggested A-B is contradicted ; and it is only because this something else is true, that the statement A-B is rejected as false. But then this positive ground, which is the basis of negation, is not contradictory. It is merely disparate, opposite, incompatible. It is only contrary. In logical negation the denial and the fact can never be the same. § 1 6. The contradictory idea, if we take it in a merely negative form, must be banished from logic. If Not-A were solely the negation of A, it would be an assertion without a quality, and would be a denial without anything positive to serve as its ground. A something that is only not something else, is a relation that terminates in an impalpable void, a reflection thrown upon empty space. It is a mere nonentity which can not be real And, if such were the sense of the dialectical method (as it must be confessed its detractors have had much cause to "suppose), that sense would, strictly speaking, be nonsense. It is impossible for anything to be only Not-A. It is impossible to realize Not-A in thought. It is less than nothing, for nothing itself is not wholly negative. Nothing at least is empty thought, and that means at least my thinking emptily. Nothing means nothing else but failure. And failure is impossible unless something fails : but Not-A would be impersonal failure itself (§ Ii). Not-A must be more than a bare negation. It must * On the nature of incompatibility see more, Chap, V.


CHAP. HL] THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT. 1 19 also be positive. It is a general name for any quality which, when you make it a predicate of A, or joint predicate with A, removes A from existence. The contradictory idea is the universal idea of the discrepant or contrary. In this form it must keep its place in logic. It is a general name for any hypothetical disparate; but we must never for a moment allow ourselves to think of it as the collection of disparates. § 17. Denial or contradiction is not the same thing as the assertion of the contrary ; but in the end it can rest on nothing else. The contrary however which denial asserts, is never explicit In " A is not B " the disparate ground is wholly unspecified. The basis of contradiction may be the assertion A-C or A-D, C and D being contraries of B. But again it may perhaps be nothing of the sort. We may reject A-B, not in the least on the ground of A, but because A itself is excluded from reality. The ultimate real may be the subject which has some quality disparate with A-B. For contradiction rests on an undetermined contrary. It does not tell us what quality of the subject excludes the predicate. It leaves us in doubt if the subject itself is not excluded. Something there is which repels the suggestion ; and that is all we know. Sokrates may be not sick because he is well, or because there is now no such thing as Sokrates. § 1 8. Between acceptance and rejection there is no middlepoint, and so contradiction is always dual, There is but one Not-B. But contrary opposition is indefinitely plural. The number of qualities that are disparate or incompatible with A, can not be determined by a general rule. It is possible of course to define a contrary in some sense which will limit the use of the term ; but for logical purposes this customary restriction is nothing but lumber. In logic the contrary should be simply the disparate. Nothing is gained by trying to keep up an effete tradition. If a technical distinction can not be called necessary, it is better to have done with it. § 19. Contradiction is thus a "subjective" process, which rests on an unnamed disparate quality. It can not claim "objective" reality; and since its base is undetermined, it is hopelessly involved in ambiguity. In " A is not B " you know indeed what it is you deny, but you do not say what it is you

[003-007]
120 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I affirm It may be a quality in the nature of things which is incompatible with A, or again with B. Or again it may ^ be either a general character of A itself which makes B impossible, or it may be some particular predicate C. That " a round square is three-cornered," or that "happiness lies in an infinite quantity," may at once be denied. We know a round square, or an infinite number, are not in accordance with the nature of things. But " virtue is quadrangular," or " is mere self-seeking," we deny again because virtue has no existence in space, and has another quality which is opposite to selfishness. "The King of Utopia did not die on Tuesday" may be safely contradicted. And yet the denial must remain ambiguous. The ground may be that there is no such place, or it never had a king, or he still is living, or, though he is dead, yet he died on Monday. This doubtful character can never be removed from the contradiction. It is the rejection of an idea, on account of some side of real fact which is implied but occult. § 20. We may conclude this chapter by setting before ourselves a useful rule. I think most of us know that one can not affirm without also in effect denying something. In a complex universe the predicate you assert is certain to exclude some other quality, and this you may fairly be taken to deny. But another pitfall, if not so open, yet no less real, I think that some of us are quite unaware of. Our sober thinkerc, our discreet Agnostics, our diffident admirers of the phenomenal region — I wonder if ever any of them see how they compromise themselves with that little word " only'' How is it that they dream there is something else underneath appearance, and first suspect that what meets the eye veils something hidden ? But our survey of negation has taught us the secret, that nothing in the world can ever be denied except on the strength of positive knowledge. I hardly know if I am right in introducing suggestive ideas into simple minds ; but yet I must end with the rule I spoke of. We can not deny without also affirming ; and it is of the very last importance, whenever we deny, to get as clear an idea as we can of the positive ground our denial rests on.
