---
description: "Intension, extension, universal and particular judgments"
id: ch06-the-quantity-of-judgments
label: "Chapter VI: The Quantity of Judgments"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[006-001]( 155 ) CHAPTER VI. THE QUANTITY OE JUDGMENTS. § I. If in considering an idea you attend to its content, you have its intension or comprehension. Its extension may be taken in two different senses. It is an instance or instances, ideal or actual. It refers ultimately to the real, but it may directly signify (a) any other more concrete idea which contains the intension, or (S) any individual of which the Intension can be predicated Thus if "horse " signifies the attributes possessed by a horse, it is taken in intension. If it signifies any other idea which includes " horse," e.g. cart-horse or race-hor.se, it is taken in extension. And again, it is otherwise taken in extension if it is used for individual horses.* § 2. We have come again upon a distinction which is nowfamiliar. An idea is symbolic, and in every symbol we separate what it means from that which it stands for. A sign indicates or points to something other than itself; and it does this by conveying, artificially or naturally, those attributes of the thing by which we recognize it A word, we may say, never quite means what it stands for or stands for what it means. For the qualities of the fact, by which it is recognized and which correspond to the content of the sign, are not the fact itself. Even with abstracts the actual case of the quality is hardly nothing but the quality itself. The idea and the reality are presumed to be different It is perhaps an ideal we secretly cherish, that words should mean what they stand for and stand for what they mean. And in metaphysics we should be forced to consider seriously the claim of this ideal But for logical purposes it is better to ignore it It is better to assume that the meaning is other than the fact of which the meaning is true. The fact is an individual or individuals, and the idea itself is an universal. The extension can not be reduced to intension. * If it were used impossible horses, it would be taken in sense (a). Cf, pp. 158, 167, J73.

[006-002]
156 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [Boo* I. § 3. The difference may be expressed by the terms " denotation " and " connotation." These phrases have found favour with the English public, and the indiscriminate use of " connotation " marks one kind of superior person. But they serve no useful purpose in logic. They are unnecessary and objectionable. They have no advantage over the terms in general use, and they have in addition a positive vice. To " connote " is to " imply ; w and the meaning of a word is not its implication. With the names of individuals the meaning may perhaps be said to be " connoted," but with adjectives such as "red," and abstracts such as "redness," what is "connoted" is clearly not at all the attributes but the individual reality. Nothing but ambiguity can arise from such perversions. If you will use a word which signifies implication, to convey what more usually is the direct meaning, you must expect the confusion which your unfortunate choice has already to some extent occasioned. § 4. Hand in hand with this slovenly terminology there goes a superstition we have in part refuted (Chap. II. § 17), We are told that words may be " non-connotative." They may signify, we are told, a subject only or only an attribute. Both of these assertions must be rejected. No word such as " whiteness " stands simply and solely for the abstract quality.* It means this directly ; but it indirectly points to an implied individual, an actual case of whiteness. And still less can be said for the doctrine we have already refuted. The name of an individual must cany with it and imply certain attributes, or else its attachment to that individual becomes a psychological impossibility. It is mere want of thought which allows us to suppose that a sign can mean nothing and yet stand for something. § 5. It would be as easy to prove that a word may mean nothing and may also stand for nothing. And it may be useful, perhaps, at this point to digress. We have seen that all propositions are " real " (p. 41). Verbal propositions become manifestly real, if you write them " The meaning of S is P.M * All ideas imply a reference of their content to the real (p. 4), and hence to the individual. We may notice besides that abstracts imply


CHAP. VI.] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS But there is a class of judgments where the subject has got no definite meaning, and is not a perfect sign. If we take such a statement as cc magistri is the genitive case of magister" we might be tempted to assert that seme words are devoid of both extension and intension. "Theophilus is Greek," "Theophilus is dear to God," " Theophilus has the measles." The last of these informs us of the disease of a man. The second tells us the meaning of a name. The first assures us that a word is a member in a system of signs, but it seems to give us nothing which that word stands for and nothing that it means. If a sign were something with a definite signification, then we could not say that all words are signs. We may know of a sound no more than this, that it is a sign. It stands for something, but we do not know what , and it means something also, but what we do not know. And we are not at the end. This last remnant of ordinary extension and intension is doomed to vanish. I may treat the word as a common noise. " Why did you make that noise Theophilns when you saw that man? Theophilus is not a pleasant sound." We have here no signification and no meaning, nor have we any longer a word. But even here in a rudimentary form we have the sides of extension and intension. We may distinguish two elements that are blended in Tfaophihts. Even here it is universal, and is the product of abstraction and generalization. The sound that I should know under all its differences, of varying tone, of the person uttering, and of places and times, is one side of the whole. The other is this particular utterance and other possible particular utterances. The elements still co-exist at this early stage of their evolution. We can never separate the one from the other except by a mistake. § 6. Let us dismiss for ever the term " connotation/' and try to keep clear of the errors it beacons. We may pass to a doctrine of another kind, not so misleading but equally idle. Extension and intension, we are told, are related and must be related in a certain way. The less you happen to have of the one, the more you therefore must have of the other. This statement has often passed itself off as both true and

[006-003]
158 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC important I confess that to me it hab always seemed either false or frivolous. (a) If we take extension to mean that number of real individuals of which the meaning is true, then it is ludicrously false that an increase of the extension is a decrease of the meaning The logician who, impelled by the practical syllogism, begets a child, does not find his doctrine verified by the fact. The conclusion, which appears fiom the union of the premises, no doubt may surprise him and add to his experiences, bat it may not diminish the "comprehension" with which he hears the word child. His new-born instance may destroy his definition of the genus homo as animal ristbile, but the content it shears off will be largely made good by other attributes. He may say, what he never thought to have said, A //children are scourges. It is obvious that fresh instances may increase the intension by the discovery of attributes essential but overlooked. The doctrine understood in this sense is false. And if you write « possible" for "actual" individuals, still diminution of the meaning need not add to the number. If possible means that which is presumed to exist, we may remark that the complex may be possible in fact just as much as the simple ; the simple indeed by itself may be impossible. But if possible means what can be produced by artificial and arbitrary thinking (p. 187), we have now obviously left the sense of extension we have been dealing with. The extension has ceased to lie in the individuals ; it has become those groups of attributes in which analysis can find the meaning. § 7, But (#) even if we give this sense to extension, the doctrine is not true. If you compare ideas, the narrower meaning does not always have the wider application. Take a simple instance. The idea of the visible has, we may all admit, a fuller meaning than the ideas of that which can be tasted or smelt. But the latter have not got any greater extension. Everywhere, if you take adjectives or combinations of adjectives, which are co-ordinate and which can not be subsumed the one under the other, the doctrine ceases to have any bearing. Since the greater emptiness has not been got by further abstraction, there is no reason why the adjective which


CHAP. VIJ THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 159 has less content should be predicable of a greater number of kinds. And if for marks and combinations of marks we substitute laws or modes of combination, the same thing holds good. If these laws do not stand the one under the other, but simply fall under a common head, then you have no right, on comparing these laws, to expect the emptier to be the more wide and the wider to be more empty, § 8. There undoubtedly is some truth in the doctrine, but that truth does not come to much more than this. If you take adjectival marks or laws, and choose to arrange them in the form of a pyramid ; if you place at the bottom, and as the stones of your lowest layer, all those ideas which have nothing subordinate ; if you form the second and superimposed layer by subtracting the differences from two of these stones, and by placing the residue left by the operation on the top of the pair ; and if you so proceed to pile layer upon layer, so as to form a mass which grows narrower with each tier — if all this is done, then it is geometrically true that the higher you go up the fewer stones you will find, and the lower you go down the more stones you will have. And since you have gone up by leaving out differences, it is obvious that the narrower the pyramid becomes the more stones will each single stone have to stand upon, and the more there will be of which it can be predicated* This is undeniable, but what does it come to? It comes to this, that // you arrange your material in a certain geometrical figure, then it will have certain gecn metrical properties. That is true, but it seems to me quite frivolous. § 9. It is true, I admit, that if B must be C, then, supposing A should ever be B, it will also be C. But, if you offer me this as a truth about A, I can hardly affect to feel very grateful. It looks to me more like a truth about B. You begin to establish a claim to gratitude when you show me also that A is B, or is likely to become so. And this is the real question at issue. If you arrange ideas in a certain way they will have the qualities of that arrangement. Who doubts it? What first may be doubted is the possibility of so arranging all ideas ; and what may next be doubted is the

[006-004]
j6o THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I. wisdom of the arrangement. If it is not the natural relation of the material if it is forced and arbitrary, then the truth you offer me may after all be sterile. It may have little or nothing to do with the actual matter in hand. If you confine yourself to the ideas of adjectivals, then (though I will not undertake to maintain it) I think that with more or less of regularity you may effect your pyramidal arrangement ; but I think you much over-estimate its value. If reasoning were always the subsumption of a stone on a lower tier under a stone belonging to a higher layer, then your construction would begin to serve as a machine and would even live ; your ladder would grow green and blossom as the tree, not of pedantry, but of knowledge. But reasoning is really not always subsumplion, and with the cutting off that root of delusion your tree shows dead, and breaks before the breath of actual existence. The importance ascribed to your arrangement of ideas comes from a fundamental mistake. (See Book II. Part I. Chap. II) § 10. And there remains an objection we can not discuss but must not pass over. If you do not confine yourself to the ideas of adjectives and their combinations, what then ? Take ideas of individuals. If you have ideas of smaller wholes, enclosed in and subordinated to larger wholes, will it there be true that the wider the synthesis the emptier it becomes ? Are universals always more abstract than particulars ? Is it certain that the idea of a state has less content than the idea of any one of its citizens ? Are we sure that the soul is more of an abstraction than any particular psychical event ? Is the idea of God assuredly less full than the idea of a molecule ? And if we consider the idea of synthetical unity, it does not appear that the higher and wider function of synthesis need have less attributes than a subordinate function. If we entertain the belief that syntheses are possible which are not the abstraction from lower syntheses, but are the individuations of these lower abstractions, then the doctrine which has showed itself to be idle once more becomes a positive error. t This objection, I am aware, will not press very heavily. There are few readers not so wise in their own esteem as to


CHAP. VL] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS, l6l convict this suggestion of folly or madness. It would belong to metaphysics to lay folly at the door of its true possessors. It is sufficient here for our logical purpose to have pointed out an objection, disregarded and despised, but in itself not despicable. Apart from this possible ground of dissent, and confining ourselves to the consideration oi marks and the modes of their union, we may sum the matter so. The law of the relation of extent to intent is not a law of ideas themselves ; it is a law of pyramidal arrangement ; and that arrangement in the case of ideas, where it is possible, is not of importance. It may fairly be relegated to our logical lumber-room. §11. The question which is next to claim our notice is still concerned with Extension and Intension. If we leave mere ideas and go on to judgments, it has been asked whether these make a statement in respect of the extension of their elements, or the intension, or both. And this is a topic we can not quite pass over, as it presents us with several dangerous illusions. I will begin by the assertion that every proposition can be read in wliichever of these ways we prefer. I will then show, in the first place, how all can be interpreted in extension, and will prove the same, secondly, with respect to intension. § 12. Every judgment makes a double affirmation, or a single affirmation which has two sides. It asserts a connection of different attributes, with an indirect reference to an identical subject ; or it directly asserts the identity of the subject, with an implication of the difference of its attributes. If you prefer to consider the identity of the subject (immediate or ultimate), you read the judgment in extension. If again you emphasize the connection of the differences, you take the judgment intensionally. It is not true that every judgment is naturally read in both of these ways. It is true that all judgments can be read correctly in either manner, and read legitimately. If you take the proposition " Dogs are mammals," then this means either that, where anything is a dog, the same individual thing will be a mammal ; or that, given in anything1 the attribute dog, you will certainly have with it the attribute M

[006-005]
!62 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. PBooK L mammal. And it is possible to interpret every judgment in this self-same way. § 13, Dismissing for the present the intensional reading, let us consider interpretation in Extension. We find here the presence of misleading errors. It is a common doctrine that when we read in extension we assert inclusion in a class or collection. We are told that in "Dogs are mammals" no attribute is really affirmed of dogs ; the assertion is that the things called dogs are included within the class of mammals. I can discover little in this current theory but error and confusion. It sounds at least palpable, when we hear of enclosing within a class. But try to handle it, and at once your grasp is closed upon mist and unreality. The class, if it is to be real at all, must be, I presume, an aggregate or collection of individuals ; and this must exist either in my head or else outside it The latter alternative can hardly be meant There is no actual physical aggregation which answers to every general name. For eveiy single mark would be the ground of such an aggregate, and I can not suppose that any one believes that these strange complications of groups or herds actually exist in rerum naiitra. § 14. " The class is mental, - It is no group of things. It is our own private way of putting images together within our own minds," But, at the risk of seeming to affect singularity, I am bound to assert that within my own mind I can not find these classes. By a class I suppose you mean a group of images which actually exist ; but when I come to the facts and look into my mind, and survey what is there when I hear the word "mammals" or "triangles'* or "cats," I scarcely ever am able to find an actual group. The idea that "mammals" is the name of a flock of mammal-images, herded together in my mental field, and that among these I can see the little pack of dogs, and all the cats sitting together, and the rats, and the rabbits, as well as the elephants, all marked with curious references and crossreferences to heads "quadruped" and "carnivorous" and "placental" and Heaven knows what else — I do not think that this looks like the fact


CHAP. VIJ THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 163 § 15, These flocks and herds are pure mythology, they are nothing real. But let us suppose that they really exist Entertaining fables, we may unawares embrace a truth. Let "mammals " be a group of mammal-images ; and let "dogs" be a mental pack of dog-images ; and let the judgment " Dogs are mammals" be the inclusion of the former within the latter. But what does this mean ? If I look at the mammals I either know which mammals are dogs, or this is hid from me. (a) Suppose that I know it The inclusion then means that a certain definite number of my present mammal-images are also dogs, and that these are surrounded or mixed up with the residue of mammal-images which are not dogs. The judgment asserts a spatial relation in my mind of the dog-mammals to the mammals which are rats and cats and rabbits and the rest But such juxta-position, let it be ever so actual in my imagination, is clearly not what we meant by our judgment. I wanted to say something real about dogs ; but this local relation fabled in my head does not even pretend to represent external existence. (b) And if I do not know which mammals are dogs, the case is not altered. I regard my mental conglomeration of mammals, and fail to distinguish the dogs from the cats. I can not say which image is a dog-image, but I know that the dogs are every one there. They are inside the mammal-fold and not outside. The mammals range over a mental park, and all the dogs are on this side of the paling. But that again is not what I meant to assert The local position of my canine images with respect to the enclosure which bounds my mammals, is not the idea which I meant to convey by " Dogs are mammals/' § 1 6. These interpretations are fictions — that is one objection. But it is followed by another — they are unprofitable fictions. They are not only baseless : they also are useless* They do not read the whole proposition in extension. If the extension means the objects called mammals, then in neither case is " mammals/' in this sense, the predicate. In saying (l Dogs are enclosed by mammals," I do not say that " Dogs are mammals." A group of objects is one thing ; a spatial relation, indefinite or definite, to that group of objects is M 2

[006-006]
1 64 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I. clearly another thing. And, what is more, that relation is an attribute of dogs. The local relation is not the things themselves, and it certainly is predicated as qualifying dogs.* If the ostensible predicate has been taken in extension, the proposition has in part been read intensionally ; for it has asserted an attribute of the subject. The inclusion within the class has no meaning, if the class is the mere individuals themselves, and the copula simply asserts them of the subject. But if the judgment affirms a spatial relation to some of those individuals, or the area they all occupy, or the fence that confines them, then what the judgment really affirms is an attribute, § 17. If we keep to extension we must keep to the objects, and it is these we must try to predicate of the subject In " Dogs are mammals " we must try to assert " some mammals " of dogs. What is affirmed must be identity. The dogs and dog-mammals are all the same thing. (Cf. Chap. I. § 17.) If they were wholly the same there would be no difference. They could not then be at all distinguished, and both sides of the judgment would fall together. The judgment would disappear. Hence a difference must exist; and what we mean to say must come to this, that, Though the dogs and dog-mammals are the same, yet for all that— what? Here we have to join issue. For all that, we may say, they are sometimes inside the mammal-enclosure and sometimes outside, and that is the difference. The dog-mammals sometimes are packed by themselves, and go wandering off in the mental distance, and at other times their images, compelled by some secret influence, consort with all whose blood flows warmly. But this strange mythology would not answer to our meaning. We never intended to say that the dogs could exist indifferently on each side of a hedge which grows in our minds. § 1 8. "The dog-mammals and the dogs are all the same, and yet for all that their names are different You have a set of individuals which obviously in themselves are simply themselves. The difference asserted is the difference of their * I do not say the spatial relation of A to B is nothmgbut an attribute of A. Still it is such an attribute.


CHAP. VIJ THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 165 two signs ' mammal * and * dog.' That surely is a very palpable thing, and, in saying * Dogs are mammals/ we mean to assert that certain definite indivisible objects have got two names. It happens that they have been christened twice, or christened with two names, and this is the real heart of your mystery." The explanation possesses the merit of simplicity. It Is perhaps too simple for sophisticated mortals. Belief m it will not " come with observation," but demands a new birth from the world of fact into the world of faith. Philosophy has not revealed it, and not many wise are likely to accept it. The creed of nominalism is no theme for argument To those who believe that assertions about things assert nothing but names, the universe has long ago given up her secrets, and given up everything. § 19. The first interpretation asserts that the individuals, notwithstanding their sameness, cross and recross the mammal-fence. The second asserts that, although they are the same, their names are different. The first interpretation is a fiction ; the second ignores the fact to be interpreted Neither expresses the meaning of the judgment ; and both in the end do predicate attributes. The change of position with respect to a herd or the pale that encloses it, is a spatial attribute. The possession of one or two or three names is again an attribute The subject is not two different names ; it has them. One name is not the other ; it co-exists with it One thing as distinguished is not the other thing; both have a quality which is the same. On the nominalist interpretation the actual predicate is not taken in extension. The interpretation is not only ludicrously false, but, if we take it as true, it still asserts an attribute of the subject The natural and the true interpretation of "Dogs are mammals" is that dog and mammal are different attributes, and that these differences co-exist within the same things ; or again, that, though the things are certainly the same, for all that they possess two different attributes, dog and mammal. But this natural interpretation involves the abandonment of the theory of inclusion within the predicate. § 20. And if you understand extension in a different sense, the result is the same. The class of mammal may be taken

[006-007]
1 66 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK L to contain, not only the collection of Individuals which are mammals, but also the kinds of thing which are mammal. " Dog is one kind, and the judgment includes it among all the other kinds " It is doubtful what this means, but, whatever it means, the extension is not affirmed as a predicate. If I have in my mind a known or unknown aggregate of kinds, and say that dog is in the midst of this aggregate, then I assert of dog a spatial relation to a set of elements or the area they occupy. But this relation is surely an attribute. If again I mean that dog is an unit which, taken in addition with other units, amounts to the sum which I call " mammal," then I assert a relation to the other units, and a further attribute that results from this relation. If I mean that dog possesses mammal, and that other kinds, known or unknown, do so, or that dog is like these other kinds in possessing mammal, then again I assert an attribute of dog, the having an attribute, and the identity in this respect with some other kinds. These interpretations are all forced and unnatural. They none of them are really what I have in my mind when I say "Dogs are mammals." Inclusion is not what I mean to assert. But, if I assert it, then my predicate is an attribute. The whole or part of the extension of mammals is not the real predicate. The predicate is that which I either affirm or deny of the subject, and a thing is not the same as a relation between itself and something else. § 21. If you say, "The dogs, with other things, make up a certain amount we know as mammals," then this contribution to a certain number is an undeniable attribute. If you say, "The dogs share a quality mammal with a heap of other things," this again is an attribute. If you suppose dogs and mammals to be two different lots in two adjoining folds, and if you pull up the mental hurdles which separate them, then you can not say, "The dogs are in the mammals," unless you are prepared to embrace a marsupial or some other such hypothesis. They are related locally to the other mammals or to the area or fence within which all mammals are circumscribed* And this local relation is an Attributive predicate. The mythology you invoke is not strong enough to save


CHAP. VI.] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. l6/ you, and, if you throw yourself into the arms of Nominalism, then you have not only an account of the fact which is absurdly insufficient, but the difference of names is still an attribute. And if, in the end, to escape from your difficulties, you say " The class is no real collection in my head or out of it. It is a name that stands for the possible objects that have a certain attribute," then the answer is simple. If the class is no longer an aggregate or collection, it has become little else than a mere description. " Dogs are included in a possible group of things which are mammals," "Dogs are of the description mammal," " Dogs possess the attribute mammal " — what is the difference between these three assertions ? I ask you, is there any, and if so, what? To include real dogs among mere possibilities can hardly be the end you have in view. You must mean, " The dogs possess this attribute, and by virtue of this attribute are related to other possible mammals." The last part of the sentence calls for interpretation. " Dogs," we must read it, " are not only mammals but, supposing anything else to be mammal, then we may argue a relation between this thing and dogs." What relation ? Surely not juxta-position ; that is too preposterous. The relation meant must surely rest on nothing whatever but the joint possession of the attribute. The inclusion in the class of possible mammals means nothing but the having the attribute mammal, and in addition, a hypothetical relation of identity with anything else of the same description. We predicate two things, in the first place a quality, and then a relation to possible objects supposed to have the same quality. Both of these predicates are attributes, and the last is an addition which may be superfluous. It is a mistake to think that the phrase " possible " will help us anywhere into anything but bad metaphysics. And the favourite prey of this delusion is the men who think themselves above metaphysics. We may briefly sum up this matter thus. The only way to read the whole judgment in extension-is to take it as asserting a relation of identity between different individuals. Two individuals are one though their attributes differ. This is simply the other side of the judgment that different attributes


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Boo* L are interrelated within the same individual. To take the subject as included in the predicate is in the first place to substitute fiction for fact, and in the next place is to predicate an attribute and is not to read the whole judgment in extension. But If the subject alone be taken in its extension, then what is asserted is obviously a connection of attributes within an individual or individuals. § 22. Every judgment can be read in extension. Although some present two or more subjects in relation, yet all can be reduced to the affirmation of a connection of content within one subject In "A is to the right of B," the whole ^presentation is the subject, and the spatial relation of A to B is an attribute of that In " Caesar is sick," the same person is said to be sick as well as Caesar. And in "Dogs are mammals," there are certain things which are declared to be both. In this sense of extension every proposition can be read extensionally. We have now to ask if every judgment can be taken in intension. Can not only the predicate, but also the subject be reduced to mere content ? Do they all assert a connection of attributes ? And this question at first sight may be answered in the negative. In "Caesar is sicV we certainly have a junction of adjectives, but it will be said, " We have something else beside. There is the individual of whom these qualities are predicated ; and this individual is finite and determined. Admitted that in every intensional judgment you have a reference to the ultimate reality, and that this reality is individual, yet the ultimate subject does not affect the judgment. It is given undetermined except so far as it is determined by the judgment : and hence it does not interfere with the connection of the adjectives. But when you have a finite subject, then that subject interferes. In ' Caesar is sick/ the judgment is not true unless you make it of this one Caesar. You can not get rid of the individual person, and, while he remains, he prevents your reading the judgment in intension!' § 23. We have already cut the ground from under this objection by proving that every such judgment is hypothetical and strictly universal (Chap. II.). If the subject is taken as an existing individual or set of individuals, then no doubt the judg 


CHAP. TL] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 169 merit is categorical, and can not possibly be read intensionally. " All these six sheep have got the rot," " William invaded England," « I have a headache : " if" these sheep/' or « William/* or " I," are taken as sensible individuals in the series of time, then that character enters into the assertion, and we can not reduce it to a hypothetical synthesis of adjectives. But then our analysis in Chapter II. has shown us that the reduction is demanded. When we press forthe final truth of the judgment, the particular subject becomes an unspecified condition of the content The assertion is thus hypothetical. It conjoins mere adjectives, though what it conjoins is vague and undetermined. The true subject of the judgment is, not this or that finite person or thing, but the ultimate reality. All the qualities of the ostensible subject pass into the condition of a universal connection of attributes. It would be idle to repeat the painful enquiries which have established this result. It stands or falls with our second chapter, and while it stands it carries the conclusion that every judgment can be read in intension. § 24. Thus, when the ostensible subject is a particular phenomenon or collection of phenomena, no ordinary means will reduce the judgment. To take it in intension we must apply the drastic treatment we discussed in Chapter II, But in other instances the remedy is more obvious, and is easier to administer. " Some trespassers must be prosecuted," " Some English citizens are to be hung," * In some impossible cases right would be wrong." These assertions would, I presume, be called particular, but none of them need refer to this or that phenomenon. The "some" may mean "under some condition." It may describe the attribute, not point to the individuals. There are cases where "some" most cleariy does not indicate this or that particular or set of particulars. " Some crimes are deserving of capital punishment," " In some diseases the patient should be secluded :" we mean here that, given a crime or disease of a certain sort which we do not specify, then something else would in that case follow. The judgment couples mere attributes with attributes. It does not assert the existence of this or that crime or disease. It is hypothetical, and is naturally read at once in intension.

[006-008]
I7Q THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I. § 25. "Some" again may mean an unknown number. « Some English citizens will be hung next year/' may mean, not one sort, but one unspecified quantity of English citizens will suffer this fate. A particular event is here asserted, and the proposition must in the end be reduced by the method laid down in Chapter II. But the event it foretells has already in part been stripped of particularity. The forming a number, or contributing to an amount, is an universal attribute : it is a general adjective, and to this extent the subject has been already purified. When read in intension the judgment runs thus, "Given certain conditions, part unspecified, part specified as the attribute of English citizen and the attribute of amounting to a certain number, then? etc. It is an elementary mistake to suppose that number confers particularity and destroys intension. And the error reveals a deep foundation of bad metaphysics. Number is surely nothing but an attribute. And how can the addition of an universal quality force us to take a judgment merely in extension ? How can it even help towards such a result ? You may say, perhaps, that nothing is numbered save actual phenomena, but such an assertion would be incompatible with fact. " In the single case of two men being three men, four men would be six men " — this is, I presume, an hypothetical judgment Not only can you take it as connecting attributes, but I do not see how you can take it otherwise. It is idle to object that the subject is really the imagined example, where two is three, and that this example is a particular event. For it is nothing of the sort. It is a supposed condition which, if it existed, would really be single, but does not exist and will never be anything real at all. § 26. The idea that a numerical subject is particular vanishes as soon as we confront it with facts. The numerical character is nothing but a character. It is nothing but an adjective, and no adjective or accumulation of adjectives will make anything else than an abstract universal. Suppose that a phenomenon is capable of division in fact or in idea. Its divisibility is a general quality, which other phenomena might also possess, and which would not difference one from the other. To be regarded as a collection of units

[006-009]
CFAP. VI.] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 17 1 summed by means of addition to a certain quantity, is an attribute not special to any single phenomenon : it can in no sense bestow uniqueness. And again, if the subject is taken as a quantity which stands in a certain fractional relation to another quantity, it is absurd to think that, on the strength of these mere qualities, you leave universals and get to existence. " If a penny is thrown one thousand times, half the number of throws will most probably give head : " we have here a purely intensional judgment There is nothing contained in it but bare universals : there is nothing but hypothetical junctions of adjectives. Of course, if you say, " This penny in half its throws will now give heads," the case is altered : but the numbers have not changed it. The subject is particular, not because it is numerical, but because it is not so, because over and above it has now been taken as a particular fact. It must be reduced by the method laid down in Chapter II. But so far as it is numerical it is already reduced, and is already nothing whatever but attributes. § 27. We may pass on to consider another superstition. If the intension signifies the meaning of a word, and the extension is the number of actual objects of which the meaning can be truly predicated, then, both extension and intension are relative to our knowledge, and naturally fluctuate with altering experience. For instance, " mammal " is a term whose meaning has changed and will change. We can fix no limit to the possible information the word may convey, for we do not know how many attributes in the end may be found to be implied in the quality of giving suck. And the number of objects we denominate " mammal " is of course not stationary. Such considerations may seem too obvious to be ignored, but their neglect has given rise to a serious mistake. In certain judgments, where the predicate is not of the " essence " of the subject, we are warned that an intensional reading is impossible. " All American citizens know the name of their President," is, we are told, to be taken in extension (Venn, Symbolic Logic, p. 395)* It can not connect one set of attributes with another set of attributes, because the connection it asserts is accidental. But the mistake here is obvious. If I know every single American citizen, so as on this knowledge


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I. to make my assertion, I surely must know by the selfsame process that the attribute I assert exists in each. After I have noticed each single citizen, it is one of his attributes and part of his -meaning to know the name of his President, and, before I have done so, I can say nothing at all. If the extension is increased, so also is the meaning. And the objection that, if the mark were part of the intension of " American/' we should assert it of American citizens in the future as well as at present, may at once be dismissed. If the subject stands also for " all Americans in the future," then the attribute becomes at once part of their meaning. But, if the subject is confined to the present time, then the mark is the meaning of " present Americans/* and you have no right to apply it beyond. The judgment is particular, not in the least because it is " accidental," but because American citizens are facts in time. It would be just as particular if I changed it into " American citizens are Americans." And of course if the citizens meant by the subject are neither real men, nor real images, but mere possibilities, the judgment is hypothetical at once, and we need not have recourse to Chapter II. to effect its reduction. § 28. This same mistake lay at the foundation of the doctrine (§ 4) that proper names have no "connotation." The meaning is not fixed, and this leads to the idea that no meaning exists. The simple enquiry "Is the denotation fixed ? " leads at once to the result that, here as everywhere, intension and extension fluctuate together. Both are relative to our knowledge. And the perception of this truth is fatal to a well-knpwn Kantian distinction. A judgment is not fixed as "synthetic" or "analytic:" its character varies with the knowledge possessed by various persons, and at different times. If the meaning of a word were confined to that attribute or group of attributes with which it set out, we could distinguish those judgments which assert within the whole one part of its contents from those which add an element from outside (p. 132) ; and the distinction thus made would remain valid for ever. But in actual practice the meaning itself is enlarged by synthesis. What is added to-day is implied to-morrow. We may even say that a synthetic


CHAP. TI] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. judgment, so soon as it is made, is at once analytic, Kant has really no need of this unfortunate division, which he seems to have inherited. The real question which he means to ask is, What kind of synthesis does each judgment contain, and what in each synthesis is the principle of unity ? § 29. To sum up the result — a proposition is read intensionally, when both subject and predicate are taken as attributes hypothetically related. Whenever the ostensible subject is no individual or collection of individuals the judgment is naturally understood in intension. Where the subject is one or more actual phenomena, the judgment can not be interpreted naturally as a hypothetical connection of attributes. But although not natural, this interpretation is legitimate, and is also necessary. When we leave first appearances and ask for truth, we find that any phenomenal judgment, whose subject refuses to be taken as content, is a judgment which Is false (Chapter II). The error we must avoid is the idea that a class is a mere aggregate of individuals. Such aggregates in my head or outside my head are barren mythology : they do not really exist. And if we mean by a class a possible aggregate of possible * individuals, we have no longer any collection. For possibilities occupy no place in the series of events connected with perception. They are not actual individuals, but merely ideal. A possible horse is anything which might conceivably possess the qualities, first of general uniqueness, and then of equine nature (Chap. VII.). Thus if the class means the attribute with reference to a hypothetical collection, to include in the class is to predicate an adjective. It is to assert an attribute, and through that attribute to assert a relation of identity and difference with any other instance. § 30. We have by this time had perhaps more than enough of the quantity of judgments, and yet there is a question we have not fully cleared up. The distinctions "universal," "p&rticular," and "singular," fall under quantity, and it may be well that we should more definitely state here the meaning in which we take these terms. The common logic, we shall * I suppose we do not always mean "judged possible. * Cf. p. 4 not*.


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. CBooK I. all remember, ranks singular and universal judgments together, and opposes the particular to both of these. A particular judgment is a judgment which fails to take the subject explicitly and avowedly in the whole of its extension ; and other judgments are considered universal because in them you have all of the subject. This arrangement we shall not proceed to discuss. It is sufficient for the technical use of the syllogism, and it is perhaps in itself not so foolish as it seems to be. We need, not however pause to examine it We may be satisfied if we succeed in making clear our own interpretation. § 31. The subject is not only beset with ambiguities, but it tends at each moment to cross the border and to enter the field of metaphysics. I am afraid it is impossible for me here to defend the interpretation which I have adopted I must content myself with trying to exhibit clearly the doctrine which seems metaphysically true, and which agrees with the logical results we have arrived at We may realize some difficulties which obscure the subject, if we state them in the form of thesis and antithesis, (i) Nothing that is real is universal, (ii) All that is real is universal, (iii) Nothing that is real is particular, (iv) Most that is real is particular. I believe in the truth of all these propositions, and will endeavour to show that they are not in conflict. But first it is better to advocate each. § 32. (i) Nothing that is real is universal* Indeed, how should it be ? What is real is substantial and exists by itself : it is individual. But the universal is nothing whatever but an adjective. It is an epithet divorced, a shadow which apart from its body is nothing, and can not exist. (ii) Everything that is real is universal. How can it be otherwise? For what exists must be individual, and the individual is no atom. It has an internal diversity of content It has a change of appearance in time, and this change brings with it a plurality of attributes. But amid its manyness it still remains one. It is the identity of differences, and therefore universal. (iii) And so we see that No real is particular. For if particular, then not individual, and if not individual, then non-existent. The particular is atomic It excludes all


CHAP. VI] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 175 difference It is itself and nothing beyond itself. And that self is simple : it is so far as it is nothing else. The true particular in respect of quality is shut up in one quality ; relations it can not be said to kave; in respect of time it has no continuance, and in space it can not occupy extension. Its existence in space is nothing but a point, in other words, is nothing spatial. Such a particular is of course not to be verified in experience. It is a metaphysical ens rationis, an abstract universal which can not be real. (iv) And it can not be real because, if not all, at least Most reality must be particular. For In existence the individuals which are real are finite. To some extent at least they are defined by their limits. It is because they repel other things that they are what they are. Exclusion by others, and exclusion of others, enters into their substance ; and where this is there is particularity. § 33. It is obvious here that in thesis and antithesis words have been used with different meanings. And this result we desired to establish. The abstract universal and the abstract particular are what does not exist. The concrete particular and the concrete universal both have reality, and they arc different names for the individual. What is real is the individual ; and this individual, though one and the same, has internal differences. You may hence regard it in two opposite ways. So far as it is one against other individuals, it is particular. So far as it is the same throughout its diversity, it is universal. They are two distinctions we make within it. It has two characters, or aspects, or sides, or moments. And you consider it from whichever side you please, or from the side which happens for the purpose of the context to be the emphatic or essential side. Thus a man is particular by virtue of his limiting and exclusive relations to other phenomena. He is universal because he is one throughout all his different attributes. You may call him particular, or again universal, because, being individual, he actually is both, and you wish to emphasize one aspect or side of his individuality The individual is both a concrete particular and a concrete universal ; and, as names of the whole from different points of view, these both are names of real existence

[006-010]
176 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Boon L § 34. The abstract universal and abstract particular are both unreal, because neither are names for the individual. They take the two aspects or characters of the whole, and, turning them into independent existences, then assert their reality. But one side of a whole can not stand by itself except in our heads. It is nothing but an adjective, an internal distinction which we try to take as substantial fact. We can all see that this holds good of abstract universal^ The oneness or identity of a man, we know, is not found when we search the series of mental phenomena. But the same is true of the abstract particular. If you take atoms seriously, and deny their extension, you find at once you are dealing with something which can not be fact Mere exclusion in space of other spaces is nothing real. A reality in space must have spatial diversity, internal to itself, and which it does not exclude. And this holds again with psychical atoms. For, as observed, they have internal multiplicity, duration in time, quality, and degree ; and as anything else they could not be observed. An atom which really was particular, which was not divisible at least in idea, could not possibly be fact. It is one aspect of fact torn away from the rest, and is nothing in itself and apart from the act which tears it away. § 35. The abstract particular and the abstract universal are mental creations, which, if taken as fact outside our heads, are different examples of the same mistake. Both are distinctions within a whole, hardened into units that stand by themselves. And not only do they spring from the same mistake, but we may even say that they are the same error. The abstract triangle in and by itself is found to exclude all further predicates (cf. p. 1 14). Determined by that division and consequent exclusion which gave it its origin, it has become particular. And the particular itself, because produced by mental separation, is really no more than an adjective divorced, or abstract universal. The dialectical method has laboured to show that, here as everywhere, insistance upon a onesided view brings out by negation the opposite onesidedness. The universal, the more we emphasize its character, divides itself the more from the whole. We make its being depend on exclusion, and it turns in our hand into its logical contrary.


CHAP. VI.] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. 177 The particular again, excluding others, and being so far as it merely excludes, is its own negative relation to other particulars. It falls beyond itself into a series of units pervaded by an universal identity, and itself has there become its own opposite. In this speculative movement, if we take it in the character it claims for itself, I neither myself profess belief nor ask it from the reader. But I think we may go so far as this, that in the end the individual is real, and that abstract universal and abstract particular are distinctions taken within that reality, which a mistake has afterwards turned into divisions and hardened into units. If we do not admit that each is a moment which, by negation of itself, affirms the other and begets the whole, we may certainly say that each has sprung from the same mistake, and is an illusion of the self-same kind, And we may muster courage, perhaps, to profess that the individual is the identity of universal and particular. § 36. We must keep in view the following distinctions. We have first the abstract universal and particular, and neither of these can exist in nature. On the other side we have the individual, and the individual is the only thing which is reaL But where this real is finite it may be taken from two points of view : it is concrete particular or concrete universal. In so far as it is a finite individual which excludes all others, so far it is a relative particular. But because it includes a diversity of content, it is therefore also a relative universal. There is here, I confess, a doubtful point I am forced to leave doubtful. It might be urged that, if you press the enquiry, you will be left alone with but a single individual. An individual which is finite or relative turns out in the end to be no individual ; individual and infinite are inseparable characters. Or again, it might be said, the individual is finite, and there can not be an absolute individual Metaphysics, it is clear, would have to take up these questions, and in any case to revise the account which is given in this chapter. But that revision must be left to metaphysics ; and for the purposes of logic we may keep the distinctions already laid down. We have (i) the real, supposed to fall into (a) absolute individual or concrete universal, (ff) relative individual or concrete universal or concrete particular ; and (ii) the unreal, consisting N

[006-011]
I78 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BOOK I. (a) of the abstract universal, and (*) of the abstract or absolute particular, § 37. We may now attempt to lay down what we mean by universal judgments. Such a judgment is one whose subject is universal. And it is obvious that here we have more than one meaning. An universal judgment may be (i) absolute, or (ii) relative. (i) In the first case we have again two divisions. Such a judgment may (a) be abstract, or again (*) may be concrete. If (a) the judgment is abstract, the ostensible subject will of course be an attribute. The statement will truly be hypothetical, since the actual subject is non-phenomenal reality. The ordinary kind of universal judgment such as "The angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles " is, as we have seen (Chap. II.), of this description. And it is universal for two reasons. The grammatical subject is an abstract universal : uhile the actual subject, the ultimate reality, is a concrete universal and is also absolute. This is the first and more ordinary kind of judgment which we are able to call absolutely universal But (6) it is necessary to mention another sort. Any statement made concerning a reality which is not considered finite will also be an absolute universal judgment. Nothing will fall outside the subject, and the predication will be categorical. I do not say that such judgments are practicable ; but they are logically possible, and must be provided for. § 38. (ii) A judgment is relatively universal where the subject is a finite individual or collection of individuals. It is universal, because the subject is the identity of its own internal diversity. In " Caesar is sick," Caesar is not affirmed to be nothing but sick : he is a common bond of many attributes, and is therefore universal. But this judgment is relative, because Caesar is one man among other men ; and, if you take him so, he himself is particular. § 39. A judgment which is absolutely particular can not exist. It would have a subject completely shut up and confined in the predicate. And such a judgment, if it came into being, would not be a judgment. For it obviously would say nothing else of the subject or predicate than themselves. "This is this " may be taken as die nearest example.

[006-012]
VI] THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS 179 A relative particular judgment is one where the subject is this or that singular or collection. It is the same as the relative universal judgment, but is taken from another side of its nature. The subject excludes all other individuals, and so is particular ; but within itself it has a diversity, and so is universal. It possesses attributes other than the predicate, and may be taken within another context. It thus serves as a middle term in reasoning, as is shown in the third of the syllogistic figures. § 40. We have seen before (Chap. IL § 45) that no logical difference separates the singular and collective judgments. It is ridiculous to think that if one individual is not universal, you reach universality by adding on others. The number of units is quite irrelevant, since, however many they become, each remains a singular* And this or that collection of individuals is as hard a particular as any individual found in the collection. Nay, from this point of view, the single individual himself turns out to be a mere collection. Considered logically they are both alike. Excluding others, they are relative particulars. Common to all their internal diversity and identical throughout it, they both alike are relative universals. § 41. No judgment has or can have a subject shut up within the limits of one single predicate. If we remain at the popular point of view, and admit those judgments where the subject is nothing but a finite phenomenon or set of phenomena, yet even these judgments are universal relatively. The subject will serve as a middle in reasoning. It is hence the identity of differences, and it could not be that if it were only particular. Every judgment is thus universal, and in the end they all may be said to be universal absolutely. For, if we exclude the possibility of non-phenomenal finite individuals, we have shown (Chap. II.) that every judgment to be true must predicate of the absolute individual, either hypothetically or categorically. And the former of these cases must, in the end, be reduced to the latter. The finite subject changes in our hands into a heap of mere adjectival conditions, and, since these conditions can never be complete, the statement loses its categorical force. But becoming hypothetical it predicates indirectly a latent N 2

[006-013]
ISO THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Boos I, quality of the ultimate reality, and so once more is categorical, true categorically of the absolute subject. § 42. All judgments are thus alike universal, but it can not be said they are universal equally. If the subject of one judgment is a whole which includes the subject of another, the first is certainly the more universal. And again, if we take two abstract judgments, they are both hypothetical, but the one may assert a more abstract connection than is affirmed in the other. The purer hypothesis, the one most set free from irrelevant conditions, will be also more true. It will predicate in a higher sense of the universal subject, and therefore may be called the more uni/ersal. But if the connection, although less concrete, is not more pure, we must then not call one judgment more universal than the other, unless we qualify universal by abstract. § 43. I will repeat in conclusion the distinctions it is right we should keep in mind. The real is individual. The merely universal or merely particular are unreal abstractions. Concrete universal and concrete particular are the individual from different points of view. But we could not say that an absolute individual was really particular, since it would have no relation to anything outside. Particular judgments, if taken categorically, are precisely the same as relative universal. The phenomenal individual, or collection of individuals, is the identity of diverse relations and qualities. Universal judgments are relative or absolute. If relative, they are the same as particular judgments. If absolute^ they are either hypothetical or categorical. In the first the ostensible subject is an abstraction : in the second it must be the ultimate reality. Particular categorical judgments may all be reduced to abstract or hypothetical universals, and these again to categorical universals. In the end all truth, if really true, is true of the ultimate non-phenomenal fact.
