---
description: "Mill's Canons of Induction and inductive proof methods"
id: ch15-the-inductive-methods-of-proof
label: "Chapter XV: The Inductive Methods of Proof"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

CHAPTER III. THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. § I. We have seen that in reality there is no such thing as an inference from the particular to a fresh particular. In this Chapter we approach a cognate superstition. In England, at least if we go with the fashion, we all have to believe in an Inductive Logic, which, starting from particular given facts, goes on to prove universal truths. Its processes, exact as the strictest syllogism, surrender themselves to the direction of Canons, reputed no less severe than Barbara and believed with reason to be far more fertile. I am afraid I may lose the reader's sympathy when I advise him to doubt the union of these qualities. § 2. To question the existence or deny the efficacy of those methods of reasoning (whatever they may be), by which modern science has made its conquests, would of course be absurd. To succeed on a great scale is to prove one's title. And it is not within the scope of this work to investigate either the nature of the processes which science employs, or the amount of evidence which it accepts as proof. What I wish to assert is that, starting from particular perceptions of sense, there is no way of going to universal truths by a process of demonstration perfectly exact, and in all its steps theoretically accurate. The induction of logicians, so far as it professes to make that attempt, I shall try to show will not stand criticism. \ 3. We need not discuss at any great length the Method which is called Complete Induction. To examine a number of individuals and to say of all what you say of each, is in the first place no inference to an universal truth. A collective term, if taken collectively, is no more universal than if taken distributively (p. 82) ; and the inference, if admitted, does not

[015-001]
330 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BK H PT. II, reach the conclusion which we have in view. But, in the second place, the inference itself is- inadmissible. In other words if you start from each and end with each, there is no process ; but if you predicate of the collection what is true of each member, there is palpable error. The Induction by way of Complete Enumeration must be rejected as either tautologous or false (cf. Book II. L Chap. II. § 5). Or again if we take the Induction in another sense, it changes its character. If first by counting you arrive at all, and then from all pass on to any, that is not a process which need be false or need merely repeat the fact it began with ; but then it is not based simply upon the particular data. If a flock of sheep have all had medicine, I know that, within the given enclosure, any sheep has been dosed, and I connect the attributes without thinking of the individuals. The conclusion is valid and is really universal ; but it implies a process which goes beyond counting. " This sheep and that sheep and the others are dosed ; " that is the first premise ; but a second is wanted. We may write it " This sheep and that sheep and the others are every sheep that is within this fold," or again " The fold does not contain any sheep but these which we have counted" It is on the strength of this premise that we go on to conclude, " If any sheep is now within the fold he must have been dosed." We seem to argue from " all " to "any/' but the " all " has ceased to be the mere collection. We have first the assurance that the whole field has been surveyed, and that we have not neglected any relevant matter. Counting is the way in which we attempt to obtain this assurance. But the enumeration, if it is to be complete, must be qualified by the privative judgment Nothing in this fold can have been uncounted. The collection is thus identified with every possible sheep that comes under the condition of being in the fold. This is one side of our process. The other side consists in an act of abstraction, and in the selective perception of one connection of attributes throughout our whole subject matter. Then, given an individual possessing the Condition of belonging to our fold, we pass at once to the other connected attribute. Now the procedure by which we get this general connection


CHAP, mj THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. 33 1 is in a sense " inductive ; " and assuredly once more it has employed counting. But then the counting by itself is not the induction, and is not by itself a generalization. The discriminative analysis, which goes with the counting, is the real agent which procures the universal, and which contains the "induction" (cf. Book III.). It is this which generalizes from the facts. But it does not go beyond one single case, since its validity depends on the privative judgment by which any folded sheep must be one case with the sheep observed. To repeat, if you confine yourself to mere counting, you get no general result If you attempt to advance from the basis of mere counting your ground is unsafe. If you proceed from a complete Enumeration, then the warrant of completeness falls outside the counting. What generalizes is the selective perception which isolates and secures the connection of adjectives. But the conclusion depends on the guarantee of completeness. It is valid because the connection is found in a whole, which is warranted to anticipate every possible case of a certain kind. § 4. But induction by way of Enumeration is not the method we are asked to believe in.* In the treatise which, partly from merits of its own and partly also from other causes, has threatened to fasten itself on us as a text book, we find the so-called Canons of Induction, collected and developed from other writers, and formulated with a show of rigorous accuracy. It is the illusory nature of these self-styled proofs that I wish to point out in the present chapter. We must not be afraid of the shadow of authority. The balance of authority among modern logicians is, I think, against the claim of the inductive proofs, and is not on their side. And perhaps already, from experience we have had, we may be prepared to find that Mr. Mill may at times be mistaken. § 5. We must remember above all things throughout this discussion that the question is not, Can discoveries be made by the use of the Methods ? They may be as efficacious in actual practice as is asserted by some, or as practically inadequate * The reader of Mill's Logic will remember, on the other hand, that with him the whole inductive process is taken to stand or fall with a proof by way of incomplete Enumeration.

[015-002]
332 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC DBs. H. Pr. H. and unstated for work as is affirmed by others. That is not the issue which we have before us. The question we have to answer here is, Are they valid ways of proof, by which we can go from facts to universals ? For that is the claim which the Canons set up, "The business of Inductive Logic is to provide rules and models (such as the Syllogism and its rules are for ratiocination) to which if inductive arguments conform, those arguments are conclusive, and not otherwise. This is what the Four Methods profess to be." J, S. Mill, Logic, Bk. III. ix. § 6. "In saying that no discoveries were ever made by the four Methods, he affirms that none were ever made by observation and experiment ; for assuredly if any were, it was by processes reducible to one or other of those methods" (ibid). "But induction is not a mere mode of investigation. " *' Induction is proof; it is inferring something unobserved from something observed ; it requires, therefore, an appropriate test of proof; and to provide that test is the special purpose of inductive logic" (Logic, III. il § 5). We can have now no doubt about the nature of this claim ; and this claim it is that we are going to discuss. § 6. I shall endeavour to show three things : first that the Four Inductive Methods can not be used if we start with mere facts, that the Canons presuppose universal truths as the material upon which the work is to be done ; and that therefore, if valid, the Methods are not inductive at all, in the sense of generalizing from particulars. In the next place I shall briefly exhibit the real nature of the reasoning used in the above Four Methods, and shall point out that its essence is not thus inductive. And finally I shall show that not one of the Canons is a test of proof, and that by every one you can bring out what is false. None of these three positions depends on the others. If the Canons are invalid, if their essence is not inductive, or if they can not be applied to individual facts — if in short any one of these contentions is established, the inductive logic is certainly refuted. And I hope to establish firmly all three. § 7, (I.) In the first place there is no doubt at all that the basis, from which we are to start in induction, consists primarily of particular given facts. I need cite no passages to establish


CHAP, III.] THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. 333 this point. We naturally expect then to see on the one side the material as yet untouched by the Methods, and on the other the operation of these agents on the crude subject matter with which they must begin. This natural expectation is doomed to disappointment. (a) A suspicion of the shock which we are destined to receive, may have come from the effrontery of the Method called " Residues." This estimable exemplar of ' our great mental operation " comes up to us placarded as one of " the means which mankind possess for exploring the laws of nature by specific observation and experience," and then openly avows that it depends entirely on "previous inductions." Unless supplied beforehand, that is, with one or more ready-rnade universal propositions, it candidly declines to work at all. We enquire of " Residues " where we are then to begin, and she says, " I do not know ; you had better ask * Difference.' " We anxiously turn to consider " Difference," and are staggered at once by the distressing extent of the family likeness, A chilling idea now steals into the mind ; but we have gone too far to retreat at once, so, resolutely turning our back upon " Residues," we begin our examination. (6) We look at the samples of the work produced, and we find the same tiling turning up everywhere. The material supplied to be dealt with by the Methods is never facts but is always universals. Sometimes an open and professed generalization is used as a starting point But, where this is not done, the material is never a particular fact It has always been subjected to such previous operation that it is able at once to be taken and used as a "case" or "instance." But this means that already it is an abstract statement, ideal and not real, capable of repetition with other environment, and without doubt universal Take the very first instance : " Let the antecedent A be the contact of an alkaline substance and an oil. This combination being tried under several varieties of circumstances, resembling each other in nothing else, the results agree in the production of a greasy and detersive or saponaceous substance " (Logic, III. viiL § i). And this is the raw material which is supplied Before I begin my induction I am to know already that under certain sets of definite

[015-003]
334 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BK. IT. PT. IT conditions exactly known, certain results have followed But, if I know this, I also know that these results will always follow given the conditions. Every one of the instances is already an universal proposition ; and it is not a particular fact or phenomenon at all.* § 8, It seems at first a strange obliquity of instinct to choose illustrations which can not illustrate.! But on turning to examine the Canons themselves, our surprise gives place to another feeling. The illustrations have been selected, not according to choice, but from hard necessity. For the Canons are such that ex hypotJiesi they can not possibly work upon any material but universal propositions. FIRST CANON. If two or more instances of tJie phenomenon under investigation have only one circumstance in common, the circumstance in which alone all tlte instances agree, is the cause (or effect) of the gvven pJienomenon. SECOND CANON. If an instance in which the phenomenon under investigation occurs, and an instance in which it does not occur, have every circumstance in common save one, tJiat one occurring only in the former; tlie circumstance in which alone tlietwo instances differ, is the effect, or tlie cause, or an indispensable part of the caziset of the phenomenon. THIRD CANON. If two or more instances in which the phenomenon occurs ftave only one circumstance in common, while two or more instances in which it does not occur have nothing in common save the absmceof that circumstance ; the circumstance in which alone the two sets of instances differ, is the effect, or the cau$e> or an indispensable part of the cause, of tJie phenomenon. FOURTH CANON. Subduct from any phenomenon such part as is known by prevmis inductions to be the effect of certain antecedents, and the * Cf. Whewell, Philosophy of Discovery, p. 263. t There is an exception which I will deal with in § 9.


CHAP. DTI THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. 335 residue of the pfienomenon is the effect of the remaining antecedents. .FIFTH CANON. Whatever phenomenon varies iu any manner wlieneuer anotfier p)ienomenon varies in some particular manner^ is Cither a cause or an effect of tJiat pfienomenon, or is connected with it through some fact of causation. (Mill, Logic, III. viii.) Consider the phrases " only one circumstance in common? " every circumstance in common but one? "nothing in common save the absence of that circumstance" Only think for a moment and realize what they mean, and then take on the other hand a given fact of perception. The fact is made a particular fact by the presence of that, the absence of which is postulated beforehand by these formulas. A universal judgment is made universal by just those attributes which are pronounced indispensable in the material for these Methods. The moment you have reduced your particular fact to a perfectly definite set of elements, existing in relations which are accurately known, there you have left the fact behind you. You have already a judgment universal in the same sense in which the result of your "induction" is univeisal. Let us take once again the very first instance. The universal which you come to is " that the combination of an oil and an alkali causes the production of soap." The universals which you start with are that an oil and alkali, if combined under conditions be and de, in each case produce soap. But how can you deny that these latter are universals ? No doubt they are impure ; but the result of the " induction " is surely not quite pure. And is an impure universal no universal at all? If you assert this, you deny the efficacy of your "induction/1 If you will not assert it, then you admit that your " inductions " are not inductive, since the base they start from is not individual facts. If we regard the formulas for a little steadily, we must surely see that an " instance " which is capable of being so formulated, has had already done upon it that work which we heard the Methods, and tJie Metlwds aloney were capable of performing. And, if so, these Methods

[015-004]
336 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Bs. II. PT. II. must retire from the field or withdraw their claims. Something like a farce has been played before us, whether we consider the airs and pretences of the Canons, or remember the promises and the boasts of their patron. § 9. But I may be reminded of and in fairness I must quote an instance, selected by the author himself, to show that his Methods can deal with common material And the instance has the greater relevancy here, since he devised it expressly to meet the objection that the conditions of his formulas could not be found in facts. "If it had been my object to justify the processes themselves as means of investigation, there would have been no need to look far off, or make use of recondite or complicated instances. As a specimen of a truth ascertained by the Method of Agreement, I might have chosen the proposition ' Dogs bark.' This dog, and that dog, and the other dog, answer to ABC, ADE. AFG. The circumstance of being a dog, answers to A. Barking answers to a. As a truth made known by the Method of Difference, 'Fire burns' might have sufficed Before I touch the fire I am not burnt ; this is BC ; I touch it, and am burnt ; this is ABC, aBC" (Logic, III. ix. 6.) The Canons we think are not hard to content if this will satisfy them. But surely their author had forgotten them for the moment By seeing three barking dogs I perceive that they " have only one circumstance in comtnon" By standing in front of a burning fireplace, and then touching the fire and being burnt, I am to know that the two facts "have every circumstance in common but one." Is not this preposterous ? Surely it is dear in the first case that Mr. Mill's way of arguing might prove just as well that all dogs have the mange, and in the second that every fireplace blisters. And these conclusions hardly seem to be sound.* If we have succeeded so far in establishing this point, then the Methods of induction are placed in this dilemma. * As a test of the writer's accuracy in small points, we may notice that in the second example there is a mistake in the working of the Method. The right conclusion is " Touching burns ; n for the fire is not the differential condition. It was there before I touched it, and if it was not there, then we have two differences and another kind of mistake.


CHAP. IIL] THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. 337 Because they presuppose universal truths, therefore they are not the only way of proving them. But if they are the only way of proving them, then every universal truth is unproved. § 10. (II.) The second assertion I have now to make good, is that the process of the Methods is not inductive, I do not mean merely that, as we have seen, they can not be applied except to universals. I mean in addition that it is not at all of the essence of their process to bring out a conclusion more general than the premises. The process is one of elimination (cf. Book IIL p. 383). By removing one part of an ideal construction you establish the remainder. And hence the result will be more abstract than the whole original datum, but it need not be more abstract than some of the premises ; on the contrary it may be less so. If five plums, two apples, and ten nuts balance the scales against three pears, two peaches, and six grapes, when I know that the nuts weigh the same as the grapes, and the apples as the peaches, I infer that the plums and the pears are equal by an ideal process of removing the rest But if this is " induction," then "* + 5 - 3=fl + 4-2, and therefore #=#," and again "A is either b or ct A is not c, and therefore it is £," will also be inductions. And if everything is induction which is not syllogism, then certainly these inferences are all inductive. But such an assumption would surely be quite erroneous. It finds its parallel in the counter*part mistake, that, because the Inductive Methods are not really "inductive," therefore they are syllogistic. The Methods are all of them Methods of Residues or Methods of Difference, and they all go to their conclusion in the self-same way. They fix a relation between certain wholes, and then, by the removal of parts of each, establish this relation between the remaining elements. In the Methods of Agreement and Concomitant Variations the principle is the same as it is in the rest In the former the data are ABC~def> AGH-dtj, AKL-dmn. It is then assumed that the d in def, dij> and dmn, can not be produced by a different cause; and hence since BC, GH, KL are different, they do not produce d. A is the residue or difference, and therefore A is the cause. The process we shall see is vicious, but, such as it is, it is elimination. In Conz

[015-005]
336 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [Bs IL PT. II must retire from the field or withdraw their claims. Something like a farce has been played before us, whether we consider the airs and pretences of the Canons, or remember the promises and the boasts of their patron. § 9, But I may be reminded of and in fairness I must quote an instance, selected by the author himself, to show that his Methods can deal with common material. And the instance has the greater relevancy here, since he devised it expressly to meet the objection that the conditions of his formulas could not be found in facts. "If it had been my object to justify the processes themselves as means of investigation, there would have been no need to look far off, or make use of recondite or complicated instances. As a specimen of a truth ascertained by the Method of Agreement, I might have chosen the proposition * Dogs bark.' This dog, and that dog, and the other dog, answer to ABC, ADE, AFG. The circumstance of being a dog, answers to A. Barking answers to a. As a truth made known by the Method of Difference, 'Fire burns' might have sufficed. Before I touch the fire I am not burnt ; this is BC ; I touch it, and am burnt ; this is ABC, aBC" (Logic, III. ix. 6.) The Canons we think are not hard to content if this will satisfy them. But surely their author had forgotten them for the moment By seeing three barking dogs I perceive that they " have only one circumstance in comtnon" By standing in front of a burning fireplace, and then touching the fire and being burnt, I am to know that the two facts "have every rirewnstance in common but one? Is not this preposterous ? Surely it is clear in the first case that Mr. Mill's way of arguing might prove just as well that all dogs have the mange, and in the second that every fireplace blisters. And these conclusions hardly seem to be sound.* If we have succeeded so far in establishing this point, then the Methods of induction are placed in this dilemma. * As a test of the writer's accuracy in small points, we may notice that in the second example there is a mistake in the working of the Method. The right conclusion is "Touching burns ; n for the fire is not the differential condition. It was there before I touched it, and if it was not there, then we have two differences and another land of mistake.


CHAP. HI.] THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. 337 Because they presuppose universal truths, therefore they are not the only way of proving them. But if they are the only way of proving them, then every universal truth is unproved. § 10. (II.) The second assertion I have now to make good, is that the process of the Methods is not inductive, I do not mean merely that, as we have seen, they can not be applied except to universals. I mean in addition that it is not at all of the essence of their process to bring out a conclusion more general than the premises. The process is one of elimination (cf. Book III. p. 383). By removing one part of an ideal construction you establish the remainder. And hence the result will be more abstract than the whole original datum, but it need not be more abstract than some of the premises ; on the contrary it may be less so. If five plums, two apples, and ten nuts balance the scales against three pears, two peaches, and six grapes, when I know that the nuts weigh the same as the grapes, and the apples as the peaches, I infer that the plums and the pears are equal by an ideal process of removing the rest But if this is " induction," then "x + 5 - 3 *=a + 4-2, and therefore x=*a? and again "A is either b or /:, A is not £, and therefore it is £," will also be inductions. And if everything is induction which is not syllogism, then certainly these inferences are all inductive. But such an assumption would surely be quite erroneous. It finds its parallel in the counterpart mistake, that, because the Inductive Methods are not really " inductive," therefore they are syllogistic. The Methods are all of them Methods of Residues or Methods of Difference, and they all go to their conclusion in the self-same way. They fix a relation between certain wholes, and then, by the removal of parts of each, establish this relation between the remaining elements. In the Methods of Agreement and Concomitant Variations the principle is the same as it is in the rest In the former the data are ABC-afe/", AGH-0S/; AKL-dmn. It is then assumed that the d in def, dij\ and dmn, can not be produced by a different cause; and hence since BC, GH, KL are different, they do not produce d. A is the residue or difference, and therefore A is the cause. The process we shall see is vicious, but, such as it is, it is elimination In ConZ

[015-006]
338 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [H*. H. P*. IL comitant Variations we seem to have A^C- &ef '/ and then, when A1 becomes A2, we have A2BC-A£ From this whole take away lKC-lef, 2BC-V and the conclusion is A-d The principle involved is the same throughout, and the apparent failure to see this, and the setting down of two or three co-ordinate axioms for the different Methods, is another sign that the writer had never got really inside his subject. The different Methods are different applications of one single process, and since the premises eliminated may be just as abstract as the conclusion left behind, this process can hardly be called " inductive." § 11. Having seen first of all that the Canons will not work unless applied to universal ; having seen, in the second place, that within these limits their procedure is not essentially one of generalization, we come now to the third of our objections. The Methods are vicious and the Canons are false. (III.) I do not mean to say that, for all the purposes of discovery, the flaws in the Methods amount to serious mistakes. Such a contention would lie beyond the scope of my volume. It is certain, however, that independent logicians, such as Dr. Whewell and Professor Jevons in our own country, and Professors Lotze and Sigwart in Germany, have taken a view of the process of scientific discovery which is not favourable to the claims of the Four Methods. But whatever n>ay be the usefulness of these Methods, the point here at issue is their validity as proofs. What I wish to show is that they will not prove anything beyond this or that individual case. They pass to their more general conclusion by illegitimate assumptions. § 12* I think the reader will agree that, if a method will prove a false conclusion from premises which are true, then that method must be logically vicious, and its Canon, which serves as a test, must be false. Now it is stated by Mr. Mill himself that the Method of Agreement will prove false conclusions (Logic, Chap. X). The Method is "uncertain" and has an " imperfection." But it still continues to figure as a proof, and the Canon is left standing in its naked falsity. We also have " axioms " implied in this Method, which can hardly be true if the Method is false, and which yet are left


CHAP. III.] THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF, 339 exposed to the daylight. We are told (Chap. X. § i) that in chapters preceding false assumptions have been made, and yet the chapters with all their contents are recommended to us still as a sort of Gospel. And here I must frankly confess myself at a loss. Can the writer really have known that all his Canons were false statements ? Whether he did or did not, I will not here enquire, for the discussion would not be likely to profit us. It will be perhaps convenient for the sake of argument to assume that he did not know the full vice of all his Methods, The Method of Agreement starts from the premises ABC -~def,* AGH — dij\ A!KL,-~dmn: and its conclusion is that A is the cause of d. The principle it goes on is (as we saw before) that whatever is different in the different cases can be eliminated. And this principle is false, since a consequence, such as d) need not always follow from the same antecedent The generalization is therefore vicious, and the Canon which regulates it is false. The axioms also, given in § 2 of the same eighth chapter, are no less false. To make them true you must qualify them by adding " in this one case/* But that means you must destoy their generalizing power, § 13. The Method of Difference is no less vicious.f From the premises ABC-^, BC-^f, it goes to the conclusion that A is the cause or an indispensable part of the cause of d But this conclusion is fatally unsound. A may be here a single factor in the production of d, the presence of which is quite accidental. The rule may be for d to be produced entirely without A, and for A to be present without producing d. The foundation of the Method % "that whatever can not be eliminated, is connected with the phenomenon by a law " is quite false, unless we add to it " in this one case" and thereby make it ineffectual for the purpose of generalizing, The Method of Joint Agreement and Difference is essen* I have of course altered Mill's lettering. If his letters mean anything, they involve a flagrant fetttto; and if they do not, their suggestion must tend to confuse us. t For further explanation see Book III. I. Chap. III. $ n, foil. t There is no material difference between this and what is wronglygiven, in the same § 3, as different, and as the ground of the Method of Agreement ; for you have postulated a connection in your premises. I have given above the real ground of the Method of Agreement. Z 2

[015-007]
340 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Bs. H. PT, II tially the same, and presents the same flaw. Its premises consist of ABC-^, AGH-^y; AKL-^#, BC-c£ GH-^', KL - mn. It infers from these the conclusion A - d. The mistake is the same as that which vitiated Difference. The right conclusion is that, in these three cases, A has gone to produce d. In the Method of Residues the process is the same, and is bad for the same reason. From ABC-^/J B-/> C-*, the Method goes on at once to A-dl But it could do so legitimately, only if it excluded the possibility of B or C, or both, having influenced, and been influenced by, A Otherwise the conclusion like all the rest is vicious, and its Canon is false, unless qualified by the words " in this one case!' We come in the end to Concomitant Variations, and the principle of this has, I think, not been formulated with the desirable exactness. In the first place the words whenever in the Canon itself and invariably in the Axiom assigned to it are both ambiguous. If they mean that the groups of elements are causally connected, then this must rest upon a previous Method, and not upon mere facts. And in the second place, if we consider the process as a conclusion from these idealized premises, still it is impossible even then to demonstrate a result which will hold beyond this or that case (or cases). The premises appear to be A^C-dP^, AJBC~d?V, A3BC —d*ef, and the conclusion arrived at seems to be A-


CHAP. IEL] THE INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. 341 § 14, I have shown that, if used in order to generalize beyond this or that individual instance as prepared for treatment, the Methods are vicious, and their Canons false. Their eltminative process will only show that the whole antecedent has been concerned in producing the whole consequent (cf. Book III). The attempt to go further and, by isolating the factors, to transcend the limits of the premises supplied, we have seen has broken down at all points. In the premises ABC-^, BC-^, you are supposed to know that def is connected with ABC, and ef with BC : what you not yet know is if, in ABC, A is really a factor. For it might be irrelevant, and BC without it might produce def. But now, having BC — ef, and resting on the assumption which we call the Principle of Identity (Book I. Chap. V:),you are sure that, if BC-^is once true, it will be true for even And you proceed from this to argue that "QC-def must be false. For to produce def B must have been altered : and since in ABC — def the result is produced with no possible alteration except mere A, A there must be relevant to the presence of def. Hence A in this case (of ABC — def) must be, directly or indirectly, relevant to d. But you must not go further, and try in any way to specify the connection. For you can not do that without closing possibilities, and assuming something not given in your premises.* And we must not forget that even this conclusion depends on our having assumed in the premises that, in ABC — def, d is not irrelevant Unless we are perfectly sure beforehand that the whole def has been produced by ABC, we can not advance one single step. This shows once more how absurd it is to imagine that the Methods can be applied to particular facts. They depend entirely on such an artificial preparation of the material supplied, as has already reduced it to the form of an universal. It would be waste of time to dwell further on the detail of the Four (or Five) Methods, since the process in all is the same at bottom.t * I should 'like here, and on the whole subject, to refer to Lotze's Logik, II. VII. t I must refer to the following Book for an account of inference by way of Elimination.

[015-008]
342 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. CB*. H. Pr. H. § 15, We have seen that the Methods are not "inductive/' since they will not generalize beyond the given instance. They fail again of being "inductive/' since they can not be applied to simple facts. They will not work unless they are supplied with universals. They presuppose in short as their own condition the result they profess alone to produce. ^ Once more, the essence of their procedure is as much deductive as it is "inductive." The conclusion in some cases has less generality than some of the premises. On any one of these grounds (and I hope on all of them) we may set down the Inductive Logic as a fiasco. And, if I am told that these flaws, or most of them, are already admitted by Inductive Logicians, I will not retract the word I have used But to satisfy the objector I will give way so far as to write for fiasco, confessed fiasco* § 1 6. If it really is the case that the Methods are not sound ; if it really is the case that the Canons are not true ; if it really is the case that "induction" is not proof, and that he has all along known this, and been well aware of it— in that case I would suggest to the Inductive Logician that he has provoked a possible harsh remark. And however mistaken that harsh judgment might be, yet I can not help thinking that it would be better if he were to tell the public, what they certainly do not know, and the opposite of which his too large professions have led them to believe. But if, as I suppose, the Inductive Logician himself makes the mistake which his public has accepted— if, that is, while admitting that, like all things human, his Methods have " imperfections," he has no idea that, taken as proofs, they are radically vicious— in that case I will end by expressing the hope of a final agreement By abridging claims that will not stand criticism, and by reforming the root and principle of his fabric, he will bring no ruin to the bulk of his edifice. Even if we confined ourselves to Mr. Mill's Logic, we should find that, when his so-called Four Inductive Methods were wholly removed, and his inference from mere particulars banished as a misunderstanding, the more valuable and even the larger part of his discussions on Science would remain untouched.
