---
description: "New examples and analysis of inferential reasoning"
id: ch18-fresh-specimens-of-inference
label: "Chapter XVIII: Fresh Specimens of Inference"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

[018-001]( 36$ ) CHAPTER II. FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. § I. In the preceding Book we possessed an advantage we no longer enjoy. Those examples of reasoning, upon which we worked, were too clear to be doubted. No unprejudiced mind could deny the fact of their being inferences, and the issue was confined to the question of their principle and inner nature. But at the point which we have reached, doubt is possible on all sides. Not only will the character of the specimens we produce be matter of debate, but their claim to be specimens will be disallowed. We must ask not merely, To what kind of inferences do they belong, but, Are they really inferences at all ? With this prospect in sight a preliminary reflection, before we argue, seems likely to be useful. What test shall we apply, when any claim to inference is sent in ? Where the facts are not palpable it will clearly be a gain if we are able to agree to an explicit Canon, for we then shall have something to which we can appeal in the course of the discussion. § 2. We may say that inference is the same as reasoning, that to reason without inferring, or to infer without reasoning, does not sound possible. But when do we reason ? Do we always reason when a judgment is given as a judgment for which we have a reason ? If that reason were taken as a fact merely got by simple perception, then this question would probably be answered in the negative. But suppose our reason is no fact of sense, but is another judgment ; not something that exists but some knowledge that we have of it — the answer surely will in that case be different. We should be said to reason where a truth is given as a reason for belief in another truth. In other words where, instead of affirming that S is P, we say S must be P, wherever we have a necessary truth, there

[018-002]
366 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC, [BK. in. PT. I is reasoning and inference. We apply the same test^ in a different form when we turn to the use of "why" and « because." If these have a sense, if it is possible to ask Why, and then to answer Because, in all such cases we seem to have an actual inference. There is judgment as to which a doubt can be raised, and that doubt is satisfied, not by pointing to a fact, but by reference to a truth. There is a mental operation, in which a result is seen to follow from an ideal datum. And we may agree that wherever this mark exists, an inference is present § 3. And there is another mark which perhaps we may use. Where illusion exists it seems to arise from mistaken inference ; for the senses are infallible because they do not reason, and fallacy can come from nothing but inferring. If this is true, then possibility of error means presence of inference, and we may employ the first as a test of the second. But we are treading here upon dangerous ground. It may be denied that, when water is hot to one hand and cold to the other, the mistake that exists is a fallacy of inference ; and the denial could not well be discussed in these pages. We can not assume that in every case where error is possible, reasoning exists, and so we are disappointed in our canon ; but for all that we have an admitted indication. It will be agreed that, where we discover mistake, we shall not be wrong in looking for inference, and that, to some extent at least, we may expect to find it § 4. Armed with this understanding we may begin at once, and may take up the claims which our first Chapter found were demanding a scrutiny. They make no pretence to exhaust the array of possible applicants, and they enter in no systematic order. Still we hope, and believe, that the worst has shown itself, and we at least do not know of more terrors in the background. (A) The first to come in are the three-term constructions ; (i) those where elision is simply not used, and (ii) those operations where we also go to a quality. What reply shall we make to each of these ? (i) I cannot think of any way by which to escape the claim of the first If A is given to the right of B, and 3 again to


CHAP. II.] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 367 the right of C, and I therefore judge that the terms are arranged as C — B— A, this is clearly an inference. I did not know it before, and I get it by putting two truths together. And if this is not an inference, why is it an inference when I go to C — A ? No answer can be given ; we are forced to admit that C — B-A is inferred ; and yet it is not an inference according to our formula. § 5 (ii) But there follows close a further consequence. We have reasoned to a whole C — B — A, and this whole may have a new quality x* But, if so, we have reasoned from terms in relation, C — B and B — A, to no new relation but to the presence of a fresh quality; and hence once more our formula has broken down. A friend of our youth may be called upon here to supply us with an instance. I sail round land, and reconstruct my course by a synthetic process, and the whole shore that I combine is then interpreted as belonging to an island. A — B, H A B-C, C - D, D - F, F-H become, when united, F


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. CBs. HL PT. I. until we came upon one which would do. But these attempts were all inferences from hypothetical data, and we went from the construction direct to a quality, and so to a judgment If the quality was aesthetic that made no difference ; for we did not say of the whole psychological image, That nowhmts me, or gives me a pleasant sensation. We said of the content, which we had in the premises, That leads and must lead to a certain result. And this was an inference, which certainly fell outside our formula. It is clear, I think, that when trying experiments in the actual world by combining and dividing real things, or by drawing upon paper, we may be surprised by qualities which we did not anticipate. And the same must be true of ideal experiment In both cases, the interrelation being given, we perceive a quality which comes from that, and which is more than and beyond the bare interrelation. But in the second case the construction, being got by an ideal process, is itself an inference, and its result is also nothing but a conclusion. But it is not any fresh relation of the original data; it is an issuing quality. § 6. It seems clear that reasoning does not always give us a new relation of the terms we began with. Our formula has now too palpably lost its virtue ; and virtue being gone, we may proceed less anxiously. The advances of those more audacious claimants, who showed their heads in the foregoing Chapter, may be calmly received There is no longer any absolute presumption against them, and the reception of each is a matter not of principle, but of choice and convenience. (B) In this spirit we may meet the approaches of Arithmetic, the claim of which I will bring in indirectly. An introduction is certainly not required, but it may serve to make the change less startling. We saw long ago that, when spatial relations with points of identity were forced on our attention, we could put them together and find a new relation. We have lately seen that, instead of a relation, these premises could supply us with an unknown quality. Given lines A — B, B — C, C— A, we can A construct B/\^ and from *at construction get the quality


CHAP II.] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 369 possessed by a certain triangle. In this case the conclusion is categorical and necessary. But there was something else which we hardly glanced at. We may have three lines such as A ~ B, C - D, E - F. In these, as they are given us, there are no points marked identical, and we have no given reason for putting them together. But we may do so if we choose ; if their lengths do not forbid it, we may arrange them ideally, combining them into the form of a triangle, and thus endowing them with a certain quality. We have here an intuition which follows on a synthesis, and the doubt which arises is, Have we an inference ? If we have one what is it ? It is not " AB, CD, EF have x" That would be false, since they are not combined, and since they fatvenot together any quality at all. And again the inference can not run thus, " AB, CD, EF, when their terminal points are identified, have x? That certainly is true, but then it is not an inference. For, though the quality is perceived in an ideal arrangement, it has not been got by it The combination in this case would not be such a construction as was made to get the judgment, and therefore connects the judgment with the original data. The judgment is passed on a whole that is found, and it says nothing about the ideal composition of that whole. And for this reason it can not be a • concision. The real conclusion is " AB, CD, EF may be combined, and when combined they have a quality x? or " If AB, CD, EF are manipulated in a certain way, they give rise to jr." The lines plus my arranging activity are the premises, and the construction with its quality follows. This has all the marks of inference, but it obviously differs from the inference we got from A — B, B — C, C— A. In this case the construction follows from the data themselves, but in the other example it does not follow, unless an arbitrary arrangement of my own is added. My free manipulation has taken the place of the compulsory synthesis through identity of the terminal points B, C, A. The lines need not have any point that is identical, and I am not obliged to put them together. The premises are hypothetical, and the conclusion is thus arbitrary. But it still is an inference, for if 2 B


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC, [Bs. TIL PT. I. the lines are combined, then the quality must come because they are combined. • r § 7 This foregoing section has been no digression, for we may consider both addition and subtraction as cases of the process we have just sketched Let us clear our ideas by asking what we mean by the simple proposition " Twice one is two." Do we mean to assert that one unit and another unit are the integer two ? Such a statement would be false, for the integer is more than one unit considered along with another unit There is a quality in the whole, which belongs to the units first when combined and made into an integer. It is false then that "one and one are two." They make two, but do not make it unless I put them together ; and I need not do so unless I happen to choose. The result is thus hypothetical and arbitrary. § 8. There is a mistake we must correct before we proceed. The reader may (or may not) be aware, that the logical^ and temporal relation which exists between degree and quantity is a difficult subject It is a question that could not be fully discussed in a narrow compass, and on which we can offer but a brief observation. You may use "degree" in more than one sense. You may understand by the term a scale of qualities which are related explicitly to a scale of quantities, and which depend on this scale. Or again you may mean a scale of differences, which are simply felt as more or less of a certain thing, but which are not referred to any scale of numbers of units. If we adopt the former sense of degree, then both in time and logically the knowledge of number, or the power of counting, precedes the knowledge of that scale of intensities which stands in explicit relation to the varying units. Quantity here will precede degree. But, if we use the latter meaning and understand by degree the mere vague sense of a more and a less, of a rise and a fall, a swelling and a shrinking, then without any doubt degree comes first and quantity follows. The mistake we referred to springs partly from the neglect of these metaphysical abstractions, and partly from blindness to palpable facts. It is assumed, that the perception of differences in quantity implies the power of counting units.


CHAP. II] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. There is a well-known tale, not worth repeating, of the experiment which proves that a magpie can count up to two or three, but not any further. Thus if three men go in and but two come out, the bird knows that all have not been accounted for, and therefore it counts. But if so, and if the power to perceive the difference of more food and less food, a larger beast and a smaller beast, demonstrate counting, few animals will not count If again the ability to distinguish part from the whole, and, when but part appears, to expect the rest, shows the practice of arithmetic — then the higher animals are all arithmeticians, and all habitually add and subtract. This perhaps may not seem a reductio ad absurdiim, but then this is not all. Though the higher (and even lower) animals can all count, there are races of men who can hardly count at all, and are only beginning in the rudest way. But these very savages, who are staggered by the difference between three and four, and are thus led into errors which would never occur to an average dog — on the other hand count much better than we could. Take one from a flock of forty sheep, and in a moment they perceive the difference. They have finished counting before we could have begun. And on this view of the subject I think it is clear that there is something unexplained. The mistake lies in the failure to see that number, in the proper sense, is a late product of abstraction, and that, long before this could come into the world, the perception of more and less, of the whole and the parts, already existed. They existed in an unanalyzed qualitative form. § 9, Now this observation has important consequences, for it points to the conclusion that, in considering number, we have no right to strike out the qualitative side. If the confused feeling of difference in degree between wholes came first, and these wholes were then afterwards analyzed into parts, and these parts were then once again reduced to equivalent units — if this was the psychological process, as I think we may agree it clearly must have been — then I venture to argue that this shows we are wrong, if we take quantities to consist in nothing but units, somehow taken together and barely co-existing. Even when we get down to abstract 2 B 2

[018-003]
372 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [BE. in PT. I. number, each integer must be more than units and units. As an integer it will have an additional quality which results from addition and disappears on subtraction. One and one are not the same as two, two and two are not the same as four, nor are they the same as three and one. For integers are individuals ; each has an unity which makes it a whole, and joins together its units by a higher bond than mere co-existence before the attention. If that bond is a residuum of spatial perception or comes from elsewhere, we need not here consider. Enough that it exists, that each integer is one whole, with qualitative relations of higher and lower persisting between it and other integers. Hence we may^say that mere counting is not the integers; it does but vwke them. It progressively produces and destroys them as it goes up and down the scale, The integer then is different from its units. To say of the units that they are the integer, is not a tautology but a dowmight false statement That they become the integer, on the other hand is true.and is not a tautology. § 10. Addition and subtraction produce new resulfs ; they are ideal operations which give conclusions, and justify what they give ; they are palpable inferences. The reasoning which they employ no doubt may be very simple in its nature and very easy to disparage. "It is the work of a machine," we may hear the reproach, uand not of a brain'* But if, starting from certain data^ it is a brain that by means of ideal experiment procures a fresh judgment, we must call this reasoning ; for we do not know what else we can call it. And the reproach, we must add, betrays a prejudice that is not philosophical. The operation is the analogue of that arbitrary arrangement in ideal space which we mentioned above (§ 6). We start with the units one and one, we freely rearrange them, and we end with the result of integer two. But the result is hypothetical, for we can not say, one and one must give two. They may be arranged in such a way that two must appear, or, if I choose to manipulate one and one, then two conies out Hence there is nothing categorical. One and one, if I leave them alone, are one and one. I may handle them or not at


CHAP, IL] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 373 my private pleasure, and when I handle them, I need not add them. They do not necessitate their own addition, it Is only when I add them that necessity appears. But then they must become two, and I have made an inference. This is still more patent if we consider subtraction. We might say "Three is one," or "The integer three is one of its units ; " and of course such a proposition would be false. But the integer turns of necessity to one unit, when I first break it up and then set aside two of its component parts. Three, if two be subtracted, is obviously one ; but this result is hypothetical. We are not obliged to analyze the datum and to set part on one side ; and we are in no way compelled to get the conclusion unless we have taken this arbitrary step. § ii. These inferences, it is clear, will not come under the formula we set up. They suit it no better than did that ideal arrangement of wholes in space, which gave a new quality. But we need not dwell on this point, for there is something which presses for more serious attention. "The above account," it may fairly be said, "is not a right view of addition and subtraction, for these give a conclusion which is true categorically. Arithmetical judgments are in no sense arbitraiy, nor, given the data, is the inference conditional. Bricks and mortar, if the builder choose, may make a house ; but one and one are equal to two, whether we choose or do not choose to have it so." I admit the distinction and desire to endorse it, but it is in no sense contrary to the statement we have made ; for, up to this time, we have never said a word about equality. What we wanted was to emphasize a side of arithmetical processes, which, if neglected, makes them obscure or tautologous ; and, whatever else is right, it still remains true that addition is an inference of the kind we described. It does prove hypothetically that, if units are added, they become something different; and for the right understanding of the subject this truth is all important. Having made this clear, we may now proceed to regard the process from a different side, and to consider it as a categorical proof of equality in difference. § 12. What is equality ? It is certainly not the same as mere identity, nor would it be safe for any one except a

[018-004]
374 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BK. HI PT. I " powerful thinker " to be guilty of such elementary confusion. Because things are the same they need not be equal ; and when they are equal, they need not be the same in more than one aspect Equality is sameness in respect of quantity, it is a relation between things that may otherwise be different, but are identical in regard to their number of units. Or, more accurately, we may call it the identity of the units, as units, in two different things. This definition certainly gives rise to problems which in another place I should be glad to discuss ; but for present purposes it will be found sufficient One and one are equal to two because the mere units in both are the same, and three minus two is equal to one because on both sides the unit is identical. This result is true, and it seems categorical, and we therefore are led to ask once more how we reach the result. If the conclusion is not hypothetical, were we right in taking the operation to be arbitrary ? Yet, on the other hand, how do I know that one and one are equal to two ? I know it because when I add the units, they become two, and when I analyze two it becomes the units, I thus see the identity of the units throughout, but I see it in consequence of a free manipulation which I might have omitted. So again in subtraction I infer that 3 — 2=1. But how do I reach this? I break up the three into three separate units ; I break up the two in the selfsame manner, and, removing it, I perceive that two units of the three have been removed. One Is left, and that as an unit is precisely the same as any other one. The conclusion is necessary, but the operation is optional, for there was nothing which demanded my analysis and comparison. The result has thus depended on my arbitrary choice. § 13. We seem left with this difficulty — the result is unconditional, though the process on which it depends is arbitrary. And this difficulty for the present must be simply accepted We are indeed only too ready to accept it or ignore it The operation in arithmetic, which gives the result, is supposed to have no influence upon it ; there is a postulate that, so long as you do not alter the number of the units, you may do what you please with them, and whatever you bring out is, unconditionally true. The process is a mere prepara 


CHAP. II.] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 3/5 tion of the data, and it demonstrates an element which already was there. It is not an arbitrary alteration of my own, since it does not alter the element at all ; it constructs no artificial and novel spectacle, it does but remove an obstacle to iny vision. In other words the relation of equality between any quantities is supposed to exist, and the judgment which expresses it is supposed to have independent validity. Whether I see it or not, it is taken to be true, and the way in which I get to it affects it in no way. Thus my inferring is optional and entirely arbitrary — but the inference itself is eternal truth. It is my process from a datum which enables me to see what is true of that datum, yet it is only my insight, and it is not the truth, which depends on that process. One and one = two, not because I add them, but because they are equal. , § 14. The general relation of the ground of knowledge to the ground of reality will vex us hereafter, and we will not anticipate ; for our present task is simply to find the process which is used. It consists, as we have seen, in a free rearrangement, resulting in a perception of quantitative identity, which is taken as true independent of the process. The new result, which is got by experiment with the units, is held valid of those units apart from the experiment. And we do not propose in the present chapter to question this result ; but, the process being such, our wish is to know if it really is an inference, and again if it will come under the formula which we first accepted but now hold suspect. That it really is inference we can not long doubt We might indeed dispute for ever about " twice one is two ; " for, when a product has been learnt before it was understood, and now comes to the mind as so ready-made, self- apparent, and obvious, it is hard to see that it ever has been a painful inference, a slow result of time for which ages had to wait But more complex instances soon convict us of our error. The moment we desert the table we have learnt, we find there is a process which proves the result, and in which mistakes are only too easy. And this process is the movement of an ideal experiment which gives a judgment we had not got

[018-005]
376 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [B*. m PT. I. before. But, unless we have somehow apart from the facts decided In our minds what reasoning is to be, then this must be reasoning and its result must be an inference But is it an inference according to our formula ? That at least it can not be, for it establishes no relation between the terms of the premises. On the contrary the relation, which appears in the conclusion, has one terminal point which never appeared in the data at all. Our poor formula at this rate will hardly be able to claim respectful treatment in the future, and what presumption there is seems against its virtue. § 13. Spaces and times admit of treatment by a similar process. If an optional arrangement of superposition, division into parts, or construction into a whole by arbitrary additions, results in relations of equality or inequality, this result is taken as a categorical conclusion. The alterations which we introduce do not alter the fact as long as they do not alter the magnitude and it is a postulate that no change of place or context, no analysis or synthesis, can make any difference to the relations of quantity. The operations (we assume) are external to the data themselves ; the work done upon them is really work that falls outside them, and that but renders them apparent as they were before. The truth is shown to us by a process which does not give the reason why the thing actually is so. The demonstration removes a barrier from our sight, or provides us with artificial vision, but it does not produce the fact from its elements. Yet we can not doubt that here once more we have an inference ; an inference again which we have failed to provide for, since it can not be reduced to interrelation. When I show, for instance, by superposition that one triangle is equal to another, what third term is it that connects the couple, or \vhat syllogism will express the actual process ? I know that an application of reckless torture will reduce anything you please to any possible form ; but the fact remains otherwise. We have here an intuition of comparison, taking place by means of free ideal rearrangement This is an inference, and it is a new kind of inference. § 1 6. (C) And new itself it suggests fresh innovation, for it leads us to ask if comparison is reasoning, and if, whenever


CHAP II.] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 377 we compare, we may be said to infer. The suggestion is contrary to our established ideas, but how can we repulse it ? We start from data, we subject these data to an ideal process, and we get a new truth about these data. The new truth, so far as our knowing it is concerned, depends on the operation, is because of it, and would not be unless for that reason ; but if so, we surely must call it a conclusion. Take an instance ; we have ABC, DBF, and we may not know that they are the same in any point. We then inspect them with a desire to discover sameness, general or special ; that is we attend to them from a certain point of view. We compare them in respect of identity, either in quality or quantity or again in some more special developement No doubt it is not easy to lay down the precise character of the process employed, but there certainly is some process. There is an ideal operation on ABC, DBF, and that operation presents us with a judgment. We did not know that ABC, DBF were alike, now we know that they possess the point B in common, and this intuition depends on the operation. The conclusion runs "If ABC, DBF are compared they are alike in B ; " and, since the operation is assumed to make no difference to the fact, we may say categorically, " The two are alike." No doubt we may question the validity of this inference, but I do not see how we can deny its existence. On the other hand it is not a relation between two given terms that is seen in a construction through identity. We shall perhaps not be wrong to place under this head the copulative process " A is C, B is C, and tlwrefore both are C." So far as this connects, and does not baiely conjoin, it concludes to an identity between A and B. § 17. And what holds of the comparison which establishes identity, must hold too of the process which brings out difference. If distinction is an ideal operation which demonstrates new truth, that is truth new to its, then so far it must be reasoning. We may illustrate simply ; what is really BaB3B3 has been taken throughout as simply B. We subject this datwn B to an ideal process, the nature of which we do not at present discuss, and the result is B1B2B3. Now since the


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. CB*- HL PT. I operation is arbitrary the product is hypothetical, but because once again the operation is assumed not to alter the datum, as it really is— we take the product as categorical. The marks have been found, and therefore they are. True there is no distinction unless things are first different ; but for us there can be no difference which does not follow on distinction. It becomes apparent and is shown to exist by virtue of a process, which must therefore be taken as a demonstration and a genuine inference. A difficulty, we admit, besets the operations of distinction and identification ; for they do not, it may be said, give the actual reason of the real truth in which we are finally landed. Nay they do not even profess to give it, and we may say that they even protest above all things that they demonstrate nothing that was not there without them. This difficulty, which has bearings we perhaps do not suspect, will engage us hereafter. But for our present purpose we must insist on the other side of the .process. We have reached a result by ideal experiment ; and of this we can say, Though it be not made true by our operation, yet we know it for that reason, and it is for us because of our activity. But, if so, then once again we have reasoned § 1 8. (D) It would seem that we may reason, though we do not give the reason of the fact itself, and when our demonstration less establishes than recognizes. Mere consistency now prompts us to raise the doubt if recognition is not always reasoning. And perhaps to our surprise we discover that this is really the case, for to find that AB is C, and to recognize it as such, implies a process of ideal redintegration. I start with AB, and the function of ideal synthesis BC supplies the construction from which I proceed. Even where I merely recall the name, or where I can but say that somewhere I must have seen that face before, there is still a conclusion. The connection may be dim and the element that is added may be trifling or obscure ; but whatever it is, we get it by a synthetic process of restoration, and this is leasoning. "Yes, reasoning," I may be told, "but normal reasoning and with the usual three terms. First AB and TJC, then a whole ABC, and an elision leaving the result A-C" But, I


CHAP. HJ FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 379 answer, In what sense is BC a premise ? It is by no means an original datum. Indeed it is not a datum at all ; for it is a function which does not come before the mind, but which presents the result of its action on the only datum that we possess. If BC is a premise, it is a premise in no usual sense of the term. We have at any rale found a case that has not been yet provided for, and a case where the inference seems quite indisputable* We may add to this section a remark on the hypothetical judgment This is always an inference. I do not simply mean that it is an inference, when we first say, " If anything is B it is C, but here A is B, and therefore it is C." The inference I mean is one which dispenses with the explicit statement of the general principle, A is merely supposed ; it is offered in experiment, as an attribute of reality, and from this we go on to arrive at C without any other premise which comes before the mind. This process is, I think, an inference of a kind we did not anticipate ; but it hardly can claim an independent position. Where it does not fall under the foregoing head of Recognition, it will find its place in the ensuing section. § 19. (E) The subject of this section is forced upon us, I should be very glad in a work of this kind to say nothing about the Dialectic Method, but I can find no excuse for passing it over, for it is irresistibly suggested by the inference which we had to notice last I am far from implying that the Method falls under the previous section, and that it is a mere process of recognition. Such a view, if adopted, would annihilate its claims, and my object is here not to criticize or to advocate. I wish simply to consider what sort of operation is performed by Dialectic, assuming that it has a real way of its own. If we make that assumption, we pass naturally from the process of Recognition on to the Dialectic movement Like recognition this starts from a single datum, and without the help of any other premise it brings out a fresh result, Yet the result is not got by mere analysis of the starting-point, but is got by the action of a mental function which extends the datum through an ideal synthesis. So far the method of

[018-006]
3g0 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [BK. HL PT. I. Dialectic is precisely the same as the common recognition which works by means of redintegration. But now comes a difference; the ideal synthesis, which in Dialectic meets and supplements the starting-point, is not reproduction from past perception; or rather, and to speak more correctly, it is not mtretysuch ideal reproduction. Even though the synthesis which it brings into play does repeat a connection we have got from presentation, there still is more than bare repetition. The function is felt not as what the mind docs because it has thus been trained to perform : the naturalness seems more than the ease of habit, and the necessity above any vis mertia. And the cause of the difference we find is this ; the message in the one case seems external tidings which are so believed, since thus received ; but in the other it seems like a revelation Of ourselves, which is true because we have the witness in our own experience. The content in one case, itself irrational, seems to come to our reason from a world without, while in the other it appears as that natural outcome of our inmost constitution, which satisfies us because it is our own selves. This internal necessity, of the function and of its product, is the characteristic of the Dialectical Method and constitutes its claim and title to existence. § 20. I do not propose to criticize that title, and prefer to attempt the removal of misunderstandings. One of these we have already noticed ; you make no answer to the claim of Dialectic, if you establish the fact that external experience has already given it what it professes to evolve, and that no synthesis comes out but what before has gone in. All this may be admitted, for the question at issue is not, What can appear and How comes it to appear ? The question is as to the manner of its appearing, when it is induced to appear, and as to the special mode in which the mind recasts and regards the matter it may have otherwise acquired. To use two technical terms which I confess I regard with some aversion — the point in dispute is not whether the product is a posteriori^ but whether, being a posteriori, it is not a priori also and as well And misunderstanding on this head has caused some waste of time. The second misunderstanding is of a different nature. An


CHAP. IL] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 381 idea prevails that the Dialectic Method is a sort of experiment with conceptions in vactto. We are supposed to have nothing but one single isolated abstract idea, and this solitary monad then proceeds to multiply by gemmation from or by fission of its private substance, or by fetching matter from the impalpable void. But this is a mere caricature, and it comes from confusion between that which the mind has got before it and that which it has within itself. Before the mind there is a single conception, but the whole mind itself, which does not appear, engages in the process, operates on the datum> and produces the result. The opposition between the real, in that fragmentary character in which the mind possesses it, and the true reality felt within the mind, is the moving cause of that unrest which sets up the dialectical process. § 21. We may understand that process in two different ways. On one view the method advances on the strength of negation ; the synthesis, which unites and adds a fresh element, comes ahvays from denial, and from the contradiction of the starting-point. Every truth is taken to have two sides, and to consist in the assertion of a pair of correlatives, each of which is the logical negation of the other. Each of these by consequence, to assert itself, denies the other; but at the same time each depends on what it denies, and so reasserts it. Affirming itself, it thus on the other hand is driven to affirm its own negation, and so becomes its own opposite by a selfseeking self-denial. Or, more correctly, the whole, which is both sides of this process, rejects the claim of a one-sided datum, and supplements it by that other and opposite side which really is implied — so begetting by negation a balanced unity. This path once entered on, the process starts afresh with the whole just reached. But this also is seen to be the one-sided expression of a higher synthesis ; and it gives birth to an opposite which co-unites with it into a second whole, a whole which in its turn is degraded into a fragment of truth. So the process goes on till the mind, therein implicit, finds a product which answers its unconscious idea ; and here, having become in its own entirety a datum to itself, it rests in the activity which is self-conscious in its object. This great ideal of self-developcmcnt and natural evolution led in Hegel's


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [B*. HI. PT. I. hands to most fruitful results, and m the main these will stand when the principle of negativity is rejected as an error. For the Dialectic Method does not necessarily involve the identity of opposites, in the sense that one element in its own assertion supplements itself by self-denial ; and it is possible to take a simpler view which keeps clear of this difficulty. We may suppose, as before, that the reality has before it an J contemplates itself in an isolated datum. What comes next is that the datum is felt insufficient, and as such is denied. But ia and through this denial the reality produces that supplement which was required to complete the datum, and which very supplement, forefelt in the mind, was the active base of the dissatisfaction and the consequent negation. The important point is that, on this second view, both sides of the correlation are positive, and one is not the mere denial of the other. The presence of either is inconsistent ttith the absence of the other, and it is inconsistent with the solitary presence of the other. Thus either by itself is denied, nor ty, but from tfo ground of its positive counterpart, which in that denial makes itself conscious and so comes to light. I am perfectly aware that this doctrine is a heresy; but it is a heresy which, I think, will be found to save the real substance of the orthodox doctrine. § 22. We are not concerned here with the truth of this heresy, and we turn to the question which is really in hand ; In what sense is Dialectic an inference ? It certainly is reasoning, which by an ideal operation gets a fresh result. Take


CHAP. II] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 383 abstraction, we are thence led to ask whether such an operation must not be an inference. For it is an ideal experiment which procures a new result. We start here with a given whole abed ; we operate on this by the neglect of or by the removal of fe, and ad is left ; and we then predicate this ad of the reality. The real was abed, and in consequence of our action we know now it is ad. The nature of the process by which we remove what seems unessential, need not at present be discussed, but it is certain that there is some process, and that the result of this process is accepted as truth for no other reason. And once again it is true that the experiment is arbitrary, for we need not perform it, and it is not supposed to make a difference to the fact itself. Still it makes a difference to our knowledge and judgment, it supplies the because of a new perception, and it has therefore the mark of reasoning and inference. § 24. We have first analysis, then elimination or elision of part of the content, followed in the end by a positive attribution of the remaining content to the original subject. The operation is familiar and is largely employed, but its validity is open to grave objection. We shall consider this hereafter, but may remark at present that the doubt is whether by your elimination you have not fatally altered the subject. By removing one element you may destroy the condition which made the rest predicable. Our old friend, J- S. Mill's socalled Method of Difference, fell into this blunder, and may serve us as a warning (Book II. Part IL Chap. III.). Reality was first ABC — def> then BC-tff, and we assumed that, if we elided BC-^/J we should leave A -^standing good of reality. But here (we may repeat) were two errors. Suppose first that our data are pure universals, still you have not experimented with that very BC which goes with A. You have worked with a second and an other BC, and you can not be sure that there is not a difference in the way in which they operate. The first BC may give something to A, and get something in exchange, so that A may be concerned in the first ef> and BC be partly concerned in d> This unconsidered possibility wrecks your proof; and your Method of Difference is selfcondemned, since it is not a method of the only difference.

[018-007]
384 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Bs. in. PT. I And your error is not single ; for you have withal ignored the fundamental difficulty. How can you procure your pure universal ABC-^/ without using to get it a process of elision, a "method of difference/' which is still more precarious? Your premises, "Reality is ABC-


CHAP. II.] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 385 A is not b, and we conclude that therefore it falls within cd. Once more we find that A is not ct and on this we conclude, tJierefore A is d. We have here an obvious and palpable inference, but in what does it consist ? It consists in removing the possible piedicates of a given subject until the residue fe self-consistent, and in then passing at once from this residual possibility to an assertion of its reality. One possibility is left, and therefore that is fact. Our inference is not got by arguing from the major " What is not b or c must be d? and that major does not give the proof of our conclusion. On the contrary our process is the ideal experiment which proves this major. We know that A, which is not b and not c, must be d, only because we have tried and have seen that d comes out as the result. Thus our major, if we had one, would be the principle that a sole possibility must be actual fact. But then this again is not given as a premise, and we do not argue because we know that this is true, We know it is true because we have argued, and itself is the result of ideal experiment. § 27. And even this principle is not quite fundamental. For it presupposes a judgment that we have before us an explicit exhaustion of the possibilities of A One step of our reasoning consisted in the statement, that b, c} and d are the whole sphere of A, and that A must fall (if anywhere) within this sphere. But the earliest form of disjunctive reasoning dispenses with such a preliminary statement Incompatible suggestions with respect to A come before the mind, and the suggestion which survives in that ideal struggle is accepted as fact. Thus we go direct to the assertion without any declaration that our previous denial has exhausted the subject We shall return to this process when we begin to sketch the beginnings of inference in the lower stages of mind, and at present we must content ourselves with saying a few words on the principle which underlies this early operation. There is an axiom which we cannot fail to use, however little we may be aware of its nature or existence. All suggested ideas, we assume, are real, unless they are excluded If an ideal content is disparate with reality, then it is not fact If again it is disparate with another content, then 2 C

[018-008]
386 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [BE. Ill PT. I* both are, at present, not yet real. The suggested idea is so far possible ; but if nothing is found incompatible with it, the idea is held actual. Thus all suggestions are true unless they are opposed, and the suggestion, which maintains itself in ideal experiment, and abolishes incompatible ideas, has demonstrated its own validity. The survivor from the struggle of competing ideas has shown itself fittest, and it therefore is the truth. This ominous dictum, which contains the soul of disjunctive reasoning, awakens our scruples, and when we discuss the validity of the process it gives rise to, we shall have to weigh these scruples in the balance. In this place it is enough to have shown that once more we have found an operation, which is not three-term reasoning, and which yet lays claim to the title of inference. § 28. It is worth our while to pause for a moment, and to see the extent over which this principle operates. Any judgment whatever may be turned into reasoning by a simple change. For we have merely to suggest the idea of the opposite — we have only to suppose that the touth is otherwise, and at once the predicate, which we already possess, excludes that suggestion and returns to itself as what must be true. It now is real because it must be so ; and it is a necessary truth, for it has entered the field of ideal experiment and has returned victorious. The process seems frivolous, since if turns in a circle ; we return to the place from which we set out, and the predicate of necessity but adds the idle form of " It is because it is" (c£ Book I. Chap. V. § 29). We first degrade our judgment to a mere idea, and then assert the tdea on the strength of the judgment But this process, circular when we apply it to judgments, is very different when used on mere ideas. Take any idea, no matter what it is, suggest it of the real and find it compatible ; bring it into collision with the other ideas which are disparate with itself, see that it defeats them in open competition, and then go on at once to assert its truth — this alarming process appears to have no limit Yel valid or invalid, it certainly is inference. Whether we explicitly state the possibilities as exhausted, or simply ignore their possible enlargement, we have in both cases reasoning of a type that does not fall under any other head.

[018-009]
CHA* II] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 38; § 29. We may add the remark that apagogic inferences belong to this class, for, whatever intermediate steps they may employ, they in the end must turn on a disjunction. They make a transition from the denial of one predicate to the assertion of another. And that transition assumes that no other possible predicate exists. The large amount of vicious reasoning which attends the use of the indirect method, is mainly due to forgetfulness of this fact The bad logic which abounds in philosophical discussions consists in great part of conclusions based upon hasty disjunctions. And perhaps no writer can hope entirely to escape from this error, for the process, in which we are most likely to slip, is at times unavoidable. § 30. (H) We have nothing now left but our old friends the so-called Immediate Inferences. And these have given cause for scruple , doubt extends not only to the nature and principle of their procedure, but even attaches itself to their actual existence. If they are mere tautologies, rearrangements of words without alteration of ideas, they can not be inferences. And some of them appear to be little else To argue from " A is B " to " Some B is A " gives rise to suspicion, and that suspicion is deepened if we infer that E is equal to A because A is equal to B, or that A must be to the left of B, since B is certainly to the right of A. We may ask in these cases what new conclusion comes from the process. On the other hand if, given that A is B, we are offered the assertion " Not-A is not B/'we decline to receive this erroneous addition. We should call it a bad inference, and should hence be compromised when invited to deny that the legitimate " Not-B is not A " is an inference at all. We need not enter on the thankless task of enquiring in each case if the inference is real or is simply circular. For no logical principle is involved in this controversy, and it will be enough to show that, given the validity of the immediate inferences, we have already laid down those types of argument under which they will fall. In any case they will make no addition to those classes of reasoning which we have already reviewed. § 31, Where the so-called inference repeats the assertion 2 C 2

[018-010]
388 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [B* IH. PT I from which it started, there is nothing to be said. From A = B to proceed by proof to B=:A is an impossible process In each case you possess the same relation of A to B, and the order in which you take those terms is perfectly irrelevant Hence the alteration which is made is psychological, not logical, and is concerned with nothing but the verbal expression. Let us take another case where the process seems doubtful. It is not easy to answer off-hand the question, if " No B is A" is a mere repetition of " No A is B," or if " Some B is A " is a real advance on "A is B." But suppose that these are inferences, they bothjfall under heads which we know already. If, given one truth, you perceive another implied or contained in it, this process is analysis followed by abstraction. And what falls outside this is an inference from disjunction. If to perceive for instance that Not-B is not-A, an experiment is required which goes beyond the inspection of " A is B," the process in that case will be indirect and the reasoning apagogic. I will illustrate these general observations by some remarks on the detail of Immediate Inferences. § 32. If we consider first the immediate conclusions from affirmative judgments, we shall find a good deal which excites our wonder. The ambiguity which besets the word " some " brings disgrace on this part of the traditional logic ; and behind this ambiguity there is something hidden which will hardly bear the light. Let us take the judgment as asserlorical, "All A is B." What is it, we may ask, that the inference gives us, save this same relation over again? Take the judgment first in extension as "All the A's are all the B's ; " is it any news to be told that also " All the B's are all the A's " ? Is it not the old relation once more ? Or if you know that ihc A's are a part of the B's, are you further advised when you learn that a part of the BJs are the A's ? If again from " All the B's are all the A's " I am ordered to conclude, that they are at least a part of the B'j, I must ask for information. To what am I committed by this doubtful formula ? If it means that a collection, being taken distributively, is taken distributively, that, if I have seen a, and have also seen b, and also seen c, I must therefore have seen each — then where is the inference ?


CHAP. II] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 389 But if it means that what is true of a lot Is true of some or each component part of that lot — then the inference is vicious, and the lot again is perhaps hardly taken in its extension, And if I am invited finally to argue that, since I am certain of each, I therefore am certain at least of some, since that may be true even though I can not be sure of each, then I must answer that you seem to be suggesting that I should doubt my premise upon the ground of its certainty* If again you do not take the predicate in extension — if you argue Because all the A's have a quality B, therefore some things which have the quality are all the A's — I can not see how you have advanced one step. You know already that there are things which have a quality B with a quality A, and what more do you learn ? Your " at least some B's are A's " is not a positive conclusion at all. If it is neither tautologous tior dowmight false, it is a caution to yourself not to make an infcience of a certain kind, It says, " I have a certain relation which I must not go beyond ; to dispense with the ' some ' would be wanton temerity, and to say 'at most' would be unauthorized despair. The right state of mind is a doubtful hope, or an expectant ignorance." But this is not to infer, or, if this is inferring, it is an inference which in the same breath concludes that we must not make an inference. And if, while we keep its assertorical character, we try to read the whole judgment according to intension, we fare no better. It is a fact that the attribute B attends upon the subject or attribute A. Can we proceed from this to anything more than a vain repetition ? To bring in our "at least" is a futile expedient, for it merely reminds us of what we did not say, and of what we must not say, viz. that B is never to be found without A. But this is not making a good inference ; it is forestalling a bad one. And if you reply, " To forestall a bad inference is to infer. For how else should I know that my inference was bad, unless after making it I compared it with my datum in an ideal experiment ? My "at least some B is A" does mean that besides there is a mere possibility. And the knowledge of this possibility, which to me is not more and must not be thought more, how else should I get it but by an inference? "—then

[018-011]
390 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BK III. PT. I I answer that I am ready to accept your contention, for you now have yourself admitted that your conclusion is not assertorical^ but is problematic. §33. The truth is that, if you keep to categorical affirmatives, your conversion or opposition is not ratiotial, but is simply grammatical. The one conversion which is real inference is a modal conversion, and that presupposes a hypothetical character in the original judgment I will not labour to prove this last observation, but will proceed to show that a hypothetical judgment can be converted modally. It can not be converted in any other way. In " given A then B " you experiment with A, and your result is B. But you can not, by simply taking B, experiment with that, and so get as a result its relation to A. This I think Is obvious, and if in despair we fall back on our old device and bring in " some at least," we shall get no further. We shall succeed in saying " Given B you have A, if you suppose the case where A has given B." This is barren tautology. The real conclusion is " B may be A," but this once again may be reduced to mere words. If you start with w Arsenic creates such symptoms," and conclude "The symptoms possibly have come from arsenic ; " or if you begin with *' Any dog is a mammal," and go on to infer "A mammal may be a dog " — it Js possible that still you are drifting between the Scylla of false inference and the Charybdis of verbiage. It is assumed that you mean to go beyond the truth you started with, and that you are not content with the impotent result, that the symptoms are arsenical upon the condition that arsenic has caused them. You really mean that tJiey may or may not be arsenical, but that you ham some reason to judge that tJiey are so. And this is the point ; for you do not judge directly of the real facts ; you do not conclude by a vicious extension that, given some other drug, you might have the same symptoms; nor again, by an orthodox but imbecile process, that, since arsenic must be mortal, its administration at least may be the cause of death. This is not your meaning, and you would be sorry to be understood as conveying such frivolity. Your real judgment is about your own grounds of belief and disbelief, and is only indirectly an


CHAP JI] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE, 391 assertion about facts. That the death may have come from arsenic can mean, that, among the possibilities of death which are otherwise unknown, we can specify this one. And you perhaps meant to say this ; but it is more likely that you meant to say something else. For you knew nothing before about arsenic as a possible cause of the death, except that you had no more reason to believe in it than in anything else. But now, from the knowledge that it does produce death with certain symptoms, you can make an inference. You have that reason in favour of its chance when you seek the -most probable cause of the death. Among all the possibilities this alone has extra weight, and the weight turns the scale. The symptoms may or may not be arsenical ; but in favour of the former we have at least the consideration that arsenic certainly would produce them. There is so much more probability in favour of arsenic than there is in favour of any other cause. And this, I think, was what you really intended to convey. And if the conversion has this modal character, it then will imply an inference based upon the disjunction of possible alternative:! § 34. This argument from certainty to probability is, I think, the real sense which underlies the conversion of affirmative judgments. We may be told, in answer fco our charge of frivolity, that such conversion and opposition are a valuable agent in education, and that therefore the orthodox logic in this point can not be wholly absurd. Most absurd, I reply, in the doctrine that it inculcates, but possibly useful because misunderstood into something rational. It can not, I should say, much profit a pupil to be taught that, if "every dog is a mammal," he may argue that " some mammals are therefore dogs," and from this make his way to the triumphant conclusion " Some dogs are mammals" (cf. Lotze, Logik, § 81). I should have thought that it might have been better to tell him that, unless he has special information before him, he can not reason straight from the attribute to the subject or from the consequence to the ground He might be told, I should have fancied, that the presence of the former was a sign to his mind, which so far certainly increased the probability of the latter, but still could not prove its actual presence. This is

[018-012]
392 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. DBK, HL FT. L what he must learn, if he really learns anything else than folly, and this he has to learn in spite of his teaching. It is here as elsewhere with the uneducated professional. He is pledged to the creed that truth can not be imparted until lost in a medium of superstition and nonsense. § 35. If we pass to the conversion of negative judgments and to conversion by way of contraposition, we must modify these charges. It can hardly be maintained that in this new sphere we have no frivolity ; but on the other hand it can not be said that we have nothing else. From "A is not B " there seems really a passage to " B is not A." This no doubt may be questioned ; we may be told that we knew before that A and B were incompatible, and that now we but know that B is incompatible with A ; we thus have the same relation with a grammatical difference. But this view I take to be incorrect. It is true no doubt that in negation we may be said to experiment with both our terms, while in affirmative judgment we have but the first Still the result, arrived at by the negative experiment, is not the incompatibility of A and B. We find that, given A, B can not be there ; but as to what will happen when B is supposed, we have no information. Hence the relation arrived at is so far onesided. How then do we gain the other side of this truth ? Most certainly not by any general principle, for that principle itself must first be got by the process in question. The process must consist in another experiment, which takes B as real and, suggesting A, again finds exclusion. The essence of the inference is open to doubt. It might be treated as the explicit perception of a new relation, got by abstraction from an implicit whole ; but I should prefer to take it as apagogic. Suppose B, then A is excluded or is possible. First let it be possible, and then A may be B ; or again B may be not-B, for B can be A and A is not B. Thus we prove indirectly that B excludes A and that the two are incompatible. It is by virtue of the same apagogic process, that we are able to reason from the absence of the consequent to the absence of the ground. § 36. This brings us to contraposition, and here without doubt we have real inference. Given "A is B/1 we can be


CHAP II] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 393 sure that not-B Is not-A ; yet we can not be supposed to see this immediately. The process is indirect, and tests upon disjunction. Not-B must either be A or not-A, but A is impossible, because, given A, we must have B ; and by con^equence B might exclude itself, or, if absent, must be there. This conclusion removes the alternative " Not-B is A ; " and, since but one possibility remains, that is therefore actual, and hence not-B is not-A. We might desire something better than such an indirect reasoning, which depends on the mere exhaustion of alternatives , but the desire would not easily find its satisfaction. § 37. I may end by mentioning the so-called Inference through added Determinants. If we are sure that a negro is a fellow creature, we may go on to argue, A negro who is in suffering is a suffering fellow creature. Modern prejudice takes the truth as a tautology, and would deny the very existence of the inference ; but against this we may set the moral prejudice, which, admitting the existence of the reasoning process, practically refuses the conclusion. The process is certainly vicious in form, for the addition may, so to speak chemically unite with the terms it is applied to, and may form two components which are incompatible. A lie is a bad action, but it is only in rhetoric that a virtuous lie is a virtuous crime. So " friends are welcome," but " friends in adversity " may find their added determinant makes a change. The form of this inference, it is clear, will not stand, and it is better to reduce it to two main types. In one of these we say " A under any condition is B, C is A Conditioned, and therefore C is B/' In the other we betake ourselves to the Third Figure, and abstain in the conclusion from elision of the middle. " A is B, A is C, therefore CAB is true/' or « This negro is a fellow creature, and this negro suffers, hence we have in this negro a suffering fellow creature," The same liberty of leaving the whole construction gives the rational solution of another puzzle. " Because a horse is an animal, the head of a horse is the head of an animal "(Jevons, p. 18). If this argument can not be reduced to syllogism, it is because the syllogism has first crippled itself. The attributes of having a head and being an animal are united in a horse,

[018-013]
394 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Bic. III. PT. I and you conclude, in the third figure, that Under^ some conditions an animal has a head ; or, without elimination, that, In the case of a horse an animal has a head. But this differs from the result given by Professor Jevons in nothing except grammatical form. The whole difficulty has arisen from the supposed necessity of eliding the middle. I do not know what to say of that inference by way of omitting a determinant which Mr. Venn notices (Symbolic Logic, pp. 285-6), for I do not think that I understand it. "'Men are rational mortals; therefore they are mentals :'— Here we have omitted ihe term ' rational ' from our result, that is, we have eliminated it. Or we might have omitted the word 'mortal/ by saying that * men are rational.' " But, if we did this, we should surely be proceeding in a way which we can not justify. If our conclusion is based on extraneous information as to the irrelevance of one term, that information should have appeared as a premise. But if we mean to rest on the bare statement that we have, then we are certainly illogical We may mean that men "before identified with ' rational mortals ' are now identified with an unceitain part of the larger class 'rational/ or 'mortal' " (ibid. 287) — but, if so, I must repeat a former criticism (§ 32) : We shall have argued from my certain knowledge to my uncertainty and ignorance. We shall in effect say, because I am sure of a thing, therefore, and for no other reason, I do not know it. And this surely will not do. We may object on other grounds. The judgment may become false if you remove any part of it "Religious miracles are pretended facts that are necessary illusions ; " try elimination here. Or test the process by Mr, Venn's own instance. Men would not be rational if they were not mortal, nor would they be mortal if they were not rational ; for in either case they would cease to be men. Our argument has illustrated a well-known type of logical mistake. For men simply rational would, metamorphosed by no logical change, have risen like the angels ; and simply mortal would have lost that foreknowledge which divides them from the beasts. Each alternative robs them of their human existence ; they perish alike before the nudity of Reason, and la mort sans phrase*

[018-014]
OHAP II] FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. 395 § 38. The list of the so-called Immediate Inferences has not given an additional type of reasoning They all fall under the previous classes, and none of them can strictly be called "immediate/* for none gives a conclusion with out an operation. But, if we leave them and ask for the general result of the present Chapter, we may state it thus. Apart from these last, we have found a number of palpable inferences which can not be brought under the formula \* e laid down in the previous Book. The list of such processes may not have been exhaustive, but enough has been adduced to show beyond question that the general nature of the reasoning process has yet to be ascertained.
