---
description: "Further analysis of inference characteristics"
id: ch19-general-characteristics-of-inference
label: "Chapter XIX: General Characteristics of Inference"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [BK. Ill IT, I. CHAPTER III. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. § i. The position we now stand in is briefly this It is not every inference that gets a new relation of the original elements, by means of a construction that Interrelates them. This is not the universal type of reasoning, and it obviously docs not present us with its essence. The ideal operation is not always a synthesis based on the identity of given terminal points. The place of such a construction maybe taken by processes, the nature of which we have partly seen, but whose general type we have not yet asked for. But we must delay that enquiry till we reach another chapter. At present we shall not take this diverse array of ideal operations, and try to reduce them to common types ; for, before attempting this scrutiny, we may pause with advantage and raise some questions, § 2. And the first of these is, Can we not at once say something general about the nature of reasoning ? Without regard to the differences which we have brought to light, is there not some account which holds true of all of them ? And \ve answer that we can see clearly such a common character. No matter what the operation may be, there is always some operation. This operation is an ideal experiment upon something which is given, and the result of this process is invariably ascribed to the original datum. We have here an application of the Principle of Identity, for what is true of a datum within the operation of our ideal experiment, is also in some sense true of that datum without regard to the experiment. This formula holds good throughout all our instances, and it will repay us to consider them awhile from this side and aspect of their nature, § 3. In reasoning we have a starting-place that is given, a subsequent operation, and a consequent modification of that

[019-001]
CUAI>. Ill] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OP INFERENCE. 397 starting-place, In an abstract form we may represent it as follows First A, then A in ideal experiment becoming A£, and last the assertion that Ad is true, unconditionally or conditionally. We have thus (i) Premises or premise, (ii) Operation, and (iii) Result. The first is A1, the second is A2£, the last is A'£ For what holds of A once will hold of it always, and the quality, which A gets in the context of that process which we represent by A2, belongs iii some sense to A apart from the process Our present task will be to verify this type throughout all our examples. § 4. We may preface the enquiry by a reference to causation. Without discussing the exact relation which exists between the causal and the reasoning processes, we may refer to something which they have in common. In causation you first of all start with the elements called the " conditions," the next step consists in the process of change which issues in a certain result, and the whole is complete when that which has resulted is ascribed to the original conditions. It is the same with inference. The result of change that issues from the process into which the original datum enters, is ascribed to that datum. Both causation and reasoning depend upon identity, sameness in spite of a growth of difference ; sameness again which preserves itself, not by refusing but by appropriating that difference. Both are alterations of a datum which is changed, but survives in its changes and makes them its attributes. In a future chapter we shall further discuss the relation which subsists between the effect of a cause and the conclusion of an argument. § 5. Returning to the task we have now in hand, let us proceed to the application of our general remark. And let us try first those inferences which interrelate three terms, and which so bring out a new relation. In these we have first the elements of our construction existing apart, then we have the construction, and last of all the new relation. Take for instance " A to the right of B, and B of C, and therefore A to the right of C." We here have got (i) two spatial relations, or rather two sets of terms in relations of space, and we may call this starting-place reality qualified as these pairs of relations. Let us pass to the second step (ii) ; this gives us


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. PL. III. PT I the synthesis of those very same terms which we had at the beginning. The construction certainly is 'a difference, but it does not make such a difference to our terms that they lose their identity. We next (iii) perceive a new relation, the result of the construction. But since the terms are the same notwithstanding the construction, they are the same in respect of this further result, C-A. Hence the real, qualified as C-B B-A, is the real qualified as C-B -A, and that again is the selfsame subject as the real which has the relation C-A. We have sameness both within and without the construction, and we have appropriation of that construction's result. Take another argument, "A is equal to B, and B to C, and therefore C=A" The whole synthesis of these terms, effected through B, is the second stage, on which follows thirdly the separate perception A-C. The result of the construction is taken as its attribute, and is so predicated ; and the construction itself is in just the same way made an attribute of the terms. A, B, and C are the same in the construction and with the result that it developes, as they were apart from it. The issue of the operation is simply their own being. And we can verify this type in the common syllogism. In " Mammals are warm-blooded, men are mammals, and so men are warm-blooded," we find the same elements. First the separate judgments are given us as true ; we have reality appearing in the attribute of these two syntheses, "manmammal" and "mammal-warm-blooded" Then the construction follows, and from that the intuition of "man-warmblooded" But the relation which we predicate of these extremes, is not a foreign compulsion of their nature. For the issue of the process, the result of the change, has not removed their sameness. They have remained through alteration, and accept the difference as their proper attribute and native possession. § 6. Where we go from the construction not to a new internal relation but to a quality of the whole, our account still holds good. The elements, which during our circular voyage we received discontinuously each in isolation, first


CHAP III] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 399 combined themselves into a spatial whole, and then took oti the qualities we understand by "island." But the reality throughout has maintained its identity. It moved before our eyes a changing show, that came fresh from the unknown and slid back perpetually into nothingness. To our judgment it appeared as a discrete series of spatial arrangements ; and it was with this series that our reasoning began. That, boldly relying on the Identity of Indiscernibles, built up for us an intellectual whole, and that whole presented us with certain qualities. We then attributed these qualities to that very icality which was manifest in cur fragments of successive coast line. The reality has ccitainly both undergone experiments and suffered changes at our hands. It is not what it was, and it yet remains the same ; for it is itself and more. It is the original subject with additional attributes, conferred upon it by our ideal operations. We find the same when we pass to spatial arrangement .Bricks and mortar with the builder are here our premises, the compound action and reaction of the two may be called the construction, and the conclusion is the appearance of the house. It may be doubted how the elements, which we had at the start, can survive in the result ; yet we can not but think that somehow they have survived. For otherwise it would surely be false to say that the house is the effect which has come from these causes. I admit the difficulty which attaches to identity, but it is still harder to believe in a discontinuous existence and in a divided reality. For if in the house you have not got the work done by the builder on a certain material, you have no right to speak as if you had. And you could not even say that the house has appeared, without synthetic judgments which assume an identity. If the reality lias changed, the same reality must be there still, and if the reality has not changed, there has been no change whatever ; for a sequence of mere differences would have nothing it could alter, and could not generate even the show of alteration. And in the same way when, not externally but simply in my head, I rearrange elements by an arbitrary choice, the result, which I get at the end of my process, is true of the basis from which I began. That foundation has survived and

[019-002]
400 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [Bx. Ill Pi I. has got a new quality without the loss of its own selfsameness. The result is hypothetical, since my free action was no more than possible. One element of the cause, apart from the others, is but the hypothetical producer of the consequence, and is no more than what we call a " condition." § 7 We may deal rapidly with the operations of addition and subtraction. We have the units arranged in a certain manner, and these are our material with which we begin. Then follows a rearrangement of these units, and a consequent perception of another attribute which also belongs to them. Throughout the operation the units are identical, and they appropriate the result of the experiment And since it is assumed that to them the experiment can make no difference, therefore that difference becomes a categorical predicate. The units with a quality of certain integers go into a process, and come out in possession of another quality. Thus by virtue of this change the identical subject is credited with both contexts, or, in other words, the two different arrangements, which we began and ended with, are taken as identical. And it is clear that the same view holds good of geometry. The data are divided or are rearranged or are compounded with arbitrary fresh surroundings, and from this manipulation comes out a result But since the experiment adds nothing to the data nor takes anything away, since again the data remain the same throughout the experiment, the result becomes their categorical attribute. § 8. In Comparison it is easy to recognize the same type. A and B are first given us apart from their relation. The next stage is the process, in which we bring them together, and so perceive a relation of likeness. The relation is then predicated of A and B apart from our comparing activity. They are alike because their change to this relation was no alien imposition, and because their identity has remained unimpaired throughout the alteration. The same remarks apply to the inference of Distinction. And they apply once more, with slight modification, to Dialectic reasoning, to Recognition, and to the Hypothetic judgment. In all these we have but one premise explicit ; we start with AB, and, subjecting this to an ideal experiment,


CHAP HI] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 40 1 we are given ABC. The original dattim is met by a function which produces a result But it is assumed once more that the synthesis does not arbitrarily add from the outside ; and hence, since the datum is the same in the experiment as it was beforehand, the result is taken as its quality and attribute. Nor in passing to Abstraction do we find any change. We start here with reality in the character of abed1. This same content is subjected to an ideal operation as abed*, and then presents us with a — d. Upon this we conclude that abed'1 is also ad, or, more directly, that the reality is ad. But our conclusion would be false, did it not presuppose the identity of the subject in two different contexts. § 9, In Disjunction lastly we find once again this identity. Whether we begin with the alternatives stated as exclusive, or with a simple field of possibilities, makes no real difference. We start with a subject determined inside a certain area of possible predicates. This subject then undergoes an operation which reduces that area, and it ends by seizing on the undcstroyed remainder as its actual attribute. But it could not do this, if it stood Outside the process or were dissipated within it Itself goes there and is active, preserving its self, and emerging with a difference which it refuses to give up. The same character is seen in Apagogic reasoning, and again in that qualification through rejected suggestion, which (by employing the supposal of an opposite) turns c< it is " into " it must be." The identity within and without the experiment needs here no indication. And finally the Immediate Inferences, which we were last concerned with, are not independent. They arrange themselves under the heads we have discussed, and our foregoing remarks have already dealt with them. § 10. Our result so far is that inference is the getting a new result from a certain datum. The result is procured by an ideal operation upon this datum, and when procured becomes its predicate. Reasoning thus depends on the identity of a content inside a mental experiment with that content outside. And so we find once again in the total process that need for individuation, which we before discerned in the middle construction. Just as that construction was 2 D

[019-003]
402 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BK III TT I insufficient to give us a new relation of the extremes, unless it joined them in an individual whole — so here the full process would not get to a conclusion, unless it possessed an individuality. And it is made individual by the identity of that content which runs right through it, and which joins the final result to the initial starting-point So much at least we are now able to say in reply to the question, What is an inference ? And this beginning of an answer we may go on to make clearer by laying down some important distinctions. § n. It is not any and every mental activity which can properly be called reasoning. This claim could not, I think, be seriously maintained, but it may perhaps be worth while to examine its nature. We may be asked if our account, so far as it has gone, has not tacitly admitted such a sweepingpretension. " Does not every ideal activity," an objector may urge, " first begin with a datum and, performing on that an ideal operation, so produce a result ? Take for instance judgment. Here \ve have the reality, and we qualify that subject by referring to it a suggested content. That is an ideal action, and it is an action again which brings about a change which it does not create or manufacture. The result is ascribed to the original datum, and ascribed by virtue of an ideal operation." We must briefly reply to this mistaken claim. § 12. There are two questions we must endeavour not to confuse. Each of them asks if judgment is inference, but each makes that enquiry in a different sense. The first asks if all judgments imply an inference. That is, dues judgment presuppose and is it the conclusion of a reasoning- such as is described above? That is the first question, and the second is quite different. For the second enquires if every judgment by itself is an inference, independent of and apatt from any of those processes which we have hitherto called argument. We will begin by dealing with this latter claim. Suppose for instance that we had an operation, which, taking X, simply added on y as a mere suggestion that came rom the outside, and then judged X-^. Could we call that in inference? No doubt it may be said to preserve an dentity : no doubt again that it ends with a judgment, which


CHAP III] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 403 may fairly be said to predicate something new of the original datum. No doubt once more it is an ideal activity. But, notwithstanding all this, it is not an inference. The 7, which in conclusion it attributes to X, is not in any sense got from X by an operation thereon. It is stuck on from the outside ; and because the result, ascribed in the conclusion, is not procured from the starting-point, therefore this result is not a real conclusion. § 13. In the arbitrary synthesis of a suggestion with reality the predicate does not really come from the datum It thus lacks an essential character of inference, the getting of the product on and from the premises We may try however to renew the attempt in an amended form. Judgment, we may say, is an inference of this kind ; we have (i) Reality together with a suggestion, and beside these two we have an arbitrary power of junction. These three elements arc our premises, and we have (u) the actual union of these elements, which gives (iii) the synthesis of the predicate with reality — and this result is a conclusion. But this amended attempt is as futile as the former. For the judgment in the first place will not be categorical. In this it will be like free spatial arrangement ; so that the inference, if there is one, does not end in the simple assertion X — y. It can not go beyond, " If X is treated in an arbitrary manner it will turn to X— y" And perhaps this is senseless. For in the spatial arrangement the combination of the data produced a new quality, while here on the other hand it produces — their combination. We must end by writing the result of our process, '* X, if X be X~y, must certainly be X— y" And there does not seem to be any inference heie. § 14. I offer no apology for pursuing these somewhat dull enquiries, since it seems to me that every answer we elicit throws some light on our general doctrine. We have seen so far that judgment is not inference, and that a process which was nothing more than a judgment would never be reasoning. We may now approach the second question we asked : Is every judgment part of an inference ? Does, that is to say, judgment presuppose a process which must be called reasoning ? May assertion be always taken as con2 D 2


THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [BK III PT. I. elusion ? This is really a somewhat difficult problem, and, as we shall have to recur to it afterwards (Chap. VI. § 15), we may content ourselves here with some brief remarks, § 15. Some judgments, we know, do involve a reasoning. We saw that this held of hypothetical, since the supposition that A is real, is itself an ideal operation on this content For, in the union with reality, A is met by a function of synthesis and so developes a new connection. And again if we take those common judgments which go beyond presentation—I mean those extensions of sense which supply us with the past or with the unseen present— they are all inferential. They imply, as we saw, an ideal operation, and it was for that reason that we called them " synthetic." Nay, when, leaving these, we come down in the end to those judgments which assert about present perception— the class we thought fit to call "analytical" — even here it may seem we are dependent on reasoning. For these assertions are based on a process of mutilation. They are all abstractions, and abstraction, we now know, is a kind of inference. So that, resting on these grounds, we clearly have got some cause to maintain that judgment is never separable from reasoning. § 1 6. But there is ground on the other side from which we might deny this thesis. " Admitted," we might say, ct that every judgment can be turned into a kind of inference by a suggestion of the opposite, yet all judgments do not undergo this operation. In the first place the operation may be wholly circular (cf. Chap. II. § 28), and hence illusory : and then, apart from this objection, in very many cases it does not exist at all These cases so far will be free from all reasoning And now, passing from this point, let us take in hand a more real difficulty. We admit that all judgments, though they may not combine, at least must mutilate; but it does not follow that they therefore infer. 'Mutilation' is ambiguous, for you may perform the operation or may simply accept it A judgment, that is, may eitfier start with something given, and by working on this may extract an isolated and abstract product, and this would clearly be inference ; or on the other hand, instead of selecting, the judgment may receive. If the original whole has never been

[019-004]
CHA*. Ill] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 405 given to the judgment, if the judgment takes up a foreign suggestion which itself is mutilated, then, although in conclusion we affiim an abstraction, yet we have not abstracted, and the result /0r us will not be a conclusion." § 17. " For," we might continue, " you should consider it so. You can not reason categorically unless you start with a given, and unless this given premise contains a judgment.* If therefore all judgment depended on inference, you never would get to an ordinary judgment And the only way in which to escape this circle, is to begin with judgments that imply no leasoning. Nor is this impossible, for you may have a result which involves selection, and yet you may never yourself have selected. An abstracted content can be conveyed to your mind, though you have not worked on the raw material. The testimony icceJved from others is an instance; and then, apart from the reasoning of other men's intellects, you have your own senses. Judgment rests in the end on suggestions of sense, and these suggestions t\re never uniform. For we do not feel one equable and steady flow, we are not in contact with a level surface ; the judgment does not come down unsolicited, and compose at random its spontaneous junctions. This, if it were possible, would be to reason without reason. But it is not possible. Before judgment appears there are prominent points in the suggestions of the senses A stands above the level and with it stands B. Together they knock at the door of judgment, which admits them together and keeps back the rest. The result may thus present an ideal synthesis, an intelligible abstraction ; but the process is no selection of the reason. It is bare natural selection, where the fittest have survived and where the strongest are most fit. And hence the conclusion, for the intellect, is the work of chance. The mind has not embraced the persuasion of argument, but has yielded to the insistance and the emphasis of sense." § 1 8. Such is the answer we might make to the claim of all judgment to stand as inference ; and in another Chapter we shall have to weigh the worth of this denial. But we can not pause to consider it here, and must be content with a * This statement must be taken subject to the explanation given in Chap. VI. § 15.

[019-005]
406 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [JBs III. PT. 1 partial answer to our questions. All judgment is not in ference, if mere judgment claims a position as inference. Sc much is certain. But when asked if judgment does not presuppose inference, if in short the two activities are not diverse stages of a single function, we can not yet give an answer. We have however shown some reason for considering them as separate, at least for the present. Judgment then is not inference, and reasoning is not the same as intellectual activity. We must now go on to consider a narrower claim. Has all Redintegration a right to assume the title of inference ? § 19, Every reproduction is clearly a function which starts from a basis and gets a new result And some reproduction of course is inference. Where, AB being given, C is supplied and then attributed as a predicate to AB, we have a kind of reasoning with which we are now familiar. An ideal whole is produced by a process, and a judgment follows from this ideal construction. And if redintegration always had this character, the question if it always might call itself inference, could be answered at once and answered affirmatively. But there are other reproductions which are far from appearing to possess this character. Redintcgiation does not always seem to result in judgment. An object may excite vague feelings of pleasure or a dim sense of pain, but these feelings need not be attributed to that object. Their content is not always taken apart from their existence, and applied to the thing as one of its adjectives. They may remain my feelings, mere psychical phenomena, which are together with the object but form no part of it Hence the piocess has no right to call itself inference. For it does not end in a judgment ; the starting-point does not survive in the process, maintaining its identity and appropriating the difference. We simply pass from it to another existence which is taken as existing on a level Trfth the first. This process is on the one hand ideal, in the sense that it advances on the strength of a connection between universals. But on the other hand it is not logical, since the universal, brought in by the ideal connection, is not used as a content which is bestowed upon the original object


CHAP III] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 407 and particularized by that reference. The universal on the contrary is allowed to become an independent fact, in which the content is one with the existence, and where the particular character is supplied psychologically from my whole state of mind. There is hence no logical individuation. What unity there is does riot fall within a developement of the datum through one process of change. It falls simply within my feeling self; and the result is a conjunction which is no connection. It is useless to object that the result in the end may be a judgment which affirms the existence of this mere conjunction in my soul. For that result will be no inference from the original datum. You may say that we certainly have got our conjunction from the datum> but after all that datum does not survive in it. And so we have not got a content, we have not got a predicate, our result is not ideal, nor is it a conclusion. And when starting again from this mere psychical fact you go on to a judgment, then, let that be an inference, it has not been inferred from the content we began with. It has come from a fact whose existence has supervened. § 20. This discussion, I fear, may prove hard to follow , and the reader who finds more than moderate difficulties, had better pass on to the following chapter For we are now about to raise another question, both important and relevant, but not essential to the understanding of the sequel. There is an answer we might give to the foregoing section. Admitted, we might say, that some redintegration exists, the final result of which is not logical, yet the process itself, with its immediate product, is still an intellectual inference. All reproduction will in that case be reasoning. We objected in our Chapter on Association, to the formula we found laid down by Wolff, on the ground that reproduction went beyond perceptions. And on this very ground we have just objected to taking the process everywhere in the character of inference. The unity of the process we found might be other than the individuality of cognition. But a doubt may now be raised as to whether this result is after all not mistaken, and it may be urged that, at bottom, the recall and reconstruction are purely intellectual.

[019-006]
408 THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC. [Bs, HI. PT I Let us try to state this possible contention. It is admitted on both sides that an object, once accompanied by certain feelings, may, when it is either reinstated ideally or once again presented to sense, bring in those feelings. The issue 5s this— Are the feelings, as such, reproduced or produced ? We have assumed so far that the former is.true, but our assumption admits of being traversed thus. Feelings, it might be urged, can not be recalled unless made universal; and this unconscious abstraction suggests the presence of intellectual work. For suppose that when the object was presented, it, together with the feeling, engaged our attention. This mere attention will be apprehension, it will imply selection and rudimentary judgment, and this alone and by itself will set up between the elements a logical connection. It will make the whole perceptive, so that now, given one part, the rest will follow. Hence the feelings are recalled as they are for perception, and that process is inference. They certainly come to us as psychical facts, but this final result falls outside the inference, and is a mere psychological addition § 21. Let us further explain. We must remember that every psychical phenomenon is complex ; for on the one hand no perception is without some tone of feeling, and eveiy feeling on the other hand is partly perceptive, and has a content, a character, a quality that we recognize. Now suppose that this perceptive side of the feelings was attended to together with the object, in that case the object will recall it by reasoning, and will supplement itself by this inferred content. This is inference, but it still falls short of what is wanted, for it does not account for the side of mere feeling. How, it may be objected, do you get back to that ? If you do it by rcdintegration,. then, after all and in the end, you have been forced to admit the reality of what you denied, a reproduction that was not logical. And this is the issue. The view, which we are here attempting to work out, would admit that such reproduction would not be logical, but then it would deny that such reproduction exists. It would urge in opposition that it is the perceptive side of the feeling which is reinstated, and that this produces actual feeling directly and not through reproduction


CHAP, in.] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 409 The perceptive side may be particularized first by the psychical context into which it is brought, but this is not the point. The point is that it works directly on the soul, and by that working causes an actual feeling which is like the original. Thus the old feeling, as feeling, is in no sense reinstated , but the real fact is that the soul is such, or has become such, that, without restoration or redintegration, and by nothing at all but simple reaction, it responds to the idea with an outcome of feeling. And, if this account is true, a restriction has saved us. The feeling is not the conclusion of an inference, but falls wholly without it as a mere psychical effect. And, if so, the actual reproduction is purified from feeling, and remains in the character of intellectual connection. § 22. I think that this view deserves careful attention, but I must not be understood as adopting it wholly. It is not that I doubt the reality of the psychical process which it describes , for I am sure that in some cases that process exists, and its existence has somewhat important bearing's. The confusion for instance which in English Moral Philosophy besets the word " motive," arises mainly from a false assumption on this very point And that confusion disappears when we distinguish between the idea itself and its psychical effect (cf. Ethical Studies^ Essay VI L), But it is one thing to hold that a process exists, and it is another thing to deny the existence of any other possible process; and here I hesitate. We might explain perhaps every phenomenon offered, on the view that reproduction is always logical This view in the hands of those who espouse the cause of the intellect and are champions of its primacy, would be a weapon perhaps not easy to withstand, and which would make short work of many difficulties. But then in some cases the explanation might force the facts. And again any inference from the universal character of what is reproduced to the logical nature of the reproductive process, would appear to me to be questionable. The logical is universal, but I am far from sure that the universal must be logical. And I doubt on another point This simplification might be premature ; for suppose we got down to an ultimate true doctrine of the relation between the elements of our nature,

[019-007]
4IO THE PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC [BK. HI. FT I and suppose we saw clearly how the intellect stands to the emotions and the will (if there really is a will)— are we sure that this weapon would any longer be wanted, and that the difficulties would keep the form that they now wear ? To this doubt I can only allude in passing But however we settle the questions just raised, we are certain of one thing in respect to inference. The mere result of feeling, not attributed to an object, is never a conclusion. Whether produced by reinstatement, or not so pioduccd, in neither case will it come straight from reasoning. Foi in the latter case it will fall outside the process, while in the former case the process is no inference. And with this we may proceed to another enquiry. § 23. A result of mere feeling we saw could not be an inference, since It was not ideal. But the result of imagination, it may now be urged, is often ideal It may keep itself distinct from mere emotion and desire, and may present us with a pure perceptional series. In such a case as this can imagination be called inference ? We must deal briefly with this question, for it tends to divert us to matters of great interest which may here be neglected. And we may answer at once, No result of mere imagination can be an inference. It can not be a conclusion, because it is not a judgment. The production of imagery may no doubt follow strictly the logical sequence to a certain point ; but there it breaks off. For instance A* may proceed to a result of fancy through logical functions b—cyc — d; but the result when obtained is now not integrated logically with A. On the contrary it appears as an individual image D, and that image is not a predicate of Kb. It certainly stands in relation with A£, but it falls into that relation through psychiral co-existence ; and so once more we have conjunction without connection. We have no judgment, since the result is mere fact which exists in the mind, and since it is not a symbolic content referred away from its own existence. It exists and it stands in certain relations, but it is not taken as an adjective which is either true or false. And then the given A, with which we


CHAP III] GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. 4! I started, does not survive in the result ; it does not appropriate the content and use it as its attribute. That content breaks its logical bond, and, wandering off into the psychical space, begets by contact with beings external to A an independent substantive D ; which, itself autonomous, has now a substantival relation to A. Hence we have no logical unity in the object, no ideal individuation. § 24. Imagination is certainly not free from logical processes. Its trains, no doubt, throughout a great part of their length may consist of the strictest intellectual sequences. They may contain few images, and but little save the purest symbolic ideas Yet somewhere we find a solution of continuity ; somewhere the identity of the datum is lost; at some point we pass from the adjectival content attributed to our basis, and slide into an image which is not its predicate. And with this break, wherever it comes, we have left judgment for fancy, and are not concerned with truth but with psychical fact. It would no doubt be interesting to puisne this enquiry ; but the interest would, I think, in the main not be logical. It would in the fiist place be psychological, and then perhaps aesthetic. But the broad distinction, that what is merely imagined is not held to be true, removes imagination from the province of logic We shall however be forrcd to touch again on this point when we deal with the early developement of reasoning (Chap. VI L). § 25. Inference then, so far as we have seen, is an ideal experiment which procures a result from a given basis. This result is a judgment in which the new product is predicated of the given. And in this whole operation we have found that identity which our Second Book perceived to be essential to the middle construction. But our enquiry so far has stopped short of the goal. We are naturally still curious about this middle process. We still ask Is there not some central identity to be found in this ? And we shall take up this question in Chapter V. ; but, before we can answer it, it is necessary to inspect our types of inference and to reduce them, if we can, to some more general foim
