---
description: "Title page, preface, and table of contents"
id: front-matter
label: "Front Matter"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# 逻辑原理（上下册）


> ⚠️ Best-effort 提取自 Internet Archive OCR 扫描版 EPUB（准确率 17-25%）。

> 文本含大量 OCR 错误，需人工校对后方可作为可靠语料。


This book is with tight Binding


Keep Your Card in This Pocket Books will be issued only en " cards* , , mt b*  two weeks. Borrowers findina books isarked/ ds


PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC BY F. H. BRADLEY II,.D GLASGOW H-LI.OW IN MERTON COLLKOh, OXFORD ANASTATIC REPRINT OK THE LONDON EDITION 1883 NEW YORK O. E. STECHERT & CO.;


PREFACE. THE following work makes no claim to supply any systematic treatment of Logic. I could not pretend to have acquired the necessary knowledge ; and in addition I confess that I am not sure where Logic begins or ends. I have adopted the title Prim/pies of Logic, because I thought that my enquiries were mainly logical, and, for logic at least, must he fundamental. I feel that probability is against me. Experience has frhown that most books on Logic add little to their subject There is however one reflection which may weigh in my favour. Both in England and in Germany that subject is in motion* Logic is not where it was, and can not remain where it is. And when one' works with the stream a slight effort may bring progress. I have in general not referred to thoe glad to state my debts in detail, and in this way to express the gratitude I feel, but I doubt if it is now possible. I could not everywhere point out the original owners of my borrowed material, and I could not clearly slate how much is not borrowed. I lay no claim to originality, except that, using the result of others* labour, I in some resects have made a sensible advance.


iv PREFACE. I wished at first to avoid polemics altogether. But, though [ have not sought out occasions of difference, it is plain that too much of my book is polemical My impression is that it will nor suffice to teach what seems true. If the truth is not needed the reader will not work for it, nor painfully learn it. And he hardly will need it where he stands possessed of what seems an easy solution. Philosophy now, as always, is confronted with a mass of inherited prejudice. And, if my polemics bring uneasiness to one self-satisfied reader, I may have done some service. I fear that, to avoid worse misunderstandings, I must say something as to what is called " Hegelianism." For Hegel himself, assuredly I think him a great philosopher ; but I never could have called myself an Hegelian, partly because I can not say that I have mastered his system, and partly because I could not accept what seems his main principle, or at least part of that principle. I have no wish to conceal how much I owe to his writings ; but I will leave it to those who can judge better than myself, to fix the limits within which I have followed him. As for the " Hegelian School " which exists in our reviews, I know no one who has met with it anywhere else. What interests me is something very different We want no system-making or systems home-grown or imported. This life-breath of persons who write about philosophy is not the atmosphere where philosophy lives. What we want at present is to clear the ground, so that English Philosophy, if it rises, may not be choked by prejudice. The ground can not be cleared without a critical, or, if you prefer it, a sceptical study of first principles And this study must come short, if we neglect those views which, being foreign, seem most unlike our own, and which are the views of men who, differing from one another, are alike in having given an attention to the subject which we have not given. This, I think, is a rational object and principle, and I am persuaded that a movement which keeps to this line will not be turned back. In conclusion I maybe allowed to anticipate two criticisms which will be passed on my work. One reader will lament


PREFACE V that he is overdone with metaphysics, while another will stand on his right to have far more. I would assure the first that I have stopped where I could, and as soon as I was able. And in answer to the second I can only plead that my metaphysics are really very limited. This does not mean that, like more gifted writers, I verify in my own shortcomings the necessary defects of the human icason. It means that on all questions, if you push me far enough, at present I end in doubts and perplexities. And on this account at least no lover of metaphysics will judge of me hardly. Still in the end pet haps both objectors are right If I saw further I should be simpler But I doubt if either would then be less dissatisfied


CONTENTS. In thib Table the numbers refer to the sections of each chapter. BOOK I. JUDGMENT CHAPTER I. THE GENERAL NATURL OF JUDGMENT. What judgment is. It implies ideas, and these are signs (1-3). A sign, what (4-6), Two senses of "idea" (6-8). In Judgment ideas are meanings (9). Judgment defined (10), and errors refuted (11-12). Mistaken views criticized. Judgment not "association" (13-14); nor practical influence (15) ; nor a mere junction3 nor an equation of ideas (16). Truths contained in the above errors (17). Devdopement of Judgment. It is a late product (18), because at first the mind has no ideas proper (19-20). Conditions required for origin of Judgment (21-22). If the Association-theory were true it could never have appeared (23) ,- but from the first um'versals operate in the mind (24-26)  Pages 1-39 CHAPTER II. THE CATEGORICAL AND HYPOTHETICAL FORMS OF JUDGMENT. Judgment is about fact (i). Preliminary objections answered (2). But how if all judgment is hypothetical (3) ? And if judgment keeps to ideas it all is hypothetical (4-6). This true of universal and again of both classes bf singular judgments (7-8). But judgment is not confined to ideas. It refers to present reality (9). On the other hand it does not refer to reality as present (10). This explained and defended (11-14). Search for Categorical Judgment. L Analytic Judgments of sense, and their varieties (15-16). Superstition as to names of Individuals (17-18). II. Synthetic judgments of sense. How can these refer to^w*#/ reality (19) ? But they can not refer to mere ideas (20-21). Their true subject is unique, Thisness and This. Idea of " this » how used


vja CONTENTS. But how then can Synthetic Judgments be true of this given reality (28) ? Because the reality is not the mere appearance (29-30). These judgments rest on continuity of content (31), and that upon ideal identity (32-33). Past and future are not phenomena (34). Recapitulation (35). Memory and prediction not mere imagination (36-37). Idea of Individual, what (38-39) • Non-phenomenal Singular Judgments (41). Existential Judgments (42). Transition to Abstract Universal Judgments (43). These are hypothetical (44). Collective Judgments really singular (45). Hypothetical can not be reduced to Categoricals (46-47). A supposition, what (48). Real assertion contained in Hypothetical Judgments (49-52). They aie all universal (53-55)- Result (56). Tages 40-90 CHAPTER II. (Continued^ With hypothetical we seem to have left the real world, but have reached the world of Science (57). Presumption against the singular judgment of sense (58). Its claim (59-60) is untenable because it mutilates the facts (61-67). It is conditioned (68-70), and conditional (71) ; and is even false (72-73). It is an impure and impeifect hypothetical (74-78). Result (79-80). Remaining class of Judgments (81). Pages 91-108 CHAPTER III. THE NEGATIVE JUDGMENT . Negation depends on the real (i), but is more ideal than affirmation 13 (2-3). It is not the denial of an affirmation (4), nor is it a kind of affirmation (5), nor an affection of the copula (6). It has a positive ground which is not explicit (6-7). Opposition and Privation. These distinctions here not vital (8), but call for explanation (9-11). Varieties of negative judgment. Negative Existentials (12). Logical negation is subjective, and is no real determination (13-14). It does nof assert the existence of the contradictory (15). Idea of the contiadictory, what (16). The asserted contrary not explicit (17). Contrary opposition not dual (18). Ambiguity of denial It rests on covert asseition (19-20). .. ., -. .. Pages 109-120 CHAPTER IV. THE DISJUNCTIVE JUDGMENT, It is not a mere combination of hypothetical (1-2). Its basis is categorical (3-6). Alternatives are rigidly exclusive. Eironeous views on this point (7-12). What disjunction presupposes (13), Recapitulation (14) ., .. .. ,. ., Paged 121-130


CONTENTS, ix CHAPTER V. PRINCIPLES OF IDENTITY, CONTRADICTION, EXCLUDED MIDDLE, AND DOUBLE NEGATION. Principle of Identity must not be a tautology (1-3). What (if anything) it should mean (4-9). Pnnciple of Contradiction does not explain anything (10). What it means (11-14). Fuithei criticism and explanation (15-16). Principle of Excluded Middle is one special case of disjunction (16-19). Goes beyond it, how (20-21). Is wrongly objected to (22). Criticism of mistaken views (23-27). Double Ncgatwn, wrong account of (21). True explanation (29-31). Erroneous use of (Note) .. .. ., .. ,, Pages 131-154 CHAPTER VII. THE QUANTITY OF JUDGMENTS. Extension and intension (1-2). Mistakes about " connotation 'J (3-5). Law of inverse proportion of intent to extent, shown to be erroneous (6-10). Kvciy judgment has two aspects, and can be taken both extensionally and in intension (11-12). The first defended against erroneous views (13-21). The second explained, and mistakes removed (22-29). Universal, parti culai, and singular ; what these mean, and how far they can be ical (30-36). The corresponding judgments, what (37-43). Pages 155-180 CHAPTER VIII. THE MODALITY OF JUDGMENTS. Modality affects not the fonn but the content of Judgment (1-3). Logical modality, what (4-5). The Assertorical (6). The Necessary is hypothetical (7-n). And so is the Possible (12). Varieties of the latter (13-15)* Modality docs not exist in fact (16). This shown of the necessaiy (17), and the possible (18-19). But there must be a leal basis for necessity (20), and for possibility (21-22). Fwther explanations. The Potential not real (23). Conditions, as such, not facts (24), Pemianent Possibilities ambiguous (25). The Problematic and Paiticular Judgments identical (26}. The Impossible, what (27). The possible not the same as the mere not-impossible (28-31)Probability. Its principles logical (32). Is neither objective nor subjective (33), Rests on an exhaustive disjunction (34'36)? each alternative of which is equally credible (37-38)- Expression of the chances by fiactions (39-40* Inductive probability implies no fresh punciple (42-43)*


x CONTENTS, Errors refuted. Probability objective as well as subjective (44-45)- ** does not in its essence imply a series (46-50) ; nor a knowledge of the future (51). Fiction of the "long run" (52-54), and the truth which underlies this (55-57). Superstitious beliefs (58-59), Transition to Inference (61-63)  .. Pages 181-221 BOOK IL— PART I. THE GENERAL NATURE OF INFERENCE. CHAPTER I. SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF REASONING* We are really agreed on three features of inference. What these aie (1-3). Examples (4)  Pages 225-226 CHAPTER II. SOME ERRONEOUS VIEWS. The major premise is a superstition (i). And the syllogism is not the one type of reasoning (2). The ordinary syllogism in extension criticized (3-5). Principle of nota note (6). Possible reform of the syllogism (7-8). Principle of " Related to same are related to each other w criticized (9-10) ..  Pages 227-234 CHAPTER III. A GENERAL IDEA OF INFERENCE. Inference a perception ensuing on a synthesis (i). Demonstration is seeing m a logical preparation, and that is an ideal construction (2-4). Examples (5). Superstitions to be abandoned (6) .. Pages 235-239 CHAPTER IV. PRINCIPLES OF REASONING. These are special principles of interrelation (1-2). Examples of syntheses (3). But in what sense are they principles (4) ? Not as canons and tests of individual inferences (5-6). No art of Reasoning (7). Illustration from Casuistry (8-9), Inadequacy of the syllogism (10), Pages 240-249


CONTENTS xi CHAPTER V. NEGATIVE REASONING. Its general nature (i) and special principles (2; Can you argue from two negative premises? Yes, but not from two bare denials (3-7). When one premise Is negative can the conclusion be affirmative ? On one >pcaal condition, yes (8-9) .. .. . Pages 250-259 CHAPTER VI. TWO CONDITIONS OF INFERENCE. Result reached (i). An identical point required in all reasoning (2). Merc likeness not enough (3). Principle of Identity of Indiscernibles stated and defended (4-9). And one premise at least must be universal (10-13) «• Pages 260-272 BOOK II.— PART II. INFERENCE—CONTINUED CHAPTER I. THE THEORY OF ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS. The fact of psychical association is certain, but the theory which explains reproduction by the "Laws of Association" is false (1-7). Main ground of objection (8). The true explanation of the fact (9-12). Errors refuted. No association by Contiguity (13-17), even if assisted by Similarity (18). Similarity alone is left (19), and this too is a fiction (20-22), which the facts do not require (23-25). The true explanation (26-27), Misunderstandings removed (28-31). Wolff and Maas adduced (32). An objection answered (33). Practical conclusion (34-36). * Note. Indissoluble Association and the Chemistry of Ideas. Pages 273-321 CHAPTER II. THE ARGUMENT FROM PARTICULARS TO PARTICULARS. This discussion has been anticipated (1-2). Supposed evidence for the Argument (3) is an ignoratio elenchi (4-5), We never argue from particulars as such (6-9), but from an universal (10-1 1). And we can not do otherwise (12-13). Mr. Spencer's theory of inference to be passed over (14)  Pages 322-328


Xli CONTENTS. CHAPTER III. THF, INDUCTIVE METHODS OF PROOF. The question limited (1-2) Complete Induction (3). Mill's Canons of Induction. Their claim to be demonstrative (4-5). But (I) they can not start fiom fact (7-9). And (II) then conclusion need not be more geneial than some of their premises (to). Anrl (III) they all have a logical flaw unless you confine them to the case in hantl (11-14). Result (15-16)  Pages 329-3^ CHAPTER IV. JEVONS1 EQUAT10NAL IOGIC The Enquiry Hunted and subdivided (1-2). A. Propositions .ue no I equations, and can not assert meie identity (3-7). B Reasoning dees not consist in Substitution of Similars. It lathei connects differences (8-13). C. The Indnect Method (14) can not be i educed to Substitution (iS-18)- The Logical Machine. Its menu and defect 22). Result (23)  Pages 3 BOOK III.— PART L INFERENCE— CONTINUED. CHAPTER I. THE ENQUIRY REOPENED. Our former account of inference was insufficient. There aic inferences which will not come under our foimuU (1-9) . Pa&efc 361-364 CHAPTER II. FRESH SPECIMENS OF INFERENCE. Tests of the existence of inference (1-3). Claim of fresh specimens. A, Three-term Constructions (4-5). B. Arithmetic and Geometry (6-15). C. Comparison and Distinction (16-17). D. Recognition (18). E. Dialectic (19-22), F. Abstraction (23-24). G. Disjunctive Inference (25-29). H. Immediate Inferences (30-37). Pages 3^5-395


CONTENTS. xiii CHAPTER III. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INFERENCE. Further charactei of inference as an ideal experiment (1-4). This type verified thioughout our fiesh instances (5-10). Not every mental activity is reasoning (11). Judgment is not mfeience (12-18); nor is all Reproduction (19-22); nor is Imagination (2324), Result obtained (25)  . Pages 396-411 CHAPTER IV. THE MAIN TVPES OF INFERENCE, Analysis and Synthesis a:e two mam types (i). This not apparent (2), but <0iown throughout the whole of our instances (3-7). Tabular statement (8)  - ., Pages 41 2-41 8 CHAPTER V. ANOTHER FEATURE OF INFERENCE. A central identity icqulied for each process of experiment (.1). Difficulties (2-3). The identit) shown m Recognition and Dialectic (4) ; and in Comp*uison and Distinction (5-6). This fuither explained (7-9). The identity shown in spatial Construction and in Arithmetic (10-12) ; and in Abstraction (13) ; and in Disjunctive Inference (14). Result 05)  Pages 419-429 CHAPTER VI. THE FINAL ESSENCE OF REASONING. s « Principles of our processes (i), Analysis and Synthesis are two sides of one process (2). Their sameness shown (3), and their differences pointed out (4-7). Analytic and Synthetic Methods (8-10). Judgment and Inference, how related (11). Every judgment involves synthesis and analysis (12-14) ; but itself is not inference (15). If however we go back far enough, judgment and inference seem two sides of one piocess (16-22), Their connection shown in the woiking of Reproduction (23-24)Beside Analysis and Synthesis there is a third principle of reasoning (15). Defects of Analysis and Synthesis (25-28) These defects suggest a self-developing function (29-30), which appears in our third principle (31-32), Recapitulation (33). Self-developernent shows itself through the whole process of reasoning (34~35)« ^ages 43<>4S4


xlv CONTENTS. CHAPTER VII. THE BEGINNINGS OF INFERENCE. Gulf between explicit inference and the beginnings of soul-life (i-a). Yet from the first an intellectual activity is present, which slowly developes (3-8). Prevalent errors as to early intelligence (9-")Obstacles to the right study of it (i 2-1 5) - < Pages 4 5 $-4°* BOOK III.— PART II. INFERENCE— CONTINUED. CHAPTER I. FORMAL AND MATERIAL REASONING, No reasoning with a bare form (2) ; nor need we even have a relative form if that means a mere formula (3). No material reasoning if that means an argument from the particular (4), There is a form or principle in every inference, and there is an irrelevant detail (5-6). We can extract this form (7) ,• but it is not a major premise (8-13). The form is the principle which neither proves, nor is proved by, the instances (14-16) ; and this can be stated in a syllogism (17). Other meanings of" formal " (i 8)  Pages 469-483 CHAPTER II. THE CAUSE AND THE BECAUSE. Is the middle the cause (i) ? Meaning of this term must be limited (z). The cause is loiown by reasoning, since it implies ideal reconstruction of the case (3-5). Futile to ask if cause comes from mere habit (6)* Explanation not perception of intermediate detail (7~ro)» But the reason need not be the cause (n). Ambiguity of "because'* (12). The psychical cause and the logical ground distinguished (13-14). The consequence not more complex than the cause or giound(i5> Result (16)  > . Pages 484-497 CHAPTER III. THE VALIDITY OF INFERENCE. The question has two main senses, but can here receive no final answer (t-2). Is reasoning formally valid? Not if se^'have interfered to


CONTENTS. XV wake the conclusion (5). Do we interfere in Synthetical Construction without elision (4-6), or with elision (7) ? Is the process capricious in Comparison, etc ($-10), and again in Abstraction (11-15) -? T^e Disjunctive Argument (16-20). Sceptical doubts (21- 22) Result (33). Is a conclusive inference practicable? Question explained but no answered (24-25) ..  Pages 498-520 CHAPTER IV. THE VALIDITY OF INFERENCE (CONTINUED). Is inference valid really AS well as formally? Question stated (1-2). Infeiencc seems not always true of things. Instance of Comparison Three alternatives (3). Does reality change through our caprice, or in hai mony, or does it merely somehow correspond ? Unless we utterly revolutionize our beliefs, we must give up complete identity of logic and fact (4-7). Reasoning is never quite true of presented fact, since it must be discursive (7-11). Even Dialectic, because discursive, seems unreal (12). Nor, if logic answered to the known series of phenomena, would it eveii then be true ; for that series is not given but inferred To be true of the presented logic must be true to sense, which is impossible (13-15). Can we then, denying the tiuth of sense-presentation, take reality itself as logical truth ? Another alternative opposes us, and our logic still may prove untrue (16). Yet why should truth and reality have exactly the natuie (17) ? Anyhow logic can not copy phenomena. Pages 521-534
