---
description: "Enough, that after this vista had disclosed itself to me, I myself had reason to search for learned, bold, and…"
id: Preface-Section-7
label: "Preface, Section 7"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

#### PREFACE.

[P09-001]Enough, that after this vista had disclosed itself to me, I myself had reason to search for learned, bold, and industrious colleagues (I am doing it even to this very day). It means traversing with new clamorous questions, and at the same time with new eyes, the immense, distant, and completely unexplored land of morality—of a morality which has actually existed and been actually lived! and is this not practically equivalent to first _discovering_ that land? If, in this context, I thought, amongst others, of the aforesaid Dr. Rée, I did so because I had no doubt that from the very nature of his questions he would be compelled to have recourse to a truer method, in order to obtain his answers. Have I deceived myself on that score? I wished at all events to give a better direction of vision to an eye of such keenness, and such impartiality. I wished to direct him to the real _history of morality_ , and to warn him, while there was yet time, against a world of English theories that culminated in _the blue vacuum of heaven_. Other colours, of course, rise immediately to one's mind as being a hundred times more potent than blue for a genealogy of morals:—for instance, _grey_ , by which I mean authentic facts capable of definite proof and having actually existed, or, to put it shortly, the whole of that long hieroglyphic script (which is so hard to decipher) about the past history of human morals. This script was unknown to Dr. Rée; but he had read Darwin:—and so in his philosophy the Darwinian beast and that pink of modernity, the demure weakling and dilettante, who "bites no longer," shake hands politely in a fashion that is at least instructive, the latter exhibiting a certain facial expression of refined and good-humoured indolence, tinged with a touch of pessimism and exhaustion; as if it really did not pay to take all these things—I mean moral problems—so seriously. I, on the other hand, think that there are no subjects which _pay_ better for being taken seriously; part of this payment is, that perhaps eventually they admit of being taken _gaily_. This gaiety indeed, or, to use my own language, this _joyful wisdom_ , is a payment; a payment for a protracted, brave, laborious, and burrowing seriousness, which, it goes without saying, is the attribute of but a few. But on that day on which we say from the fullness of our hearts, "Forward! our old morality too is fit material _for Comedy_ ," we shall have discovered a new plot, and a new possibility for the Dionysian drama entitled _The Soul's Fate_ —and he will speedily utilise it, one can wager safely, he, the great ancient eternal dramatist of the comedy of our existence.
