---
description: 'Chapter I: The Intensity of Psychic States'
id: ch01
label: 'Chapter I: The Intensity of Psychic States'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Chapter I: The Intensity of Psychic States

[001-001] Can there be quantitative differences in conscious states?

[001-002] It is usually admitted that states of consciousness, sensations, feelings, passions, efforts, are capable of growth and diminution; we are even told that a sensation can be said to be twice, thrice, four times as intense as another sensation of the same kind.

[001-003] This latter thesis, which is maintained by psychophysicists, we shall examine later; but even the opponents of psychophysics do not see any harm in speaking of one sensation as being more intense than another, of one effort as being greater than another, and in thus setting up differences of quantity between purely internal states. Common sense, moreover, has not the slightest hesitation in giving its verdict on this point; people say they are more or less warm, or more or less sad, and this distinction of more and less, even when it is carried over to the region of subjective facts and unextended objects, surprises nobody.

[001-004] But this involves a very obscure point and a much more important problem than is usually supposed.

[001-005] When we assert that one number is greater than another number or one body greater than another body, we know very well what we mean.

[001-006] Such differences applicable to magnitudes but not to intensities.

[001-007] For in both cases we allude to unequal spaces, as shall be shown in detail a little further on, and we call that space the greater which contains the other. But how can a more intense sensation contain one of less intensity? Shall we say that the first implies the second, that we reach the sensation of higher intensity only on condition of having first passed through the less intense stages of the same sensation, and that in a certain sense we are concerned, here also, with the relation of container to contained?

[001-008] This conception of intensive magnitude seems, indeed, to be that of common sense, but we cannot advance it as a philosophical explanation without becoming involved in a vicious circle.

[001-009] For it is beyond doubt that, in the natural series of numbers, the later number exceeds the earlier, but the very possibility of arranging the numbers in ascending order arises from their having to each other relations of container and contained, so that we feel ourselves able to explain precisely in what sense one is greater than the other. The question, then, is how we succeed in forming a series of this kind with intensities, which cannot be superposed on each other, and by what sign we recognize that the members of this series increase, for example, instead of diminishing: but this always comes back to the inquiry, why an intensity can be assimilated to a magnitude.

[001-010] Alleged distinction between two kinds of quantity: extensive and intensive magnitude.

[001-011] It is only to evade the difficulty to distinguish, as is usually done, between two species of quantity, the first extensive and measurable, the second intensive and not admitting of measure, but of which it can nevertheless be said that it is greater or less than another intensity. For it is recognized thereby that there is something common to these two forms of magnitude, since they are both termed magnitudes and declared to be equally capable of increase and diminution. But, from the point of view of magnitude, what can there be in common between the extensive and the intensive, the extended and the unextended?

[001-012] If, in the first case, we call that which contains the other the greater quantity, why go on speaking of quantity and magnitude when there is no longer a container or a contained? If a quantity can increase and diminish, if we perceive in it, so to speak, the *less* inside the *more,* is not such a quantity on this very account divisible, and thereby extended? Is it not then a contradiction to speak of an inextensive quantity? But yet common sense agrees with the philosophers in setting up a pure intensity as a magnitude, just as if it were something extended. And not only do we use the same word, but whether we think of a greater intensity or a greater extensity, we experience in both cases an analogous impression; the terms "greater" and "less" call up in both cases the same idea.

[001-013] If we now ask ourselves in what does this idea consist, our consciousness still offers us the image of a container and a contained. We picture to ourselves, for example, a greater intensity of effort as a greater length of thread rolled up, or as a spring which, in unwinding, will occupy a greater space. In the idea of intensity, and even in the word which expresses it, we shall find the image of a present contraction and consequently a future expansion, the image of something virtually extended, and, if we may say so, of a compressed space. We are thus led to believe that we translate the intensive into the extensive, and that we compare two intensities, or at least express the comparison, by the confused intuition of a relation between two extensities. But it is just the nature of this operation which it is difficult to determine.

[001-014] Attempt to distinguish intensities by objective causes. But we judge of intensity without knowing magnitude or nature of the cause.

[001-015] The solution which occurs immediately to the mind, once it has entered upon this path, consists in defining the intensity of a sensation, or of any state whatever of the ego, by the number and magnitude of the objective, and therefore measurable, causes which have given rise to it. Doubtless, a more intense sensation of light is the one which has been obtained, or is obtainable, by means of a larger number of luminous sources, provided they be at the same distance and identical with one another. But, in the immense majority of cases, we decide about the intensity of the effect without even knowing the nature of the cause, much less its magnitude: indeed, it is the very intensity of the effect which often leads us to venture an hypothesis as to the number and nature of the causes, and thus to revise the judgment of our senses, which at first represented them as insignificant. And it is no use arguing that we are then comparing the actual state of the ego with some previous state in which the cause was perceived in its entirety at the same time as its effect was experienced. No doubt this is our procedure in a fairly large number of cases; but we cannot then explain the differences of intensity which we recognize between deep-seated psychic phenomena, the cause of which is within us and not outside. On the other hand, we are never so bold in judging the intensity of a psychic state as when the subjective aspect of the phenomenon is the only one to strike us, or when the external cause to which we refer it does not easily admit of measurement. Thus it seems evident that we experience a more intense pain at the pulling out of a tooth than of a hair; the artist knows without the possibility of doubt that the picture of a master affords him more intense pleasure than the signboard of a shop; and there is not the slightest need ever to have heard of forces of cohesion to assert that we expend less effort in bending a steel blade than a bar of iron.

[001-016] Thus the comparison of two intensities is usually made without the least appreciation of the number of causes, their mode of action or their extent.

[001-017] Attempt to distinguish intensities by atomic movements. But it is the sensation which is given in consciousness, and not the movement.

[001-018] There is still room, it is true, for an hypothesis of the same nature, but more subtle. We know that mechanical, and especially kinetic, theories aim at explaining the visible and sensible properties of bodies by *well* defined movements of their ultimate parts, and many of us foresee the time when the intensive differences of qualities, that is to say, of our sensations, will be reduced to extensive differences between the changes taking place behind them.

[001-019] May it not be maintained that, without knowing these theories, we have a vague surmise of them, that behind the more intense sound we guess the presence of ampler vibrations which are propagated in the disturbed medium, and that it is with a reference to this mathematical relation, precise in itself though confusedly perceived, that we assert the higher intensity of a particular sound? Without even going so far, could it not be laid down that every state of consciousness corresponds to a certain disturbance of the molecules and atoms of the cerebral substance, and that the intensity of a sensation measures the amplitude, the complication or the extent of these molecular movements? This last hypothesis is at least as probable as the other, but it no more solves the problem. For, quite possibly, the intensity of a sensation bears witness to a more or less considerable work accomplished in our organism; but it is the sensation which is given to us in consciousness, and not this mechanical work.

[001-020] Indeed, it is by the intensity of the sensation that we judge of the greater or less amount of work accomplished: intensity then remains, at least apparently, a property of sensation. And still the same question recurs: why do we say of a higher intensity that it is greater? Why do we think of a greater quantity or a greater space?

[001-021] [Sidenote: Different kinds of intensities. (1) deep-seated psychic statese (2)muscular effort.

[001-022] Intensity is more easily definable in the former case.

[001-023] Perhaps the difficulty of the problem lies chiefly in the fact that we call by the same name, and picture to ourselves in the same way, intensities which are very different in nature, e.g. the intensity of a feeling and that of a sensation or an effort.

[001-024] The effort is accompanied by a muscular sensation, and the sensations themselves are connected with certain physical conditions which probably count for something in the estimate of their intensity: we have here to do with phenomena which take place on the surface of consciousness, and which are always connected, as we shall see further on, with the perception of a movement or of an external object. But certain states of the soul seem to us, rightly or wrongly, to be self-sufficient, such as deep joy or sorrow, a reflective passion or an aesthetic emotion.

[001-025] Pure intensity ought to be more easily definable in these simple cases, where no extensive element seems to be involved. We shall see, in fact, that it is reducible here to a certain quality or shade which spreads over a more or less considerable mass of psychic states, or, if the expression be preferred, to the larger or smaller number of simple states which make up the fundamental emotion.

[001-026] Take, for example, the progress of a desire.

[001-027] For example, an obscure desire gradually becomes a deep passion. Now, you will see that thee feeble intensity of this desire consisted at first in its appearing to be isolated and, as it were, foreign to the remainder of your inner life. But little by little it permeates a larger number of psychic elements, tingeing them, so to speak, with its own colour: and lo! your outlook on the whole of your surroundings seems now to have changed radically.

[001-028] How do you become aware of a deep passion, once it has taken hold of you, if not by perceiving that the same objects no longer impress you in the same manner? All your sensations and all your ideas seem to brighten up: it is like childhood back again. We experience something of the kind in certain dreams, in which we do not imagine anything out of the ordinary, and yet through which there resounds an indescribable note of originality. The fact is that, the further we penetrate into the depths of consciousness, the less right we have to treat psychic phenomena as things which are set side by side. When it is said that an object occupies a large space in the soul or even that it fills it entirely, we ought to understand by this simply that its image has altered the shade of a thousand perceptions or memories, and that in this sense it pervades them, although it does not itself come into view. But this wholly dynamic way of looking at things is repugnant to the reflective consciousness, because the latter delights in clean cut distinctions, which are easily expressed in words, and in things with well-defined outlines, like those which are perceived in space. It will assume then that, everything else remaining identical, such and such a desire has gone up a scale of magnitudes, as though it were permissible still to speak of magnitude where there is neither multiplicity nor space! But just as consciousness (as will be shown later on) concentrates on a given point of the organism the increasing number of muscular contractions which take place on the surface of the body, thus converting them into one single feeling of effort, of growing intensity, so it will hypostatize under the form of a growing desire the gradual alterations which take place in the confused heap of co-existing psychic states.

[001-029] But that is a change of quality rather than of magnitude.

[001-030] What makes hope such an intense pleasure is the fact that the future, which we dispose of to our liking, appears to us at the same time under a multitude of forms, equally attractive and equally possible. Even if the most coveted of these becomes realized, it will be necessary to give up the others, and we shall have lost a great deal. The idea of the future, pregnant with an infinity of possibilities, is thus more fruitful than the future itself, and this is why we find more charm in hope than in possession, in dreams than in reality.

[001-031] The emotions of joy and sorrow. Their successive stages correspond to qualitative changes in the whole of our psychic states.

[001-032] Let us try to discover the nature of an increasing intensity of joy or sorrow in the exceptional cases where no physical symptom intervenes.

[001-033] Neither inner joy nor passion is an isolated inner state which at first occupies a corner of the soul and gradually spreads. At its lowest level it is very like a turning of our states of consciousness towards the future. Then, as if their weight were diminished by this attraction, our ideas and sensations succeed one another with greater rapidity; our movements no longer cost us the same effort. Finally, in cases of extreme joy, our perceptions and memories become tinged with an indefinable quality, as with a kind of heat or light, so novel that now and then, as we stare at our own self, we wonder how it can really exist.

[001-034] Thus there are several characteristic forms of purely inward joy, all of which are successive stages corresponding to qualitative alterations in the whole of our psychic states. But the number of states which are concerned with each of these alterations is more or less considerable, and, without explicitly counting them, we know very well whether, for example, our joy pervades all the impressions which we receive in the course of the day or whether any escape from its influence.

[001-035] We thus set up points of division in the interval which separates two successive forms of joy, and this gradual transition from one to the other makes them appear in their turn as different intensities of one and the same feeling, which is thus supposed to change in magnitude. It could be easily shown that the different degrees of sorrow also correspond to qualitative changes. Sorrow begins by being nothing more than a facing towards the past, an impoverishment of our sensations and ideas, as if each of them were now contained entirely in the little which it gives out, as if the future were in some way stopped up. And it ends with an impression of crushing failure, the effect of which is that we aspire to nothingness, while every new misfortune, by making us understand better the uselessness of the struggle, causes us a bitter pleasure.

[001-036] The aesthetic feelings. Their increasing intensities are really different feelings.

[001-037] The aesthetic feelings offer us a still more striking example of this progressive stepping in of new elements, which can be detected in the fundamental emotion and which seem to increase its magnitude, although in reality they do nothing more than alter its nature. Let us consider the simplest of them, the feeling of grace. At first it is only the perception of a certain ease, a certain facility in the outward movements. And as those movements are easy which prepare the way for others, we are led to find a superior ease in the movements which can be foreseen, in the present attitudes in which future attitudes are pointed out and, as it were, prefigured. If jerky movements are wanting in grace, the reason is that each of them is self-sufficient and does not announce those which are to follow. If curves are more graceful than broken lines, the reason is that, while a curved line changes its direction at every moment, every new direction is indicated in the preceding one.

[001-038] Thus the perception of ease in motion passes over into the pleasure of mastering the flow of time and of holding the future in the present. A third element comes in when the graceful movements submit to a rhythm and are accompanied by music.

[001-039] For the rhythm and measure, by allowing us to foresee to a still greater extent the movements of the dancer, make us believe that we now control them.

[001-040] As we guess almost the exact attitude which the dancer is going to take, he seems to obey us when he really takes it: the regularity of the rhythm establishes a kind of communication between him and us, and the periodic returns of the measure are like so many invisible threads by means of which we set in motion this imaginary puppet. Indeed, if it stops for an instant, our hand in its impatience cannot refrain from making a movement, as though to push it, as though to replace it in the midst of this movement, the rhythm of which has taken complete possession of our thought and will. Thus a kind of physical sympathy enters into the feeling of grace. Now, in analysing the charm of this sympathy, you will find that it pleases you through its affinity with moral sympathy, the idea of which it subtly suggests.

[001-041] This last element, in which the others are merged after having in a measure ushered it in, explains the irresistible attractiveness of grace.

[001-042] We could hardly make out why it affords us such pleasure if it were nothing but a saving of effort, as Spencer maintains.[[1]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_1_1) But the truth is that in anything which we call very graceful we imagine ourselves able to detect, besides the lightness which is a sign of mobility, some suggestion of a possible movement towards ourselves, of a virtual and even nascent sympathy. It is this mobile sympathy, always ready to offer itself, which is just the essence of higher grace. Thus the increasing intensities of aesthetic feeling are here resolved into as many different feelings, each one of which, already heralded by its predecessor, becomes perceptible in it and then completely eclipses it. It is this qualitative progress which we interpret as a change of magnitude, because we like simple thoughts and because our language is ill-suited to render the subtleties of psychological analysis.

[001-043] The feeling of beauty: art puts to sleep our active and resistant powers and makes us responsive to suggestion.

[001-044] To understand how the feeling of the beautiful itself admits of degrees, we should have to submit it to a minute analysis. Perhaps the difficulty which we experience in defining: it is largely owing to the fact that we look upon the beauties of nature as anterior to those of art: the processes of art are thus supposed to be nothing more than means by which the artist expresses the beautiful, and the essence of the beautiful remains unexplained. But we might ask ourselves whether nature is beautiful otherwise than through meeting by chance certain processes of our art, and whether, in a certain sense, art is not prior to nature. Without even going so far, it seems more in conformity with the rules of a sound method to study the beautiful first in the works in which it has been produced by a conscious effort, and then to pass on by imperceptible steps from art to nature, which may be looked upon as an artist in its own way. By placing ourselves at this point of view, we shall perceive that the object of art is to put to sleep the active or rather resistant powers of our personality, and thus to bring us into a state of perfect responsiveness, in which we realize the idea that is suggested to us and sympathize with the feeling that is expressed. In the processes of art we shall find, in a weakened form, a refined and in some measure spiritualized version of the processes commonly used to induce the state of hypnosis. Thus, in music, the rhythm and measure suspend the normal flow of our sensations and ideas by causing our attention to swing to and fro between fixed points, and they take hold of us with such force that even the faintest imitation of a groan will suffice to fill us with the utmost sadness. If musical sounds affect us more powerfully than the sounds of nature, the reason is that nature confines itself to *expressing* feelings, whereas music *suggests* them to us. Whence indeed comes the charm of poetry? The poet is he with whom feelings develop into images, and the images themselves into words which translate them while obeying the laws of rhythm. In seeing these images pass before our eyes we in our turn experience the feeling which was, so to speak, their emotional equivalent: but we should never realize these images so strongly without the regular movements of the rhythm by which our soul is lulled into self-forgetfulness, and, as in a dream, thinks and sees with the poet. The plastic arts obtain an effect of the same kind by the fixity which they suddenly impose upon life, and which a physical contagion carries over to the attention of the spectator. While the works of ancient sculpture express faint emotions which play upon them like a passing breath, the pale immobility of the stone causes the feeling expressed or the movement just begun to appear as if they were fixed for ever, absorbing our thought and our will in their own eternity. We find in architecture, in the very midst of this startling immobility, certain effects analogous to those of rhythm. The symmetry of form, the indefinite repetition of the same architectural motive, causes our faculty of perception to oscillate between the same and the same again, and gets rid of those customary incessant changes which in ordinary life bring us back without ceasing to the consciousness of our personality: even the faint suggestion of an idea will then be enough to make the idea fill the whole of our mind.

[001-045] Thus art aims at impressing feelings on us rather than expressing them; it suggests them to us, and willingly dispenses with the imitation of nature when it finds some more efficacious means. Nature, like art, proceeds by suggestion, but does not command the resources of rhythm. It supplies the deficiency by the long comradeship, based on influences received in common by nature and by ourselves, of which the effect is that the slightest indication by nature of a feeling arouses sympathy in our minds, just as a mere gesture on the part of the hypnotist is enough to force the intended suggestion upon a subject accustomed to his control. And this sympathy is shown in particular when nature displays to us beings of *normal* proportions, so that our attention is distributed equally over all the parts of the figure without being fixed on any one of them: our perceptive faculty then finds itself lulled and soothed by this harmony, and nothing hinders any longer the free play of sympathy, which is ever ready to come forward as soon as the obstacle in its path is removed.

[001-046] Stages in the aesthetic emotion.

[001-047] It follows from this analysis that the feeling of the beautiful is no specific feeling, but that every feeling experienced by us will assume an aesthetic character, provided that it has been *suggested,* and not *caused.* It will now be understood why the aesthetic emotion seems to us to admit of degrees of intensity, and also of degrees of elevation. Sometimes the feeling which is suggested scarcely makes a break in the compact texture of psychic phenomena of which our history consists; sometimes it draws our attention from them, but not so that they become lost to sight; sometimes, finally, it puts itself in their place, engrosses us and completely monopolizes our soul. There are thus distinct phases in the progress of an aesthetic feeling, as in the state of hypnosis; and these phases correspond less to variations of degree than to differences of state or of nature. But the merit of a work of art is not measured so much by the power with which the suggested feeling takes hold of us as by the richness of this feeling itself: in other words, besides degrees of intensity we instinctively distinguish degrees of depth or elevation.

[001-048] If this last concept be analysed, it will be seen that the feelings and thoughts which the artist suggests to us express and sum up a more or less considerable part of his history. If the art which gives only sensations is an inferior art, the reason is that analysis often fails to discover in a sensation anything beyond the sensation itself. But the greater number of emotions are instinct with a thousand sensations, feelings or ideas which pervade them: each one is then a state unique of its kind and indefinable, and it seems that we should have to re-live the life of the subject who experiences it if we wished to grasp it in its original complexity.

[001-049] Yet the artist aims at giving us a share in this emotion, so rich, so personal, so novel, and at enabling us to experience what he cannot make us understand. This he will bring about by choosing, among the outward signs of his emotions, those which our body is likely to imitate mechanically, though slightly, as soon as it perceives them, so as to transport us all at once into the indefinable psychological state which called them forth.

[001-050] Thus will be broken down the barrier interposed by time and space between his consciousness and ours: and the richer in ideas and the more pregnant with sensations and emotions is the feeling within whose limits the artist has brought us, the deeper and the higher shall we find the beauty thus expressed. The successive intensities of the aesthetic feeling thus correspond to changes of state occurring in us, and the degrees of depth to the larger or smaller number of elementary psychic phenomena which we dimly discern in the fundamental emotion.

[001-051] The moral feelings. Pity. Its increasing intensity is a qualitative progress.

[001-052] The moral feelings might be studied in the same way. Let us take pity as an example.

[001-053] It consists in the first place in putting oneself mentally in the place of others, in suffering their pain. But if it were nothing more, as some have maintained, it would inspire us with the idea of avoiding the wretched rather than helping them, for pain is naturally abhorrent to us. This feeling of horror may indeed be at the root of pity; but a new element soon comes in, the need of helping our fellow-men and of alleviating their suffering. Shall we say with La Rochefoucauld that this so-called sympathy is a calculation, "a shrewd insurance against evils to come"? Perhaps a dread of some future evil to ourselves does hold a place in our compassion for other people's evil. These however are but lower forms of pity. True pity consists not so much in fearing suffering as in desiring it. The desire is a faint one and we should hardly wish to see it realized; yet we form it in spite of ourselves, as if Nature were committing some great injustice and it were necessary to get rid of all suspicion of complicity with her. The essence of pity is thus a need for self-abasement, an aspiration downwards.

[001-054] This painful aspiration nevertheless has a charm about it, because it raises us in our own estimation and makes us feel superior to those sensuous goods from which our thought is temporarily detached. The increasing intensity of pity thus consists in a qualitative progress, in a transition from repugnance to fear, from fear to sympathy, and from sympathy itself to humility.

[001-055] Conscious states connected with external causes or involving psychical symptoms.

[001-056] We do not propose to carry this analysis any further. The psychic states whose intensity we have just defined are deep-seated states which do not seem to have any close relation to their external cause or to involve the perception of muscular contraction. But such states are rare. There is hardly any passion or desire, any joy or sorrow, which is not accompanied by physical symptoms; and, where these symptoms occur, they probably count for something in the estimate of intensities. As for the sensations properly so called, they are manifestly connected with their external cause, and though the intensity of the sensation cannot be defined by the magnitude of its cause, there undoubtedly exists some relation between these two terms.

[001-057] In some of its manifestations consciousness even appears to spread outwards, as if intensity were being developed into extensity, e.g. in the case of muscular effort. Let us face this last phenomenon at once: we shall thus be transported at a bound to the opposite extremity of the series of psychic phenomena.

[001-058] Muscular effort seems at first sight to be quantitative.

[001-059] If there is a phenomenon which seems to be presented immediately to consciousness under the form of quantity or at least of magnitude, it is undoubtedly muscular effort.

[001-060] We picture to our minds a psychic force imprisoned in the soul like the winds in the cave of Aeolus, and only waiting for an opportunity to burst forth: our will is supposed to watch over this force and from time to time to open a passage for it, regulating the outflow by the effect which it is desired to produce. If we consider the matter carefully, we shall see that this somewhat crude conception of effort plays a large part in our belief in intensive magnitudes. Muscular force, whose sphere of action is space and which manifests itself in phenomena admitting of measure, seems to us to have existed previous to its manifestations, but in smaller volume, and, so to speak, in a compressed state: hence we do not hesitate to reduce this volume more and more, and finally we believe that we can understand how a purely psychic state, which does not occupy space, can nevertheless possess magnitude. Science, too, tends to strengthen the illusion of common sense with regard to this point. Bain, for example, declares that "the sensibility accompanying muscular movement coincides with the *outgoing* stream of nervous energy:"[[2]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_2_2) it is thus just the emission of nervous force which consciousness perceives. Wundt also speaks of a sensation, central in its origin, accompanying the voluntary innervation of the muscles, and quotes the example of the paralytic "who has a very distinct sensation of the force which he employs in the effort to raise his leg, although it remains motionless."[[3]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_3_3) Most of the authorities adhere to this opinion, which would be the unanimous view of positive science were it not that several years ago Professor William James drew the attention of physiologists to certain phenomena which had been but little remarked, although they were very remarkable.

[001-061] The feeling of effort. We are conscious not of an expenditure of force but of the resulting muscular movement.

[001-062] When a paralytic strives to raise his useless limb, he certainly does not execute this movement, but, with or without his will, he executes another. Some movement is carried out somewhere: otherwise there is no sensation of effort.[[4]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_4_4) Vulpian had already called attention to the fact that if a man affected with hemiplegia is told to clench his paralysed fist, he unconsciously carries out this action with the fist which is not affected. Ferrier described a still more curious phenomenon.[[5]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_5_5) Stretch out your arm while slightly bending your forefinger, as if you were going to press the trigger of a pistol; without moving the finger, without contracting any muscle of the hand, without producing any apparent movement, you will yet be able to feel that you are expending energy.

[001-063] On a closer examination, however, you will perceive that this sensation of effort coincides with the fixation of the muscles of your chest, that you keep your glottis closed and actively contract your respiratory muscles. As soon as respiration resumes its normal course the consciousness of effort vanishes, unless you really move your finger. These facts already seemed to show that we are conscious, not of an expenditure of force, but of the movement of the muscles which results from it. The new feature in Professor James's investigation is that he has verified the hypothesis in the case of examples which seemed to contradict it absolutely. Thus when the external rectus muscle of the right eye is paralysed, the patient tries in vain to turn his eye towards the right; yet objects seem to him to recede towards the right, and since the act of volition has produced no effect, it follows, said Helmholtz,[[6]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_6_6) that he is conscious of the effort of volition. But, replies Professor James, no account has been taken of what goes on in the other eye.

[001-064] This remains covered during the experiments; nevertheless it moves and there is not much trouble in proving that it does. It is the movement of the left eye, perceived by consciousness, which produces the sensation of effort together with the impression that the objects perceived by the right eye are moving. These and similar observations lead Professor James to assert that the feeling of effort is centripetal and not centrifugal. We are not conscious of a force which we are supposed to launch upon our organism: our feeling of muscular energy at work "is a complex afferent sensation, which comes from contracted muscles, stretched ligaments, compressed joints, an immobilized chest, a closed glottis, a knit brow, clenched jaws," in a word, from all the points of the periphery where the effort causes an alteration.

[001-065] Intensity of feeling of effort proportional to extent of our body affected.

[001-066] It is not for us to take a side in the dispute.

[001-067] After all, the question with which we have to deal is nοt whether the feeling of effort comes from the centre or the periphery, but in what does our perception of its intensity exactly consist? Now, it is sufficient to observe oneself attentively to reach a conclusion on this point which Professor James has not formulated, but which seems to us quite in accord with the spirit of his teaching. We maintain that the more a given effort seems to us to increase, the greater is the number of muscles which contract in sympathy with it, and that the apparent consciousness of a greater intensity of effort at a given point of the organism is reducible, in reality, to the perception of a larger surface of the body being affected.

[001-068] Our consciousness of an increase of muscular effort consists in the perception of (1) a greater number of peripheral sensations (2) a qualitative change in some of them.

[001-069] Try, for example, to clench the fist with increasing force. You will have the impression of a sensation of effort entirely localized in your hand and running up a scale of magnitudes.

[001-070] In reality, what you experience in your hand remains the same, but the sensation which was at first localized there has affected your arm and ascended to the shoulder; finally, the other arm stiffens, both legs do the same, the respiration is checked; it is the whole body which is at work.

[001-071] But you fail to notice distinctly all these concomitant movements unless you are warned of them: till then you thought you were dealing with a single state of consciousness which changed in magnitude. When you press your lips more and more tightly against one another, you believe that you are experiencing in your lips one and the same sensation which is continually increasing in strength: here again further reflection will show you that this sensation remains identical, but that certain muscles of the face and the head and then of all the rest of the body have taken part in the operation. You felt this gradual encroachment, this increase of the surface affected, which is in truth a change of quantity; but, as your attention was concentrated on your closed lips, you localized the increase there and you made the psychic force there expended into a magnitude, although it possessed no extensity.

[001-072] Examine carefully somebody who is lifting heavier and heavier weights: the muscular contraction gradually spreads over his whole body. As for the special sensation which he experiences in the arm which is at work, it remains constant for a very long time and hardly changes except in quality, the weight becoming at a certain moment fatigue, and the fatigue pain. Yet the subject will imagine that he is conscious of a continual increase in the psychic force flowing into his arm. He will not recognize his mistake unless he is warned of it, so inclined is he to measure a given psychic state by the conscious movements which accompany it! From these facts and from many others of the same kind we believe we can deduce the following conclusion: our consciousness of an increase of muscular effort is reducible to the twofold perception of a greater number of peripheral sensations, and of a qualitative change occurring in some of them.

[001-073] The same definition of intensity applies to superficial efforts, deep-seated feelings and states intermediate between the two.

[001-074] We are thus led to define the intensity of a superficial effort in the same way as that of a cases there is a qualitative progress and an increasing complexity, indistinctly perceived. But consciousness, accustomed to think in terms of space and to translate its thoughts into words, will denote the feeling by a single word and will localize the effort at the exact point where it yields a useful result: it will then become aware of an effort which is always of the same nature and increases at the spot assigned to it, and a feeling which, retaining the same name, grows without changing its nature. Now, the same illusion of consciousness is likely to be met with again in the case of the states which are intermediate between superficial efforts and deep-seated feelings. A large number of psychic states are accompanied, in fact, by muscular contractions and peripheral sensations. Sometimes these superficial elements are co-ordinated by a purely speculative idea, sometimes by an idea of a practical order. In the first case there is intellectual effort or attention; in the second we have the emotions which may be called violent or acute: anger, terror, and certain varieties of joy, sorrow, passion and desire. Let us show briefly that the same definition of intensity applies to these intermediate states.

[001-075] The intermediate states. Attention and its relation to muscular contraction.

[001-076] Attention is not a purely physiological phenomenon, but we cannot deny that it is accompanied by movements. These movements are neither the cause nor the result of the phenomenon; they are part of it, they express it in terms of space, as Ribot has so remarkably proved.[[7]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_7_7) Fechner had already reduced the effort of attention in a sense-organ to the muscular feeling "produced by putting in motion, by a sort of reflex action, the muscles which are correlated with the different sense organs." He had noticed the very distinct sensation of tension and contraction of the scalp, the pressure from without inwards over the whole skull, which we experience when we make a great effort to recall something. Ribot has studied more closely the movements which are characteristic of voluntary attention. "Attention contracts the frontal muscle: this muscle ... draws the eyebrow towards itself, raises it and causes transverse wrinkles on the forehead....

[001-077] In extreme cases the mouth is opened wide. With children and with many adults eager attention gives rise to a protrusion of the lips, a kind of pout."

[001-078] Certainly, a purely psychic factor will always enter into voluntary attention, even if it be nothing more than the exclusion by the will of all ideas foreign to the one with which the subject wishes to occupy himself. But, once this exclusion is made, we believe that we are still conscious of a growing tension of soul, of an immaterial effort which increases. Analyse this impression and you will find nothing but the feeling of a muscular contraction which spreads over a wider surface or changes its nature, so that the tension becomes pressure, fatigue and pain.

[001-079] The intensity of violent emotions as muscular tension.

[001-080] Now, we do not see any essential difference between the effort of attention and what may be The intensity called the effort of psychic tension: acute desire, uncontrolled anger, passionate love, violent hatred. Each of these states may be reduced, we believe, to a system of muscular contractions co-ordinated by an idea; but in the case of attention, it is the more or less reflective idea of knowing; in the case of emotion, the unreflective idea of acting. The intensity of these violent emotions is thus likely to be nothing but the muscular tension which accompanies them.

[001-081] Darwin has given a remarkable description of the physiological symptoms of rage. "The action of the heart is much accelerated.... The face reddens or may turn deadly pale. The respiration is laboured, the chest heaves, and the dilated nostrils quiver. The whole body often trembles. The voice is affected. The teeth are clenched or ground together and the muscular system is commonly stimulated to violent, almost frantic action. The gestures ... represent more or less plainly the act of striking or fighting with an enemy."[[8]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_8_8) We shall not go so far as to maintain, with Professor James,[[9]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_9_9) that the emotion of rage is reducible to the sum of these organic sensations: there will always be an irreducible psychic element in anger, if this be only the idea of striking or fighting, of which Darwin speaks, and which gives a common direction to so many diverse movements. But, though this idea determines the direction of the emotional state and the accompanying movements, the growing intensity of the state itself is, we believe, nothing but the deeper and deeper disturbance of the organism, a disturbance which consciousness has no difficulty in measuring by the number and extent of the bodily surfaces concerned. It will be useless to assert that there is a restrained rage which is all the more intense. The reason is that, where emotion has free play, consciousness does not dwell on the details of the accompanying movements, but it does dwell upon them and is concentrated upon them when its object is to conceal them.

[001-082] Eliminate, in short, all trace of organic disturbance, all tendency towards muscular contraction, and all that will be left of anger will be the idea, or, if you still insist on making it an emotion, you will be unable to assign it any intensity.

[001-083] Intensity and reflex movements. No essential difference between intensity of deep-seated feelings and that of violent emotions.

[001-084] "Fear, when strong," says Herbert Spencer, "expresses itself in cries, in efforts to escape, in palpitations, in tremblings."[[10]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_10_10) We go further, and maintain that these movements form part of the terror itself: by their means the terror becomes an emotion capable of passing through different degrees of intensity. Suppress them entirely, and the more or less intense state of terror will be succeeded by an idea of terror, the wholly intellectual representation of a danger which it concerns us to avoid. There are also high degrees of joy and sorrow, of desire, aversion and even shame, the height of which will be found to be nothing but the reflex movements begun by the organism and perceived by consciousness.

[001-085] "When lovers meet," says Darwin, "we know that their hearts beat quickly, their breathing is hurried and their faces flushed."[[11]](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Footnote_11_11) Aversion is marked by movements of repugnance which we repeat without noticing when we think of the object of our dislike. We blush and involuntarily clench the fingers when we feel shame, even if it be retrospective. The acuteness of these emotions is estimated by the number and nature of the peripheral sensations which accompany them.

[001-086] Little by little, and in proportion as the emotional state loses its violence and gains in depth, the peripheral sensations will give place to inner states; it will be no longer our outward movements but our ideas, our memories, our states of consciousness of every description, which will turn in larger or smaller numbers in a definite direction. There is, then, no essential difference from the point of view of intensity between the deep-seated feelings, of which we spoke at the beginning, and the acute or violent emotions which we have just passed in review. To say that love, hatred, desire, increase in violence is to assert that they are projected outwards, that they radiate to the surface, that peripheral sensations are substituted for inner states: but superficial or deep-seated, violent or reflective, the intensity of these feelings always consists in the multiplicity of simple states which consciousness dimly discerns in them.

[001-087] Absolute, reality of space, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91); freedom not, [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166); law of consciousness, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); Spinoza and, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); knowledge of ourselves, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235).

[001-088] Abstraction, implies homogeneous medium, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97); breaks up elements of idea, [134](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_134); and diagram of process of reaching a decision, [177](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_177) f.; and Lord Kelvin's theory of matter, [206](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_206).

[001-089] Acceleration, hypothetical, of motions of universe, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116) f., [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193) ff.

[001-090] Achilles, and tortoise, [73](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_73) f.

[001-091] Act, not divisible like object, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); free acts, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165) ff.; "possible acts," [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174) ff.

[001-092] Act, of mind: all unity due to, [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80) f.; neglected in empirical theory of space, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93) f.; nature of, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95).

[001-093] Addition, of sensation-differences, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64), [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65); process of, [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80), [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); implies multiplicity of parts, [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85).

[001-094] Advice, relation of, to freedom, [169](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_169).

[001-095] Aeolus, cave of, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20). *Aesthetic,* Kant's *Transcendental,* [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92), [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93)· Aesthetic feelings, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11) ff.; suggested, not caused, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17); stages in, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17).

[001-096] Alceste, indignation of, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167).

[001-097] Algebra, deals with results not processes, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119).

[001-098] Analysis, already visible in mental image, [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84); distorts feelings, [132](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_132) f.; of a thing, not of a process, [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219).

[001-099] Anger, psychic element in, [29](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_29); and organic disturbance, [30](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_30).

[001-100] Animals, ability to find their way through space, [96](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_96); space not so homogeneous for, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97); perceive duration as quality, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127); do not picture distinct external world, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-101] Antecedents, same, and same consequents, [199](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_199), [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208).

[001-102] Architecture, compared with rhythm, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15).

[001-103] Aristotle, distinguishes potential and actual, [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121).

[001-104] Arithmetic, splits up units, [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84).

[001-105] Art, and beauty, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14); object of, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14); and hypnotism, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14); the plastic arts, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15); suggesting, not expressing feelings, [16](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_16); merit of work of, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17); yielding only sensations, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17); aim and method of artist, [18](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_18).

[001-106] Artificial, reconstruction of concrete phenomenon, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163).

[001-107] Aspect, twofold, of terms in a series, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); of the self, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128) ff.; of conscious states, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129) ff.; [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137) ff.

[001-108] Association, by contiguity, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136), [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164); self cannot be constituted by, [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139), [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); associationist determinism, [148](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_148), [155](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_155), [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159); of ideas in interrupted conversation, [156](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_156); illustration from hypnotism, [157](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_157); illustration from deliberation, [158](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_158); involves defective conception of self, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159) ff., [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); of end and movement, [160](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_160) f.; associations of smell, [161](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_161); its mistakes, [161](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_161) ff.; fits simple sensations, [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164); cannot explain deeper states of self, [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164); every-day acts obey laws of, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167) ff., [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238).

[001-109] Astronomy, measurement of time in, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107); prediction of celestial phenomena, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117), [192](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_192) ff., [198](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_198).

[001-110] Attention, and muscular tension, [27](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_27); Fechner on, [27](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_27); Ribot on, [27](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_27); and psychic tension, [28](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_28); and formation of number, [82](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_82), [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84).

[001-111] Bain, on nervous energy, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); on theory of space, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); on conflict of motives, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159).

[001-112] Beauty, feeling of, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14) ff.; in nature and art, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14) ff.

[001-113] Beliefs, adopted without reason, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); compared to cell in organism, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); some not properly assimilated, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136).

[001-114] Blix, experiments on temperature sense, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46).

[001-115] Body, movements of, as suggesting psychic state, [18](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_18); inclination of, in comparing pleasures, [38](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_38).

[001-116] Causality, law of, [199](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_199), [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201); as regular succession, [202](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_202) f.; common sense and meaning of, [203](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_203); as prefiguring of future phenomenon in present conditions, [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204) ff.; not a necessary principle, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); Spinoza on, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); identity and, [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209), [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210); as necessary determination of phenomena means human freedom, [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210); and second type of prefiguring, [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211) f.; this leads to Leibniz, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213), this does not involve determinism, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); involves two conceptions of duration, [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215); confusion of these two senses, [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216); relation of external, as mathematical, [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219); relation of inner, as dynamic, [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219); Kant ascribed same meaning to, in inner and outer world, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232).

[001-117] Cause, external, and intensity, [4](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_4) f., [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20), [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42) ff., [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72); introduced into effect, [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47), [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54), [68](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_68); external, and separation of sensations, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125); series of associations sometimes effect rather than, [156](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_156) ff.; in inner states no recurrence of same, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154), [199](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_199) f., [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); assertion that effect bound up with, [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201); analysis of concept of, [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201); self as free, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235).

[001-118] Cell, in organism, beliefs compared to, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135).

[001-119] Change, but not duration, attributed to external things, [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227).

[001-120] Character, freedom and, [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172) f.; and prediction of future actions, [184](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_184).

[001-121] Clocks, measurement of time by, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108) f.; perception of strokes of without expressly counting, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127).

[001-122] Co-existence, number and relations of, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.*; can space result from relations of, [94](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_94); of past and present only in consciousness, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112).

[001-123] Cold, perception of, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46).

[001-124] Colour, changes of hue and invariable colours, [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51) white, grey and black, [53](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_53) f.; degrees of saturation, [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54); intensity of, [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54); colours of spectrum, [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51), [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54), [57](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_57); changes in sensation of, [57](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_57); can there be equidistant tints, [58](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_58).

[001-125] Compromise, see also Endosmosis: between idea of free force and necessity, [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217); forms of perception result of, [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); intensity as compromise between quality and quantity, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); number results from a, [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); idea of measurable time results from a, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228).

[001-126] Consciousness, compared to invisible musician, [147](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_147); as epiphenomenon, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152); Kant separates external perception and, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); succession without distinction in, [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); matter and form of, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-127] Conservation, of energy, see Energy; of motion, [151](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_151); of *vis viva,* [151](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_151); conservative systems not the only ones possible, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152).

[001-128] Continuity, of number when formed, [82](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_82) f.

[001-129] Contradiction, law of non-, [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89), [150](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_150), [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207), reconciliation of apparent at deeper level, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136).

[001-130] Counting, units mast be identical, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76); also distinct, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77); flock of sheep, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76) f.; battalion of soldiers, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76); implies intuition of space, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77) ff.; material objects, [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85); conscious states, [86](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_86), [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89); strokes of a bell, [86](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_86); moments of duration, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104); oscillations of a pendulum, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104) f.; two sides of the process of, [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123); strokes of a clock by qualitative effect, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127).

[001-131] Crisis, freedom shown at, [170](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_170), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239). *Critique of Pure Reason,* result of, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235). *Critique philosophique,* article in, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) n.

[001-132] Dancer, and feeling of grace, [12](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_12).

[001-133] Darwin, on rage, [29](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_29); on violent emotions and reflex movements, [30](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_30); on pain and reactions, [37](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_37).

[001-134] Definition, of equality of sensation-differences, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64); of addition of sensation-differences, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64), [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65); of number, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75); of subjective and objective, [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83); of space, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95), [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); none of right and left, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97); of simultaneity, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110); of equal intervals of time, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); of velocity, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117) f.; of inertia of matter, [142](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_142); of freedom, leads to determinism, [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220) f., [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239).

[001-135] Delbœuf, his measurement of luminous sensation, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52), [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56) ff., [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67) ff.; his underlying postulate, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60).

[001-136] Deliberation, process of, [158](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_158), [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); wrongly pictured as oscillation in space, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183).

[001-137] Depth, of aesthetic feeling, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17) f.; of emotional states, [31](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_31).

[001-138] Descartes, and conservation of motion, [151](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_151); his mischievous genius, [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193); his view of matter, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); Cartesian physics, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); and regularity of physical world, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208).

[001-139] Desire, progress of a, [8](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_8); conceived as a distinct thing, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159).

[001-140] Determinism, two kinds of, [142](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_142); physical, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143) ff.; psychological, [155](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_155) ff.; rests on misconception of duration, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143), [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173); and molecular theory of matter, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143) f., [147](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_147); of psychic states does not follow from that of cerebral states, [146](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_146) f.; associationist, [148](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_148), [155](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_155), [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159); and hypnotism, [157](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_157); self-determination, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165), [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172); its mechanical conception of self, [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); could act have been different? [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173), [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201), [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); can act be predicted? [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173), [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183) ft., [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201), [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); and "possible acts," [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174); and character, [184](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_184) ff., [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172); and astronomical prediction, [192](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_192) ff.; and law of causality, [199](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_199) ff.; misunderstanding of causality underlies all, [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201) ff.; of phenomena as involving human freedom, [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210), [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215) ff.; not involved in second type of prefiguring, [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211) f., [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215) f.; Leibniz's, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); as compromis between idea of free effort and necessity, [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217); attempt to define freedom leads to, [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220), [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); all, refuted by experience, [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230); meaningless if duration heterogeneous, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239).

[001-141] Diagrams, geometrical, [176](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_176), [191](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_191).

[001-142] Differentials, expressing Fechner's Law, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62), [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65); dealing with motion, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119).

[001-143] Dimension, time as fourth, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109).

[001-144] Discontinuity, of number, [82](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_82) f.

[001-145] Disgust, Richet's description of, [36](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_36).

[001-146] Distinction, two meanings of, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.,* [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121); succession without, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101); of psychic states, leads to mechanical conception of self, [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); Kant's, between matter and form of consciousness, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-147] Donaldson, experiments on temperature sense, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46).

[001-148] Dreams, freshness in, [8](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_8); charm in, [10](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_10); superficial psychic states removed in, [126](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_126); overlying images in, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136).

[001-149] Duration, moments counted by means of points in space, [78](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_78) f., [87](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_87); differs from homogeneous time in having nothing to do with space, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91); empirical attempts to build up space from, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99) f., [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); conception of pure, [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100), [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104) ff., [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229); expressed in terms of space, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101), [103](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_103), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); order of succession in, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101) f.; any homogeneity in, implies space, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104), [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); as interpenetration of conscious states, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104), [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107), [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108), [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232) ff., [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); pure, is wholly qualitative, [106](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_106), [126](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_126) f., [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229); not measurable, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107) ff.; not measured by clocks, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108) f.; as heterogeneous and with no relation to number, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226), [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); how mistaken idea of homogeneity arises, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109); and motion, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114), [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124); eliminated from time by science, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115), [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); and simultaneity, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115) f.; and astronomical prediction, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117), [192](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_192) ff.; cannot be represented by mathematical formulae, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119); as mental synthesis, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120); none in space, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); as quality, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127), [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193), [197](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_197), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); felt as quality in sleep, [126](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_126); perceived as quality by animals, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127); homogeneous, as symbolical representation derived from space, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); its two forms, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128); constituted by deep-seated conscious states, [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); determinism rests on inaccurate conception of, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143), [153](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_153), [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173), [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209), [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215) f., [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); acts like a cause in realm of life, [153](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_153); heterogeneity of, precludes return to former state, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154), [200](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_200), [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232), [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); real, and prediction, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183) ff.; of conscious states unalterable, [196](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_196) f.; difference between past and future, [198](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_198); applicable to persons, not to external things, [200](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_200), [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209) f., [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); as contained in single moment, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); real, as leading to free will, [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210), [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215) f.; attributed to things, [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); two conceptions of, in causality, [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215); separated from extensity by science, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228) f., [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230); must similarly be separated by philosophy, [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229) f.; Kant put self outside, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); possible to get back into pure, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); Kant confused with space, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); science cannot deal with, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); if homogeneous, no freedom, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); origin of feeling of, [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238) n.; no moral crisis without, [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238) n.; key to problem of free will, [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238) *n.* Dynamism, as system of nature, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140); and relation between facts and laws, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140) f.; its view of simplicity, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141); inner, [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172).

[001-150] Eclipse, prediction of, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117), [194](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_194)· Education, not properly assimilated, [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166); may curtail freedom, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167).

[001-151] Effort, intensity of, [7](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_7), [24](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_24), [25](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_25), [26](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_26); muscular, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) ff.; apparently quantitative, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); feeling of, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21) ff., [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211); experimental investigation of, [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22) ff.; superficial, [26](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_26); in estimating intensity and pitch of sound, [45](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_45) f.; in second type of prefiguring, [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211); force and, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); ideas of free, and necessity to be kept apart, [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217), [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218).

[001-152] Eleatics, their paradoxes, [74](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_74), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); arise from confusion between motion and space, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112) ff.; Achilles and tortoise, [113](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_113) f.

[001-153] Elevation, of aesthetic feeling, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17).

[001-154] Emotions, violent, intensity of, [28](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_28) ff.

[001-155] Empiricist, theory of space, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93) f.; derivation of extensive from inextensive, [94](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_94), [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222).

[001-156] Endosmosis, see also Compromise:—between succession and externality, 109, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); between mobility and space, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); between free effort and necessary determination, [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218).

[001-157] Energy, kinetic and potential, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152); may be new kind of, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152).

[001-158] Energy, conservation of: incompatible with freedom, [142](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_142), [144](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_144); and determination of physiological and nervous phenomena, [145](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_145); does not involve determinism of conscious states, [146](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_146) f.; is it universal? [150](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_150), [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154); in the natural sciences, [150](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_150); implies return of system to former state, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152); conscious force or free will may escape law of, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154); illegitimate extension of, [155](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_155), [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230).

[001-159] English philosophers, on extensity and succession, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99).

[001-160] Epiphenomenon, consciousness as, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152).

[001-161] Equations, expressing Fechner's Law, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62); express something finished, [19](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_19); transformability of, [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204). Évellin, on space, time and motion, [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114).

[001-162] Experiments, and experimental observations: Wundt on paralytic, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); Vulpian on hemiplegia, [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22); Ferner on feeling of effort, [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22) f.; James on feeling of effort, [23](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_23); clenching the fist, [24](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_24); compressing the lips, [25](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_25); lifting a weight, [25](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_25), [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48) f.; Féré on muscular force, [41](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_41); pin pricks, [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42); on temperature sense, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46); Helmholtz on colour and intensity, [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51); photometric, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) ff.; Lehmann and Neiglick's, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52); Delbœuf's on measurement

[001-163] of luminous sensation, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) ff., [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56) ff.

[001-164] Explanation, confused with fact, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181).

[001-165] Extensity, implies relation of container to contained, [3](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_3); no point of contact between extended and unextended, [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); as aspect of physical qualities, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92); Kant on, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92), [148](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_148); attempted derivation of, from the unextended, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93) f., [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99) f., [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); homogeneous, as result of stripping matter of concrete qualities, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); Descartes' view of matter as homogeneous, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); hylozoism and qualities of matter, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); confusion with duration raises problem of freedom, [221](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_221), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); separated from duration by science, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228), [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230).

[001-166] Externality, of things in space, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99); exists outside the ego, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); endosmosis between succession and, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); of things, helps to cut up psychic life, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125) f., [130](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_130), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); animals have not same tendency to picture, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138); empirical school attempts to build up, from inner states, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); external things subject to change but not duration, [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); external world distinct from ourselves, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-167] Fact, relation between law and, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140) f.; explanation confused with, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181).

[001-168] Faraday, and centres of force, [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218).

[001-169] Fear, Spencer on, [30](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_30); conceived as distinct state, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159).

[001-170] Fechner, on attention and tension [27](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_27); his psychophysics, [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56), [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60) ff.; his formulae, [61](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_61), [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62); his law, [61](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_61); his logarithmic law, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62) *n.*; method of minimum differences, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69).

[001-171] Feeling, intensity of, [7](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_7), [185](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_185); deep-seated, [7](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_7) ff.; aesthetic, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11) ff.; of grace, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11) f.; of beauty, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14) f.; richness of aesthetic, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17) f.; moral, [18](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_18) f.; and physical symptoms, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) ff.; of effort, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21) ff., [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211); distorted by analysis, [132](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_132) f.; something living and developing, [133](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_133); leads to resolution, [133](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_133), [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); whole soul reflected in each, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165); change in duration of, means change in nature, [197](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_197) f.

[001-172] Féré, C, on sensation and muscular force, [41](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_41).

[001-173] Ferrier, on feeling of effort, [16](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_16).

[001-174] Figure, see Diagram.

[001-175] Flavour, changing, solidified by language, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131).

[001-176] Force, alleged psychic, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) f., [25](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_25); muscular, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); nervous, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); sensation of, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); conscious states not forces, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165), [170](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_170); idea of, as indeterminate effort, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); self as a free, [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216); idea of, and necessity, [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216), [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217); as free spontaneity, [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217); ideas of free force and necessity separated by science, [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218).

[001-177] "Form of Sensibility," Kant's theory of, [94](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_94); homogeneous space as, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-178] Forms, borrowed from external world in perception of self, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183), [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217), [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); borrowed from self in perception of things, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); of perception, result of compromise, [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); elimination of those borrowed from external world, [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); Kant's distinction between matter and, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-179] Formulae, Weber's, [61](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_61); Fechner's, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62); dealing with velocity, [118](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_118).

[001-180] Fouillée, on freedom as a motive, [160](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_160).

[001-181] Fourth dimension, time as, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109).

[001-182] Freedom, Free Will, see also Determinism: origin of problem, [74](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_74), [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139), [221](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_221), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); cause of conflict between mechanism and dynamism, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140); twofold objection to, [142](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_142); and molecular theory of matter, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143) f.; and conservation of energy, [145](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_145) ff.; strictly limited if principle of conservation universal, [149](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_149) f.; as conscious force, exempt from law of conservation, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154); defenders of, mistakenly agree that conscious states are distinct things, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159); Fouillée on, [160](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_160); as self-expression, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165), [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172); not absolute, but admits of degrees, [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166); many live without realizing, [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166); may be curtailed by education, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167); free acts rare, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); free decision springs from whole or fundamental self, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); covered over by automatism, [168](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_168), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); sometimes resigned through indolence, [169](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_169); shown in times of crisis, [170](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_170), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); and character, [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172); to be sought in characteristic of the decision or act, [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173), [182](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_182) f.; Mill on, [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174); and "possible acts," [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174); free action compared to over-ripe fruit, [176](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_176); distinction of successive phases in, leads to determinism, [177](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_177) ff.; the self infallible in affirming its, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183); not disproved by causality as regular succession, [202](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_202) f.; safe-guarded by different conceptions of causality taken by themselves, [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215) f.; self as free cause, [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); real but indefinable, [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219) ff., [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239) f.; why denied and defined, [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229); Kant on, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232), [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235), [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238); incomprehensible if duration homogeneous, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); key to problem of, [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238) *n.*; follows from uniqueness of relation of psychic state to act, [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239).

[001-183] Fusion, see Interpenetration.

[001-184] Future, see Prediction.

[001-185] Ghost, time as ghost of space, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99).

[001-186] Goldscheider, experiments on temperature sense, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46).

[001-187] Grace, feeling of, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11) f.

[001-188] Hamilton, Mill on, quoted, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159), [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174)· Harmony, Leibniz on pre-established, [147](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_147), [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213), [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214).

[001-189] Heat, sensation of, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46) f.; mechanical theory of, [151](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_151).

[001-190] Helmholtz, on effort of volition, [23](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_23); on colour and intensity, [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51).

[001-191] Hemiplegia, Vulpian on, [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22).

[001-192] Heterogeneity, qualitative, interpreted as extensive homogeneity, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95); of [[duration|pure duration]], [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226), [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); of deep-seated psychic states, [200](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_200); homogeneous universe assumed behind, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); Kant's distinction between homogeneity and, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-193] Homogeneity, of time, [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90), [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98), [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107), [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); of space, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95) f., [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98), [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); is all homogeneity space? [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); supposed two forms of, [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); none in duration, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104), [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); none in motion, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); how introduced into duration, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124) f., [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128); connection between, and general ideas, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163); assumed behind heterogeneity, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); Kant's distinction between heterogeneity and, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-194] Hope, why pleasurable, [9](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_9) f.

[001-195] Hylozoism, ancient, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213), [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214).

[001-196] Hypnotism, and art, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14); and aesthetic feeling, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17); illustrating association of ideas, [157](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_157); non-incorporation of idea received during, [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166).

[001-197] Ideas, analysis of, [134](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_134); interpenetration of, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); unreasoning adherence to, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); some not incorporated, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); associationism fits superficial, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136); reconciliation of, at deeper level, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136); association of, in interrupted conversation, [156](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_156); general, and perception of homogeneous medium, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163).

[001-198] Identity, principle of, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); attempt to replace causality by, [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209); causality does not coincide with, [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210).

[001-199] Illusion, as to psychic states possessing magnitude, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); reflective consciousness has two fundamental, [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190); of attributing mutual externality to conscious states, [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); leading to difficulties about free will, [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240).

[001-200] Immobility, movement cannot be made from, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); all that science retains of motion is, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119), [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-201] Impenetrability, of matter, [88](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_88) f.

[001-202] Inertia, of organism, and pleasure, [38](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_38); *vis inertiae,*38; dynamism derives, from voluntary activity, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140); idea of spontaneity simpler than, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141); spontaneity settling down into, [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220).

[001-203] Instinct, perception of duration in sleep compared to, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127); of the intellect, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135).

[001-204] Intensity, of psychic states, [1](2217104573805691701_56852-h-0.htm.html#Page_1) ff., [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224) f.; of sensations, [1](2217104573805691701_56852-h-0.htm.html#Page_1) ff., [7](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_7), [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20), [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32), [40](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_40), [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47), [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172) f.; alleged intensive magnitude, [2](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_2), [3](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_3) f., [71](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_71) f., [106](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_106), [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); no point of contact with extensive, [3](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_3), [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); estimated by external causes, [4](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_4) f., [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20), [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32) f., [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72); estimated by atomic movements, [6](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_6); different kinds of, [7](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_7); of deep-seated psychic states, [8](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_8), [26](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_26); of a growing desire, [8](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_8) f.; of joy, [10](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_10); of sorrow, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11); of aesthetic feelings, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11) ff., [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17) f., of moral feelings, pity, [18](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_18) f.; of feeling of effort, [24](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_24) f.; of superficial effort, [26](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_26); of intermediate states, [27](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_27); of violent emotions, [28](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_28) f., [31](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_31); as multiplicity of simple states, [31](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_31), [73](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_73); of affective sensations, [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32) f., [34](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_34) f., [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47), [73](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_73) and organic disturbance, [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32); of pain, [35](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_35) ff.; of disgust, [36](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_36); of representative sensations, [39](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_39) ff., *72*; as quality, [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90), [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190), [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); of sensation of sound, [43](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_43) f.; of heat and cold, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46) f.; of sensation of weight, [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48); of sensation of light, [50](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_50) ff.; of a colour, [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54); two factors contributing to, [73](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_73); as qualitative sign of quantity, [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90), [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); of deep-seated feeling, nothing but the feeling, [185](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_185); how others made to realize, [185](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_185) f.; as compromise between quality and quantity, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225).

[001-205] Interpenetration, multiplicity of, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75), [162](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_162); of conscious states, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99), [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100) f., [132](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_132) f., [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); in pure duration, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104), [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107), [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108), [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); of states of deep-seated self, [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125), [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164); of strong feelings, [132](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_132) f.; of ideas, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); of apparently contradictory ideas at deeper level, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136); in process of addition, [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); replaced by plurality, [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237).

[001-206] Introspection, as leading to fundamental self, [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231).

[001-207] Intuition, of space necessary to idea of number, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77) ff., [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84), [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); of homogeneous medium, perhaps peculiar to man, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95) f., [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); of motion and duration, [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114); of homogeneous space as step towards social life, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138), [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); immediate, and discursive thought, [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237).

[001-208] James, W. on feeling of effort, [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22), [23](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_23), [24](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_24); on rage, [29](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_29).

[001-209] Joy, feeling of, [10](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_10).

[001-210] Juxtaposition, see also Interpenetration: inapplicable to inner states, [8](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_8) f.; multiplicity of, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.*, [162](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_162); implies intuition of space, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77) f.; number as a, [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85), [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89); of conscious states, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); in homogeneous time, [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121); of lifeless states, replaces a feeling, [133](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_133).

[001-211] Kant, theory of space, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92) f.; Transcendental Aesthetic, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92), [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); distinguished matter and form of representation, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); "form of sensibility," [94](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_94), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); separated time and space, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); mistake about time, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); gave causality same meaning in inner and outer world, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); clung to freedom but made it noumenal, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232), [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238); put free self outside space and time, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); on "things in themselves," [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233) f.; made time and space homogeneous, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); and the Practical Reason, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); distinguished matter and form of consciousness, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); result of Critique of Pure Reason, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); raised barrier between phenomena and things in themselves, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); distinguished space from matter, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-212] Kelvin, Lord, his theory of matter, [206](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_206).

[001-213] Lange, on materialism and determinism, [144](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_144).

[001-214] Language, unequal to psychological analysis, [9](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_9), [13](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_13), [160](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_160), [196](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_196), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); foreign, sounds louder, [41](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_41); dominates thought, [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); perhaps implies intuition of space, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97), [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); uses terms borrowed from space, [122](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_122); favours separation of states of self, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); solidifying influence of, on impressions, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129) f.; gives fixed form to fleeting sensations, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131) f.; description distorts the feelings, [132](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_132) ff.; only ideas which least belong to us can be expressed by, [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136), [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164); and social life, [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); same impulse to picture externality as to speak, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138); second self formed, whose states expressed by, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138); illustration of inadequacy of, [160](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_160) f.; general ideas and intuition of space, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163); fixes only impersonal aspect of emotions, [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164); psychology misled by, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165); how determinism aided by, [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); why same feeling, when repeated, called by same name, [200](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_200); favoured by avoiding separation of duration and extensity, [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230) f.

[001-215] La Rochefoucauld, on sympathy, [19](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_19).

[001-216] Law, Weber's, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60); Fechner's, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62); Fechner's logarithmic, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62) w.; of non-contradiction, [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89), [150](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_150), [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); of Nature, mechanism and dynamism on, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140) f.; relation between facts and, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140) f.; "same antecedents, same consequents," [199](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_199), [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); of causality, [199](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_199) ff.; physical phenomena obey, [202](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_202), [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219); principle of identity as absolute, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); relation of psychic state to act cannot be expressed by, [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239).

[001-217] Lehmann, his photometric experiments, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52), Leibniz, on pre-established harmony, [147](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_147), [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213), [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); and conservation of *vis viva,*151; on qualities of matter, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); on matter as monad, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213), [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); conception of causality as leading to, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); and determinism, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214).

[001-218] Light, sensation of, [50](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_50) ff.

[001-219] Line, succession symbolized as a, [103](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_103); motion not a, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120); time not a, [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181).

[001-220] "Local signs," [49](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_49), [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95); Lotze on, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93).

[001-221] Lotze, theory of local signs, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93).

[001-222] Magnitude, quantitative differences applicable to, [2](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_2) ff.; alleged intensive, [2](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_2), [3](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_3) f., [71](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_71) f., [106](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_106), [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); two species of, [3](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_3) f.; of growing desire, [9](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_9); and muscular effort, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) f.; of sensations, [31](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_31) ff., [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72); intensity of pain as a, [37](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_37); pleasure as a, [38](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_38); of representative sensations, [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47); interval between colours as, [57](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_57) f.; interval between sensations as, [66](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_66), [68](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_68) f.; intensity not a, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225).

[001-223] Mathematics, represents results, not processes, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); exemplifies one type of prefiguring, [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204) f.

[001-224] Matter, impenetrability of, [88](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_88); molecular theory of, and determinism, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143) f., [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209); atomic theory of, still hypothetical, [145](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_145); has no apparent duration, [153](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_153); stripped of concrete qualities, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); shape as quality of, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); Lord Kelvin's vortex theory of, [206](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_206); Descartes' view of, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); hylozoism and qualities of, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); Leibniz and qualities of, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); distinguished from form, [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); distinguished from space, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-225] Mean gradations, method of, [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56), [59](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_59), [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69).

[001-226] Mechanics, treatment of time and duration

[001-227] in, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); and notion of velocity, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117); deals with equations, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119).

[001-228] Mechanism, as system of nature, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140); and relation between facts and laws, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140) f.; its view of simplicity, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141); its influence on determinism, [148](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_148), [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209); makes consciousness an epiphenomenon, [152](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_152); and Lord Kelvin's theory of matter, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); Spinozistic, [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209); and coincidence of causality with identity, [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210); meant to explain conduct, will control it, [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237).

[001-229] Metaphor, see Symbolical Representation.

[001-230] Method, of mean gradations, [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56), [59](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_59), [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69); of minimum differences, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64)f., [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69).

[001-231] Mill, on Hamilton, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159) *n.,* [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174) *n.*; on distinct states of self, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159); on free will, [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174).

[001-232] Mind, act of, see Act. *Mind,* articles in, quoted, [29](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_29) n., [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46) n.

[001-233] Minimum differences, method of, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64) f., [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69).

[001-234] Mobility, and motion, in f.; eliminated by science, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228).

[001-235] Molière, *Le Misanthrope* quoted, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167).

[001-236] Monad, Leibniz on matter as, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213), [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214).

[001-237] Motion, see also Movement: analysis of concept of, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110) f.; real only for conscious spectator, [111](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_111); as mental synthesis, in, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120); mobility and, [111](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_111); of shooting star, [111](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_111); confused with space in Eleatic paradox, [113](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_113) f.; intuition of, [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114); not derivable from immobilizes, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); no homogeneous element in, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); science eliminates mobility from, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); hypothetical acceleration of cosmic, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116) f., [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193) ff.; cannot be represented by mathematical formulae, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119) f., [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); helps to form idea of homogeneous duration, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124); Descartes and conservation of, [151](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_151); and Lord Kelvin's theory of matter, [206](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_206).

[001-238] Motives, actions explained by, [148](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_148); and process of deliberation, [158](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_158); act not determined by, [158](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_158); Bain on conflict of, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159); Fouillée on freedom as a, [160](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_160); choice without, shown at crisis, [170](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_170).

[001-239] Movement, see also Motion: atomic, and intensity, [6](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_6); molecular, and sensation, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33), [34](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_34); automatic and free, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33), [35](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_35); in estimating sensation of weight, [49](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_49) f.; measurement of velocity of, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107), [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117).

[001-240] Müller, Johann, nativistic theory of space, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93).

[001-241] Multiplicity, inner, [73](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_73); of conscious states, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) ff., [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90) f.; of juxtaposition, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.*, [162](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_162); of interpenetration, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.,* [162](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_162); implied in number, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76), [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80) f.; implied in addition, [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85); two kinds of [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85) f., [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91), [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129); discrete, [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90), [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91), [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120) f., [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); of number and of conscious states, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91), [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121); continuous or qualitative, [105](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_105), [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226), [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); determinism rests on inaccurate conception of, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143), [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173); associationism confuses the two kinds of, [162](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_162) f.; of psychic states as constituting duration, [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); duration as qualitative, [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226), [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229).

[001-242] Music, and suggestion, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15), [44](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_44); duration and musical rhythm, [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100); increase of stimulus compared to musical phrase, [106](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_106); organization of sensations compared to melodic phrase, [111](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_111); strokes of clock compared to musical phrase, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127); consciousness compared to invisible musician, [147](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_147).

[001-243] Nativist theory of space, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93).

[001-244] Nature beauty in, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14); compared with art, [16](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_16); profoundly utilitarian, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33); view taken by mechanism and dynamism, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140) f.; concrete phenomena of, abolished, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207); view of, as whimsical, [212](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_212).

[001-245] Necessity, see also Determinism: mechanism cannot escape, [140](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_140); as *deus ex machina* in ancient hylozoism, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); and idea of force, [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216) ff.

[001-246] Neiglick, his photometric experiments, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) Noël, G., article on number and space, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.* Notes, why classified as higher and lower, [45](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_45) f.

[001-247] Noumenon, freedom as, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232).

[001-248] Novelist, how effects produced, [133](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_133), [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164), [185](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_185).

[001-249] Number, natural series, [2](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_2), [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80); definition of, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75); article on space and, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.*; units of, identical, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76); units of, distinct, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); implies intuition of space, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77) ff., [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83) f., [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); both unit and synthesis of units, [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80) f.; discontinuity of, [82](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_82); process of forming a, [82](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_82) f.; why divisible at will, [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83); subjective and objective in, [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84); thought of as a juxtaposition, [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85); inapplicable to multiplicity of conscious states, [87](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_87); and impenetrability of matter, [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89); those in daily use have emotional equivalents, [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123); time as a, [195](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_195), [197](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_197); results from a compromise, [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226).

[001-250] Objective, definition of, [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83).

[001-251] Objectivity, of things, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-252] Objects, contrasted with progress, in, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112), [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219); can be analysed, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); help to cut up our psychic life, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124) f.; seem to live and grow old, [130](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_130); tend to fix changing feelings, [130](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_130); in human soul processes, not, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131).

[001-253] Order, of succession, implies space, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101) f.

[001-254] Pain, and pity, [18](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_18) f.; as sign of future reaction, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33); intensity of, [35](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_35) f.; Darwin on, [37](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_37); conceived as distinct thing, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159).

[001-255] Paradox, the Eleatic, [74](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_74), [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112) f., [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240).

[001-256] Parallelism, of physical and psychical series, [146](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_146) f.

[001-257] Paralysis, and feeling of effort, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21), [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22).

[001-258] Past, no recurrence of, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154), [200](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_200) f., [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232), [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239).

[001-259] Paul, his prediction of Peter's action, [184](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_184) ff.

[001-260] Pendulum, counting oscillations of, [104](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_104) f.; what do oscillations of, measure, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107) ff; oscillations of, help to cut up our psychic life, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109); spreads out undivided tension of spring, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228).

[001-261] Permeation, see Interpenetration.

[001-262] Peter, Paul's prediction of his action, [184](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_184) ff.

[001-263] Photometric experiments, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) ff.

[001-264] Physics, and sound-vibrations, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46); and degrees of luminous intensity, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) f.; interested in external cause, [71](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_71); physical phenomena and law, [202](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_202); Cartesian, [207](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_207), [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); Descartes' instantaneous, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); and forecasting of phenomena, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222), [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230).

[001-265] Pillon, F., article on number and space, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.* Pitch, of a sound, [44](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_44) f.

[001-266] Plateau, his method of measuring luminous sensations, [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56).

[001-267] Plato, quoted, [168](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_168); Platonic reminiscence, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-268] Pleasure, as sign of future reaction, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33) f.; and bodily inclination, [38](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_38); keenness of, as inertia of organism, [38](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_38); conceived as distinct thing, [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159).

[001-269] Poetry, how effects produced, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15).

[001-270] "Possible acts," [174](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_174) f., [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239).

[001-271] Postulate, Delbœuf's, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60); Fechner's, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60); fundamental, of psychophysics, [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65), [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); underlying geometrical representation of voluntary activity, [179](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_179).

[001-272] Prediction, astronomical, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117), [192](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_192) ff., [198](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_198); determinism and, [173](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_173), [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183) ff., [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220); real duration and, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183) ff.; of future actions, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183) ff., [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); probable and infallible, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183) f., and character, [184](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_184), [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172); hypothetical case of Peter and Paul, [184](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_184) ff.; all foreseeing as seeing, [195](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_195), [197](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_197), [198](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_198); of phenomena, and physics, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222), [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230).

[001-273] Prefiguring, of future phenomenon in present conditions, [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204) ff., [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210); two kinds of, [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204) ff., [215](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_215); as in mathematics, [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204) f.; as having idea of possible future act, [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211) f.

[001-274] Pressure, sensation of, [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47) f.

[001-275] Process, motion as a, in; conscious states not things but, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131), [196](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_196); misleading to substitute material symbol for, [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190); cannot be analysed, [219](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_219).

[001-276] Progress, motion as a, in; not divisible, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); cannot be represented by geometrical figure, [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181); misleading to substitute material symbol for, [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190); psychic state as a, [198](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_198); from idea to act, [211](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_211).

[001-277] Providence, Descartes and grace of, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208).

[001-278] Psychology, descriptive, limits of, [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139); sometimes misled by language, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165); deals with intervals of duration and not their extremities, [196](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_196); modern, and perception through subjective forms, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222).

[001-279] Psychophysics, and measurement of sensations, [1](2217104573805691701_56852-h-0.htm.html#Page_1), [55](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_55) ff.; measurement of intensity of light, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) ff.; Delbœuf's experiments, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52), [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56), [58](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_58) f., [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67) f.; method of mean gradations, [56](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_56), [59](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_59), [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69); method of minimum differences, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64) f., [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69); Delbœuf's postulate, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60); Weber's Law, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60); all, involved in transition from stimulus to amount of sensation, [61](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_61); Fechner's Law, [61](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_61) f.; postulate of, [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65), [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); fallacy of all, [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65) f., [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); exaggerations of, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225).

[001-280] Quality, interpreted as quantity or magnitude, [9](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_9), [13](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_13), [39](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_39), [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [43](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_43), [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48) f., [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51), [58](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_58), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69), [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); sound as a, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46); sensation of increase qualitative, [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48); intensity of light as a, [50](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_50); variations in brightness qualitative, [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54); psychophysics attempts to measure, [63](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_63); no point of contact with quantity, [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); sensation as a, [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72), [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90); confusion with quantity invades whole series of psychic states, [74](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_74); space devoid of, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95); qualitative multiplicity, [105](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_105), [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226), [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [239](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_239); sensation of mobility qualitative, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); qualitative distinctions, [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121) f., [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204); counting as a qualitative progress, [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123); of quantity, [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123); strokes of a clock estimated by quality of musical phrase, [127](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_127); time as, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129); deep-seated conscious states as pure, [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137) f., [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); matter stripped of concrete, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); attempt to explain apparent, of matter, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); shape as, of matter, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); qualities of things set up as states, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); Leibniz and external, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); psychic phenomena as pure, [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); intensity as compromise between quantity and, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225).

[001-281] Quantity, see also Magnitude: as applied to inner states, I ff.; alleged two kinds of, [3](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_3) ff., [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72), [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); quality interpreted as, [9](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_9), [13](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_13), [39](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_39), [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [43](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_43), [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48) f., [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51), [58](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_58), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69), [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); and muscular effort, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) f., [25](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_25); of cause, transferred to quality of effect, [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); pitch and, [45](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_45), [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46); increase of sensation as, [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48); difference between hues of a colour as, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60); psychophysics makes intervals between sensations into a, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62), [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65), [66](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_66), [68](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_68) f.; no point of contact between quality and, [70](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_70); how quantitative relations set up between sensations, [71](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_71); quantitative distinctions, [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121) f., [204](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_204); without quality, [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123); time as, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129); cause of psychic phenomena as, [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); quality as sign of, [224](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_224); intensity as compromise between quality and, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225).

[001-282] Rage, Darwin on, [29](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_29); James on, [29](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_29).

[001-283] Reality, of space, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91) f., [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95), no; two kinds of, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97), [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110); real duration, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110), [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125) ff., [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154); of facts for dynamism, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141); of laws for mechanism, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141); time as a, [155](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_155); attempt to produce, from algebraical relations, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); physics treats sensations as signs of, [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223).

[001-284] Reason, beliefs adopted without, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135); decisions taken without or against, [170](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_170); in ancient hylozoism, [214](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_214); the discursive, [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); Kant's doctrine of the Practical, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); *Critique of Pure,* [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235).

[001-285] Refraction through space, self perceived by, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129), [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183), [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217), [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); of "things in themselves," Kant's view, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233).

[001-286] Renouvier, on freedom, [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237) *n.* Representation, see Symbolical Representation.

[001-287] Resolution, how feeling leads to, [133](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_133), [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171). *Revue philosophique,* referred to, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) *n.* *Revue scientifique,* Tannery's criticism of Fechner in, [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67).

[001-288] Rhythm, connecting dancer and spectator, [12](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_12); effect in music, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14); in poetry, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15); and architecture, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15); Nature does not command, [16](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_16); succession of conscious states compared to, [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100).

[001-289] Ribot, on attention and movements, [27](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_27) f.

[001-290] Richet, on pain, [35](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_35) f.; on disgust, [36](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_36).

[001-291] Rood, on changes of hue, [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51).

[001-292] Saturation, of a colour, [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54).

[001-293] Scale, notes of, why classified as higher and lower, [45](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_45) f.

[001-294] Science, eliminates duration from time and mobility from motion, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115) ff., [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); and hypothetical acceleration of motions of universe, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193) ff.; attempts to do away with duration and causality, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208) f.; separates ideas of free effort and necessary determination, [218](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_218); attempts to measure intensive quantity, [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); separates extensity and duration, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228), [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230); main object of, [230](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_230); could deal with time if homogeneous, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-295] Scottish philosophers, [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72).

[001-296] Sculpture, ancient, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15).

[001-297] Self, whole, reflected in each conscious state, [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98), [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165); recovery of the fundamental, [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); introduces distinctions derived from external objects into its own states, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); superficial, with mutually external states, [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136), [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); deep-seated, with interpenetrating states, [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125), [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [136](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_136), [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); many conscious states never blend with whole mass of, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135), [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166), [168](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_168); perceived by refraction through space, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129), [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183), [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217), [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); the two aspects of the, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129) ff., [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); tendency to form secondary, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138), [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166); not an association of terms, [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139), [159](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_159) ff., [164](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_164), [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); recourse to living and concrete, necessary to solve problems of causality, freedom, etc., [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139); activity of, cannot be compared to that of any other force, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143), [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216); perception of, through forms borrowed from external world, [154](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_154), [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217), [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); self-determination, [165](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_165); parasitic, as result of education, [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166); free decisions spring from whole or fundamental, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [172](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_172), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231), [240](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_240); covered over with crust of clean-cut psychic states, [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167); does not intervene in carrying out every-day acts, [168](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_168); uprush of deep-seated, at moment of crisis, [169](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_169); distinction of psychic states leads to mechanical conception of, [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); constantly changing and growing, [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171), [175](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_175) f.; view of, involved in geometrical representation of process of deciding, [176](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_176) f.; infallible in affirming its immediate experiences, [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183); as a free force, [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216), [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); Kant put free, outside

[001-298] space and duration, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); Kant and phenomenal, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); as a free cause, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235).

[001-299] Sensations, intensity of, [1](2217104573805691701_56852-h-0.htm.html#Page_1) ff., [7](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_7) ff., [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) ff., [40](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_40), [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42), [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47), [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72) f.; art yielding only, [17](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_17); and external causes, [20](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_20) ff.; peripheral, and muscular effort, [24](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_24), [26](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_26); peripheral, and violent emotions, [31](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_31); magnitude of, [31](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_31), [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32), [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47), [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72); affective and representative: affective, [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32) ff., [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72) f.; and organic disturbance, [32](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_32) f.; pleasure and pain, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33) ff.; affective, and free movements, [33](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_33); representative, [39](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_39) ff., [73](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_73), [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90); medium, [41](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_41); representative, measured by external causes, [42](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_42); of sound, [43](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_43) f.; of heat and cold, [46](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_46) f., [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64); of pressure and weight, [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47) f.; increase of, and sensation of increase, [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48); as quantity or quality, [48](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_48); of movement, [50](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_50); of light, [50](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_50) ff.; measurement of luminous, [52](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_52) ff.; psychophysics attempts to measure, [55](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_55) ff., [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62), [63](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_63), [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); equal and identical, [57](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_57), [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62), [63](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_63), [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64), [69](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_69); law connecting stimulus and, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60) f.; as quantities, [62](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_62), [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65), [66](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_66); addition of, [64](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_64); considered as a sum, [65](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_65), [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67); how quantitative differences set up between, [71](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_71) f.; as pure quality, [72](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_72); and space, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92), [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93), [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95); can space be built up from, [94](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_94); simultaneous and identical, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95); of motion, indivisible, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); influence of language on, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131); not objects but processes, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131); altered by repetition, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131); physics treats, as signs of reality, [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223).

[001-300] Series, natural, of numbers, [2](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_2), [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80); double aspect of each term in a, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124), [226](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_226); physical and psychical, [210](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_210).

[001-301] "Several," use of, implies space, [122](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_122).

[001-302] Shape, as quality of matter, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205).

[001-303] Simplicity, different senses of, in dynamism and mechanism, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141).

[001-304] Simultaneity, implies space, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95); measuring duration and counting, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108) f.; as connecting link between space and duration, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110); definition of, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110); in measuring velocity, [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114), [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117); used in defining equal intervals of time, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119); in space nothing but, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [206](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_206), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); and astronomical prediction, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116) f., [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193) ff.; dealt with by mathematics, [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119); attempted representation of succession by, [180](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_180), [221](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_221); all relations not translatable into, are scientifically unknowable, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234).

[001-305] Sleep, and perception of duration, [126](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_126).

[001-306] Smell, illustration from associations of, [161](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_161) f.

[001-307] Social life, self with well-defined states better adapted to, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [139](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_139), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); more important than our inner life, [130](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_130); intuition of homogeneous medium as step towards, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138), [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-308] Solidification, of an act, in space, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112); of changing feelings, promoted by language and external objects, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129) f.; of sensations owing to language, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131); of ideas on surface of consciousness, [135](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_135), [166](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_166), [168](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_168); of conscious states, promotes social life, [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); of conscious states, how brought about, [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237).

[001-309] Sorrow, an increasing, [11](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_11).

[001-310] Sound, sensations of, [43](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_43) ff.; intensity of, [43](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_43) ff.; pitch of, [45](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_45); why classified as higher and lower, [45](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_45) f.

[001-311] Space, and magnitude, [2](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_2); introduced into perception of duration, [74](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_74); article on number and, [75](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_75) *n.*; intuition of, implied in counting, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77) ff., [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83) f., [225](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_225); material objects counted in, [85](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_85) f.; conscious states not countable unless symbolically represented in, [86](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_86) f., [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89), [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90); idea of impenetrability shows interconnexion of number and, [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89); projection of psychic states into, [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90), [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101), [106](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_106), [231](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_231); time, but not duration, as spatial, [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90) f.; reality of, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91) f., [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95), no; as common element in certain sensations, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92); Kant's theory of, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92), [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); nativistic and empirical theories of, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); Müller's theory, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); Lotze's theory, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); Bain's theory, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); Wundt's theory, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93); attempt to build up, from inextensive sensations, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93) f., [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99) f., [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); definition of, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95), [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); as a homogeneous medium without quality, [95](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_95) ff., [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); not so homogeneous for animals, [96](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_96); intuition of homogeneous, peculiar to man, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); intuition of, necessary to counting, abstraction and speech, [97](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_97); is time, as homogeneous medium, reducible to, [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98) f.; time as ghost of, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99); duration expressed in terms of, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101), no; order of succession implies, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101) f.; symbolical representation of succession, as line implies, [103](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_103); time as fourth dimension of, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109); simultaneity as connecting link between time and, no; and motion, no ff.; projection of act into, [112](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_112), [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181); infinitely divisible, [113](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_113), [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114); as homogeneous element in motion, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); the only measurable element in motion, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [118](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_118), [119](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_119); nothing but simultaneities in, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [206](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_206), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); alone homogeneous, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120); no duration or succession in, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120) 227; self perceived by refraction through, [128](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_128), [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129), [137](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_137), [167](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_167), [183](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_183), [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217), [223](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_223); intuition of homogeneous, as step towards social life, [138](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_138), [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163), [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); connexion between perception of, and general ideas, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163); is time space? [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181), [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190), [221](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_221); time confused with, in prediction, [191](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_191) ff.; as result of stripping matter of concrete qualities, [205](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_205); separated from time by Kant, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); must be eliminated in studying inner phenomena, [229](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_229); Kant confused time with, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); Kant put the free self outside, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); we usually live and act in, not in duration, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); Kant on time and, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); existence of homogeneous, assumed, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); as a "form of sensibility," [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236); intuition of, what it accomplishes, [236](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_236).

[001-312] Spectrum, colours of the, [51](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_51), [54](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_54), [57](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_57).

[001-313] Spencer, H., on gracefulness, [13](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_13); on expression of fear, [30](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_30).

[001-314] Spinoza, on modes of thought and modes of extension, [147](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_147); on causality and apparent succession in time, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208); conception of causality which leads to, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208), [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); Spinozistic mechanism, [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209).

[001-315] Spontaneity, idea of, simpler than that of inertia, [141](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_141); force as a free, [217](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_217); settling down into inertia, [220](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_220).

[001-316] Stimulus, law connecting sensation with, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60) ff.; effect of slight but continuous, [106](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_106).

[001-317] Subjective, definition of, [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83).

[001-318] Succession, attempt to derive extensity from, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99) f., [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222); of conscious states compared to rhythm of tune, [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100); without distinction, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101); order of, implies distinction and therefore space, [101](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_101) f.; cannot be symbolized as a line without idea of space, [103](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_103) f.; within the ego succession, without, only externality, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); exists only for conscious spectator, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108), [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); endosmosis between externality and, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109), [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); none in space, [120](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_120), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); attempt to represent by simultaneity, [180](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_180), [221](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_221); causality as regular, [202](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_202) f.; no regular, in deep-seated psychic states, [203](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_203); attempt to transform into inherence, [209](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_209); apparent, of phenomena, [201](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_201), [227](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_227); of phenomena and conscious states, [212](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_212), [216](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_216); Leibniz and, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213); attributed to things, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); idea of measurable time arises from compromise between simultaneity and, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228).

[001-319] Suggestion, in art, [14](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_14) ff.; in music, [15](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_15), [44](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_44).

[001-320] Symbolical Representation, necessary to counting of conscious states, [86](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_86) f., [89](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_89), [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90); of a line, implies idea of space, [103](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_103); pure duration cannot be measured without, [105](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_105); of duration, derived from space, [110](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_110); of time as homogeneous medium, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124) f.; of elements of a conscious state, [163](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_163); of the self and its feelings, given by determinism, [171](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_171); of process of coming to a decision, [175](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_175) ff.; leads to determinism, [178](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_178); of time as a line, [182](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_182); cannot be substituted for dynamic process, [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190); of ego, confused by Kant with ego itself, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232).

[001-321] Sympathy, physical, and grace, [13](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_13); with Nature. [16](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_16); with misfortune, [19](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_19).

[001-322] Tannery, J., as critic of Fechner, [67](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_67).

[001-323] Taste, as changeable, [131](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_131).

[001-324] "Things in themselves," Kant and, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233), [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234), [238](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_238).

[001-325] Time, sounds not counted in, [87](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_87), [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91); as homogeneous medium in which conscious states are ranged, [90](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_90), [121](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_121); as homogeneous medium, nothing but space, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91), [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); distinct from pure duration, [91](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_91), [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98); is it unbounded medium distinct from space? [98](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_98) f.; as ghost of space, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99); attempt to derive extensity from succession in, [99](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_99) f.; two possible conceptions of, [100](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_100); is it measurable? [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107) f.; apparently homogeneous, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107); as dealt with by the astronomer and physicist, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107), [192](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_192) ff.; as measured by clocks, [108](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_108) f.; as fourth dimension of space, [109](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_109); concrete and abstract, [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114); science eliminates duration from, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115) f.; definition of equal intervals of, [115](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_115); how it comes to be represented as homogeneous, [124](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_124) f., [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237); as symbolical image of duration, [125](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_125) f.; as quality and quantity, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129); confusion of, with concrete duration, [155](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_155); is time space? [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181), [190](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_190), [221](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_221); not a line, [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181); confused with space, [181](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_181) f., [191](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_191) f., [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); as a number, [195](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_195), [197](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_197); separated from space by Kant, [222](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_222), [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); idea of measurable, arises from compromise, [228](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_228); Kant's mistake about, [232](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_232); Kant on space and, [233](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_233); science could deal with, if homogeneous, [234](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_234); Kant put freedom outside, [235](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_235); heterogeneous duration replaced by homogeneous, [237](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_237).

[001-326] Tortoise, and Achilles, [113](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_113) f.

[001-327] Town, objects in, seem to live and grow old, [129](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_129) f.

[001-328] Tradesmen, their avoidance of round numbers, [123](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_123). *Transcendental Aesthetic,* Kant's theory of space in his, [92](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_92), [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93).

[001-329] Units, those forming a number identical, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76); also distinct, [77](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_77); space implied in counting, [79](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_79); every number both unit and synthesis of, [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80); two kinds, ultimate and provisional, [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80) f.; if divisible, then extended, [82](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_82); split up by arithmetic, [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84); regarded by common sense as indivisible, [84](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_84).

[001-330] Unity, attaching to number, [76](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_76); all, due to simple act of the mind, [80](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_80) f.; of act and of object, [81](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_81), [83](2217104573805691701_56852-h-3.htm.html#Page_83); Spinoza and the divine, [208](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_208).

[001-331] Universe, hypothetical acceleration of motions of, [116](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_116), [193](2217104573805691701_56852-h-7.htm.html#Page_193) ff.; molecular theory of, [143](2217104573805691701_56852-h-5.htm.html#Page_143); vague personality ascribed to, [213](2217104573805691701_56852-h-8.htm.html#Page_213).

[001-332] Velocity, measurement of, [107](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_107), [114](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_114); notion of, analysed, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117); uniform and variable, [117](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_117) f. *Vis inertiae,* [38](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_38); *vis viva,* [151](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_151).

[001-333] Vulpian, on hemiplegia, [22](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_22).

[001-334] Weber, his law, [60](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_60) f.

[001-335] Weight, sensation of, [25](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_25) f.; [47](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_47) ff.

[001-336] Will, see also Free Will: willing for willing's sake, [157](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_157), [158](2217104573805691701_56852-h-6.htm.html#Page_158).

[001-337] Words, see language.

[001-338] Wundt, on paralytic's sensation of force, [21](2217104573805691701_56852-h-1.htm.html#Page_21); on connexions of vocal and auditory nervous filaments, [44](2217104573805691701_56852-h-2.htm.html#Page_44); theory of space, [93](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_93).

[001-339] Zeno, on Achilles and tortoise, [113](2217104573805691701_56852-h-4.htm.html#Page_113).
