---
description: Chapter 20 of Father Henson's Story of His Own Life — VISIT TO ENGLAND.
id: ch20
label: "Chapter 20: VISIT TO ENGLAND."
tags: []
type: chapter
---

## Chapter XX: VISIT TO ENGLAND.

     DEBT ON THE INSTITUTION.--A NEW PECUNIARY
     ENTERPRISE.--LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION TO
     ENGLAND.--PERSONAL DIFFICULTIES.--CALLED AN
     IMPOSTER.--TRIUMPHANT VICTORY OVER THESE TROUBLES.

[020-001]My interest in the [[manual-labor-school|Manual Labor School]] in [[dawn-settlement|Dawn]], was the means of
my visiting [[england|England]]. No one who has never engaged in such business
can have any idea of the many difficulties connected with so great
an enterprise. In spite of all the efforts of the Association, a
debt of about seven thousand five hundred dollars rested upon it. A
meeting of its [[trust]]ees and friends, in the year 1849, was called to
consider its condition, and to devise, if possible, some means for
its relief. After a long discussion of the matter, it was finally
determined to separate the concern into two departments, and put
it under the charge of two parties, the one to take the mill and a
certain portion of the land for four years, and to pay all the debts
of [[slavery|the institution]] in that time; and the other party to take the other
buildings and land, and to conduct the school.

[020-002]A certain party was found willing to assume the school. But who would
be enterprising enough to take the mill for four years encumbered with
a debt of seven thousand five hundred dollars was a very important
question.

[020-003]On consideration, having a secret project in my own mind, I concluded
to do it, provided that Mr. Peter B. Smith would assume an equal share
of the responsibility, and attend to the business of the mill. He
readily consented.

[020-004]My project was to go to [[england|England]], carrying with me some of the best
specimens of black walnut boards our farm would produce, and to
exhibit them in the great World's Industrial Exhibition, then in
session at [[london|London]], and perhaps negotiate for the sale of lumber.
I accordingly left for [[england|England]], being readily furnished with very
complimentary letters of introduction to such men as [[thomas-binney|Thomas Binney]],
[[samuel-gurney|Samuel Gurney]], Lord Brougham, Hon. Abbot Lawrence, then [[us-america|America]]n
Minister to [[england|England]], from Rev. John Rolfe, of [[toronto|Toronto]], Chief Justice
Robinson, Sir Allen McNab, Col. John Prince, Rev. Dr. Duffield,
of [[detroit|Detroit]], Michigan, Judge Conant, of the same city, Hon. Ross
Wilkinson, U. S. Judge, residing also in [[detroit|Detroit]], Hon. Charles
Sumner and [[amos-lawrence|Amos Lawrence, Esq.]], of [[boston|Massachusetts]]. From the gentlemen
above mentioned I had in [[england|England]] a most cordial reception, and was
immediately introduced to the very best society in the kingdom.

[020-005]I regret exceedingly to make any allusions to personal difficulties,
or to individuals that have pursued an unjust and unchristian course
towards me or others, but I cannot give anything like a correct view
of this part of my history without, at least, a brief allusion, which
shall be as delicate as I can make it, to some difficulties.

[020-006]It was undoubtedly the plan of certain individuals of the party who
assumed the care of the school, probably from unworthy sectarian
feelings, to obtain entire possession of the property of the
association, or certainly, completely to destroy my influence over it,
and connection with it.

[020-007]Much to my astonishment, therefore, when I had arrived in [[england|England]],
and had been cordially received by the men above mentioned, and had
preached in the pulpits of such men as Rev. Messrs. [[thomas-binney|Thomas Binney]],
Baptist Noel, [[reverend-william-brock|William Brock]], [[james-sherman|James Sherman]], George Smith, Dr. Burns,
in [[london|London]], and had already introduced my enterprise before a portion
of the British public, I was confronted by a printed and published
circular, to the following effect: "That one styling himself Rev.
[[josiah-henson|Josiah Henson]] was an impostor, obtaining money under false pretences;
that he could exhibit no good credentials; that whatever money he
might obtain would not be appropriated according to the wish of the
donors, and that the said [[josiah-henson|Josiah Henson]] was an artful, skilful,
and eloquent man, and would probably deceive the public." This was
a severe blow, but fortunately I had already requested my friends
to appoint a committee of twelve persons to examine carefully into
the merits of my enterprise, which committee should appoint a
sub-committee of three, and a treasurer, to receive every farthing
contributed to me by the public, and to appropriate it only as they
should deem proper. This committee had been appointed, and consisted
of [[samuel-gurney|Samuel Gurney]], [[samuel-gurney|Samuel Gurney]], Junior, Samuel Marley, Esq., George
Hitchcock, Esq., [[james-sherman|Rev. James Sherman]], [[thomas-binney|Rev. Thomas Binney]], Rev.
[[john-branch|John Branch]], Eusebius Smith, Esq., [[john-scobell|John Scobell]], Secretary of the
British and Foreign Anti-slavery Society, Lord Ashley (now Earl of
Shaftsbury), George Sturge, and Thomas Sturge. The sub-committee of
three were, [[john-scobell|John Scobell]], [[john-branch|Rev. John Branch]], and Eusebius Smith, who
appointed [[samuel-gurney|Samuel Gurney]], Junior, treasurer. Many of the above names
are known throughout the world.

[020-008]When the above attack was made upon me, a meeting of those interested
in my cause was called, and my accuser, who was in the country, was
requested to meet me face to face.

[020-009]I forbear to mention his name, or to describe particularly the sources
of this trouble, because I do not wish to injure the feelings of any
person. The name, however, I can at any time give. I believe all the
difficulty arose from little petty jealousies, fostered, perhaps, by
the unworthy influences of slavery, over the misguided people who were
for a time misled by false representations.

[020-010]We met before a company of English gentlemen, who heard all that my
accuser had to say. They asked me for a reply. I simply re-stated to
them all the facts I had previously made known. I reminded them that
a man who devotes himself to do good, must and will be misunderstood
and have enemies. I called their attention to the misinterpretation of
their own motives made by their enemies. I then related to them the
parable of Christ about the wheat and the tares. My recommendatory
letters were re-read--a sufficient reply to the allegation that I was
an impostor.

[020-011]They were pleased to assure me of their entire satisfaction; but
to give perfect quiet to the public they determined, at their own
expense, to send an agent to [[canada|Canada]], to make a full inquiry into the
matter, and advised me to accompany him. Accordingly [[john-scobell|John Scobell]] and
myself started for [[canada|Canada]] immediately. I had already collected nearly
seventeen hundred dollars, which, of course, remained in the hands of
the treasurer.

[020-012]A mass meeting, of all interested in the matter, was called in the
institution on the premises. A large assemblage met, and Rev. John
Rolfe of [[toronto|Toronto]], presided. A thorough examination into the records
of [[slavery|the institution]] was made. The originator of the slander against
me denied having made it; it was proved upon him, and the whole
convention unanimously repudiated the false charges. [[john-scobell|Mr. Scobell]]
remained in [[canada|Canada]] about three months, and before leaving, sent me
a letter, informing me that whenever I should see fit to return to
[[england|England]], I should find in the hands of [[amos-lawrence|Amos Lawrence, Esq.]], of [[boston|Boston]],
a draft to defray the expenses of the journey. Accordingly, in the
latter part of 1851, I returned.

[020-013]The ground was now prepared for me, and I reaped an abundant harvest.
The whole debt of [[slavery|the institution]] was cancelled in a few months, when
I was recalled to [[canada|Canada]] by the fatal illness of my wife. Several very
interesting occurrences happened during my stay in [[england|England]], which I
must relate in another chapter.
