---
description: 'Translator''s advertisement by C.R. Prinsep, 1821'
id: advertisement
label: 'Advertisement'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# POLITICAL science has, in this country, become quite a necessary part of education, Aided by the general advance of human intelligence, and stimulated by the acute sense of individual, or the dismal scene of national, calamity, its maxims have been discussed alike in the counting-house and in the cabinet : in the former, with all the warmth and anxiety generated by curiosity and personal interest ; in the latter with that enforced attention, with which public functionaries will ever regard the approach of what must necessarily tend, at every step, to reduce their own importance, and to render the art of government less mysterious and less voluminous. With the public at large, political truth needs no other recommendation, than to be*seen and recognized : from authority, it can never exA2

[P02-001]IV ADVERTISEMENT. pect a hearty welcome : every important accession will emanate from the people, and not from their rulers. Since the primaeval labours of Smith upon the Theory of National Wealth, that interesting branch of polity has undergone abundance of discussion in most of its parts. Malthus on Population ; Young, Torrens, and numberless others on Agriculture; Thornton on Credit; Ricardo on Money; Blake on Exchanges ; Cobbett on Fluctuation of Price ; Hamilton on National Debt ; Brougham on Colonial Policy, have contributed to promote the progress of the science, each by the separate illustration of a particular topic ; and the increasing variety and accuracy of statistical information has greatly facilitated its acceptation amongst the practical classes of society, by the corroboration of its previous conclusions. Many have adventured a bolder flight, and aspired to the higher excellence of general instruction. But without any disposition to undervalue the merits of cotemporaries, it seems to be the prevailing opinion, that they have been far less successful in their general, than in their particular, views. The failure

[P02-002]V may perhaps be in a great measure attributed, either to the attempt to draw attention to some favorite dogma, by making it the hinge of more important solutions ; or to the unreasonable desire of novelty, in a matter wherein little was to be expected, and whereof the grand difficulty was, the removal of the accumulated rubbish of prejudice and error. Be it as it may, little has been done towards the better organization of the science since the days of Smith and Stewart : indeed, with the exception of the valuable manual of Marcet, which has become an inmate of most establishments for the better classes of instruction, the recent efforts to generalize have been singularly unsuccessful. Of the two most popular works of the present day in this department, that of Ricardo, besides being limited in its range, is both involved in the style, and defective in the arrangement ; and, though containing much that is calculated to instruct and enlighten, is evidently the production of a mind, that has worked its way up from practice to theory, and is apt to mistake the point arrived at for a novel discovery, simply because it has been attained by a tortuous route. The later Essay of Malthus A 3

[P02-003]VI ADVERTISEMENT. is equally deficient in arrangement, as well as vague and inconclusive : and he seems so sensible himself of these failings, that he has offered it rather as a commentary than a text, — a refutation of the opinions of others, than a clear exposition of his own, or a digested classification of approved and admitted principles : plainly intimating, that the science is not yet far enough advanced to be regularly marshalled; and leaving the public to hope for a more complete view of the whole, at some future indefinite period. In expectation of so desirable an addition to political literature, it may be well to look abroad and see what has been done by foreign writers in the same line of intellectual pursuit : for it is not to be supposed, that their speculation can have been wholly inactive in this bustling and inquisitive age. Although, in the practical department, the superior wealth and commerce of Britain, her amazingfinancial exertions, the frequent oscillations of her home-market, and, above all, the publicity of every occurrence, have given her writers peculiar advantages ; theoretical success was equally open to foreign adventurers ; nay, possibly, they may have enjoyed some

[P02-004]Vll superior chances, in their Comparative exemption from the contagion of party spirit, and the obliquity of private interest, to which most of our own writers have been more or less exposed. Accordingly, the press of the Continent has teemed with publications, not only upon insulated parts of the great subject of national wealth, but also upon the general theory. The diligence of Gamier has naturalized the work of Smith amongst his countrymen ; the pen of Sismondi has exchanged the task of historical detail, for the kindred one of polity in the abstract; but his work is far more commendable for eloquence and perspicuity of style, than for depth or accuracy of reasoning : the official acumen of Hauterive has involved him in refinements and abstractions, far more subtle and less edifying, than those with which our English writers have been reproached: and the sun of autocratic favour has engendered the more recent and hazardous effort of Storch, to instil into the princes and lords, at least, of Muscovy and Tartary, some of the leading maxims of political wisdom. But the work, now first presented in an English garb, is by far the most widely and A 4

[P02-005]Vlll ADVERTISEMENT. justly celebrated of all that have issued from the continental press. It was originally published in 1803, while the author was yet invested with the empty honours of the French Tribunate, but in a crude and imperfect state, and after the active revision of censorial jealousy. Since the downfall of the military leviathan, it has received several important emendations, and has rapidly run through three large editions, and been translated more than once into the German, as well as into other continental languages. The name of the author has long been familiar with the English public, and his work with the scientific, with whom it has been a frequent object of reference. It is now offered in an English version, for the use of those, who may be either incompetent to peruse the original, or unequal to the clear conception of a complex and difficult matter, in any but their native tongue ; in the full confidence, that it will not only prove instructive, but will be found to contain the best and most methodical view of the general theory of wealth that has yet appeared. In treating his subject, the outline of Turgot has been observed, and extended, from the production, or formation, and dis 

[P02-006]IX tribution of wealth, to the survey of its ultimate consumption, to which the reader is conducted by gradual and easy steps, in a plain intelligible style, which is the only merit translation can aspire to. It is given in the simplest form, with the notation of such errors as occur in the course of the deduction, and the mere addition of a few statistical facts, that may afford matter of reflection or application to the student. The attention of the public will not be ill bestowed on the perusal ; for the inquiry is one of universal interest; more especially in a season of doubt and difficulty, when every error must be calamitous, and may be ruinous altogether. Yet, after all that has been done to give to the theory of wealth the order and consistency of regular science, much remains to be effected, ere it can be said to have reached attainable perfection ; not that there is a great deal left to the acuteness of minute research ; still less to the boldness of original discovery. The principal points and bearings have been distinctly laid down and recognized, and many of the smaller compartments carefully surveyed and accurately described. It has been observed by a late fashionable and lively

[P02-007]X ADVERTISEMENT. writer, that no confidence can be placed in a science, that varies from day to day, and rests upon the opinions of men, who differ point blank upon many of its first principles. But a little further examination would have convinced him, that the discrepancy is often merely nominal; and that the remaining topics of dissention amongst the scientific are of much less moment, as well as much less numerous, than has been represented by their common adversaries. In most important particulars, there is no longer any difference of opinion ; the sources and means of production ; the nature of commerce ; the benefits of freedom, of industry, and of division of labour ; the nature and uses of money ; the operation of credit; the injurious effect of prohibition, monopoly, taxation, and, generally, of the interference of authority, on the business of production ; the constant pressure of population upon the means of subsistence — all these are placed beyond doubt or controversy. The origin and nature of value ; the effect of its oscillation upon productive power and activity ; the limits of demand and supply ; the power and benefit of national credit; the effect of national bankruptcy upon

[P02-008]XI the productive classes ; the peculiar pressure of each class of taxation — these and some other remote recesses of this ample region of intellect have been hitherto but partially explored, and will probably for some time longer furnish matter of contention and argument, until the knowledge of fact shall be more complete, and theory be fixed upon so solid a base of experiment, as to defy scepticism, and expose to ridicule the ignorance that shall overlook, or the perverseness that shall disregard, its principles. Though still far short of this desirable position, there is no need to despair of its early attainment. The grand requisite is, the simplification of positive acquirements, and the correct delineation of remaining difficulties ; the successful prosecution of these two objects will do far more to unite the opinions, and influence the public acts, of mankind, than any degree of inventive sagacity or argumentative skill. But it is time to see what has been done already, by the most distinguished of foreign economists. C. R. P. TEMPLE, March 1. 1821.
