---
description: 'Defining production and the nature of wealth'
id: chapter-1
label: 'Chapter I: Of what is meant by the term production'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# I OF THE PRODUCTION OF WEALTH. CHAP. I. Of what IS TO BE UNDERSTOOD BY THE TERM, PRODUCTION. IF we take the pains to inquire, what that is, which mankind in a social state of existence denominate wealth, we shall find the term employed to designate an indefinite quantity of objects bearing inherent value, as of land, of metal, of coin, of grain, of stuffs, of commodities of every description. When they further extend its signification to landed securities, bills, notes of hand, and the like, it is evidently because they contain obligations to deliver things possessed of inherent value, (a) In (a) It is strange, that a writer of so much research should begin with such loose definition. The term wealth or riches, in its most enlarged sense, means abundance in some degree or other of those things, which satisfy the wants and desires of mankind. In estimating human wealth, account is taken of such things only as are objects of desire, and therefore of value. Vide infra, p. 4. in notis. Neither does wealth consist in the possession of value, which is a mere quality, but in the possession of the things wherein the quality, value, is vested. Value is a matter of comparison, and, as such, is treated in Book

[001-001], B. I. point of fact, wealth can only exist where there are things possessed of real and intrinsic value. Wealth is proportionate to the quantum of that value : great, when the aggregate of component value is great; small, when that aggregate is small. (#) The value of a specific article is always vague and arbitrary, so long as it remains unacknowledged. Its owner is not a jot the richer, by setting a higher ratio upon it in his own estimation. But the moment that other persons are willing, for the purpose of obtaining it, to give in exchange a certain quantity of other articles, likewise bearing value, the one may then be said to be worth, or to be of equal value with, the other. The quantity of money, which is readily parted with to obtain a thing, is called its price. Current pricey at a given time and place, is that price which the owner is sure of obtaining for a thing, if he is inclined to part with it.* * The numerous and difficult points arising out of the confusion of positive and relative value are discussed in different parts of this work; particularly in the leading chapters of Book II. Not to perplex the attention of the reader, I confine myself here to so much, as is absolutely necessary to comprehend the phenomenon of the production of wealth. Book II. infra. All that is here meant is, to limit the range of the science to such objects as have some value or other, no -matter in what ratio of intensity. T. (/>) On this subject it will be well to refer to Ricardo, on the difference between value and riches. — Essay on Pol. Econ. and T«*. c. 20.

[001-002]Crf. 'I. ON PRODUCTION. 3 The knowledge of the real nature of wealth, thus defined, of the difficulties that must be surmounted in its attainment, of the course and order of its distribution amongst the members of society, of the uses to which it may be applied, and, further, of the consequences resulting respectively from these several circumstances, constitutes that branch of science now entitled Political Economy. The value that mankind attach to objects originates in the use it can make of them. Some afford sustenance ; others serve for clothing ; some defend them from the inclemencies of the season, as houses ; others gratify their taste, or, at all events, their vanity, both of which are species of wants : of this class are all mere ornaments and decorations. It is universally true, that, where men attribute value to any thing, it is in consideration of its useful properties : what is good for nothing they set no price upon. * To this inherent fitness or capability of certain things to satisfy the * It would be out of place here to examine, whether or no the value mankind attach to a thing be always proportionate to its actual utility. The accuracy of the estimate must depend upon the comparative judgment, intelligence, habits, and prejudices of those who make it. True morality, and the clear perception of their real interests, lead mankind to the just appreciation of benefits. Political economy takes this appreciation as it finds it — as one of the data of its reasonings ; leaving to the moralist and the practical man, the several duties of enlightening and of guiding their fellow creatures, as well in this, as in other particulars of human conduct.

[001-003]GN PRODUCTION. B. I. various wants of mankind, I shall take leave to affix the name of utility.(c) And I will go on to say, that, to create objects which have any kind of utility, is to create wealth ; for the utility of things is the ground-work of their value, and their value constitutes wealth. Objects, however, cannot be created by human means ; nor is the mass of matter, of which this (c) Utility is not the sole ingredient of value. To say that an object is possessed of value, is to affirm the presence of two circumstances, utility and difficulty of attainment, the combination of which makes the object, in human opinion, worth some exertion, sacrifice, equivalent, or price. Those most useful and necessary objects, air, water, light, are not in human calculation possessed of value, where there is interposed between the object and its attainment no difficulty or obstacle, either natural or artificial : but when difficulty intervenes, then they are objects of value. Thus air is an object, for which the tenant of a dungeon would probably make a large sacrifice, and be content to employ the greatest exertions to surmount the artificial difficulty, which stands in the way of his enjoyment of. Water is of no value to one person placed on the banks of a lake or river, but of great value to another placed in the midst of a sandy desert ; for a vast natural difficulty intervenes between its desire and its attainment. For the same reason, light in the day-time is of no value to those possessed of sight, but of infinite value to the blind. Unless there be some difficulty to surmount, no desire is excited in the human breast ; there is no motive for exertion or sacrifice of any kind. The term value, therefore, is an affirmation, when used positively, of the combination of utility and difficulty of attainment: and when used relatively, of the degree of combined utility acdlU fficulty. By real value, our author will be found © 711*3.* fc iK in which artificial difficulty is no ingredient. T.

[001-004]CH.. I. ON PRODUCTION. 5 globe consists, capable of increase or diminution. All that man can do is, to re-produce existing materials under another form, which may give them an utility they did not before possess, or merely enlarge one they may have before presented. (cT) So that, in fact, there is a creation, not of matter, but of utility; and this I call production of wealth. In this sense then, the word production must be understood in political economy, and throughout the whole course of the present work. Production is the creation, not of matter, but of utility. It is not to be estimated by the length, the bulk, or the weight of the product, but by the utility it presents, (e). Although price is the measure of the value of things, and their value the measure of their utility, it would be absurd to draw the inference, that, by forcibly raising their price, their utility can be augmented. Exchangeable value, or price, is an index of the recognized utility of a thing, so long only as human dealings are exempt from every influence, but that of the identical utility : in like manner as a barometer denotes the weight of (d) — And to surmount what difficulty there may be in the way of its attainment. T. (e) This is not quite correct. Even utility cannot be created by man ; it is a quality he may discover in objects ; and which, by his reasoning faculties, he may conclude will exist in objects modified, compounded, or decomposed in a particular manner. He cannot create the quality, but may discover and apply it. T. B 3

[001-005]O ON PRODUCTION. B. I, the atmosphere, only while the mercury is submitted to the exclusive action of atmospheric gravity. In fact, when one man sells any product to another, he sells him the utility vested in that product : the buyer buys it only for the sake of its utility, of the use he can make of it. If, by any cause whatever (/*), the buyer is obliged to pay more than the value to himself of that utility, he pays for value that has no existence, and consequently which he does not receive. * This is precisely the case, when authority grants to a particular class of merchants the exclusive privilege of carrying on a certain branch of trade, the India trade for instance ; the price of Indian * This position will hereafter be further illustrated. For the present it is enough to know, that, whatever be the state of society, current prices approximate to the real value of things, in proportion to the liberty of production and of mutual dealing. (f] These causes are so many artificial difficulties in the way of attainment. The seller of an article transfers its utility, after all difficulties in the way of its attainment have been surmounted ; and, of course, the more numerous or intense those difficulties are, the larger sacrifice or price will he require from the purchaser. Artificial difficulty adds to positive and relative, but not to real value. But that, which at first sight would seem an artificial, may prove a natural difficulty on closer inspection. For instance, a tax may be indispensable to the maintenance of public order and security, without which production may be impossible. In this case, the difficulty interposed by the tax is a natural one, originating in the vices and infirmities of human nature. T.

[001-006]imports is thereby raised, without any accession to their utility or intrinsic value. This excess of price is nothing more or less than so much money transferred from the pockets of the consumers into those of the privileged traders, whereby the latter are enriched exactly as much as the former are unnecessarily impoverished. In like manner, when a government imposes on wine a tax, which raises to 15 sous the bottle what would otherwise be sold for 10 sous, what does it else, but transfer 5 sous per bottle from the hands of the producers or the consumers of wine to those of the taxgatherer?* The particular commodity is here only the means resorted to for getting at the taxpayer with more or less convenience; and its current value is composed of two ingredients, viz. 1. Its real value originating in its utility: 2. The value of the tax, that the government thinks fit to exact, for permitting its manufacture, transport, or consumption. Wherefore, there is no actual production of wealth, without a creation or augmentation of utility, (g*) Let us see in what manner this utility is to be produced. * It will be shown in Book III. of this work, what proportion of the tax is paid by the producer, and what by the consumer. (g) And without the surmounting of natural difficulty of attainment. Vide supra, note (f) It has been observed already, that utility is a quality, and B 4 there 

[001-007]therefore cannot correctly be said to be created, although it may be discovered in objects or the modification of objects. And it is this infinite modification of objects, wherein infinite utility is discoverable, that our author really means, when he talks of the production and creation of utility. It is remarkable, that he should throughout the whole of Book I. treat value as founded wholly upon utility, whereas in Book II. he seems to admit, that difficulty of attainment determines its ratio. Smith appears to have considered the labour expended in surmounting the difficulty of attainment to be the groundwork, as well as the measure of value ; and he has been followed in the first part of that opinion by Ricardo. No author of note has yet clearly analysed or defined value ; which consists of the combination of the two ingredients. The inaccuracies arising from this defect in the outset will be noticed as they occur. T.
