---
description: 'Property rights as the fundamental encouragement to the multiplication of wealth'
id: chapter-14
label: 'Chapter XIV: Of the right of property'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# CHAR XIV. OF THE RIGHT OF PROPERTY. IT is the province of speculative philosophy to trace the origin of the right of property j of legislation to regulate its transfer ; and of political science to devise the surest means of protecting that right. Political economy views the right of property solely as the most powerful of all encouragements to the multiplication of wealth, and is satisfied with its actual stability, without enquiring about its origin or its safeguards. In fact, the legal inviolability of property is obviously a mere mockery, where the sovereign power is unable to make the laws respected, where it either practices robbery itself,* or is impotent to repress it in others j or where possession is rendered perpetually insecure, by the intricacy of legislative enactments, and the subtleties of technical nicety. Nor can property be said to exist, where it is not * The strength of an individual is so little, when opposed to that of the government he lives under, that the subject can have no security against tlie exactions and abuses of authority, except in those countries, where the guardianship of the laws is entrusted to the all-searching vigilance of a free press, and their violation checked by an efficient national representation.

[014-001]matter of reality as well as of rigat. Then, and then only can the sources of production, land, capital, and industry, attain their utmost degree of fecundity. There are some truths so completely self-evident, that demonstration is quite superfluous. This is one of that number. Who will attempt to deny, that the certainty of enjoying, the fruits of one's land, capital, and labour, is the most powerful inducement to render them productive ? Or who is dull enough to doubt, that no one knows so well as the proprietor how to make the best use of his property ? Yet how often in practice is that inviolability of property disregarded, which, in theory, is allowed by all to be so immensely advantageous? How often is it broken in upon for the most insignificant purposes ; and its violation, that should naturally excite indignation, justified upon the most flimsy pretexts? so few persons are there who have a lively sense of any but a direct injury, or, with the most lively feelings, have firmness enough to act up to their sentiments. There is no security of property, where a despotic authority can possess itself of the property of the subject against his consent. Neither is there such security, where the consent is merely nominal and delusive. In England, the taxes are imposed by the national representation ; if, then, the minister be in the possession of an absolute majority, whether by means of electioneering influence, or by the overwhelming patronage foolishly placed at

[014-002]his disposal, taxation would no longer be in reality imposed by the national representatives ; the body bearing that name would, in effect, be the representatives of the minister; and the people of England would be forcibly subjected to the severest privations, to further projects that possibly might be every way injurious to them.* It is to be observed, that the right of property is equally invaded, by obstructing the free employment of the means of production, as by violently depriving the proprietor of the product of his land, capital, or industry; for the right of property, as defined by jurists, is the right of use, or even abuse. Thus, landed property is violated by arbitrarily prescribing tillage or plantation ; or by interdicting particular modes of cultivation ; the property of the capitalist is violated, by prohibiting particular ways of employing it ; for instance, by interdicting large purchases of corn, directing all bullion to be carried to the mint, forbidding the proprietor to build on his own soil, or prescribing the form and requisites of the building. It is a further violation of the capitalist's property to prohibit any kind of industry, or to load it with duties amounting to prohibition, after he has once embarked his capital in that way. • It is manifest, that a prohibition upon sugar * Adam Smith has asserted, that the security afforded to property by the laws of England, has more than counteracted the repeated faults and blunders of its government. It may be doubted, whether he would now adhere to that opinion.

[014-003]would annihilate most of the capital of the sugar refiners, vested in furnaces, utensils, &c., &c.* The property a man has in his own industry is violated, whenever he is forbidden the free exercise of his faculties and talents, except insomuch as they would interfere with the rights of third parties, t A similar violation is committed when * It would be vain to say to him, why not employ your works in some other way ? Probably, neither the spot nor the works of a refinery could be otherwise employed without enormous loss. t The industrious faculties are, of all kinds of property, the least questionable ; being derived directly either from nature, or from personal assiduity. The property in them is of higher pretensions than that of the land, which may generally be traced up to an act of spoliation; for it is hardly possible to show an instance, in which its ownership has been legitimately transmitted from the first occupancy. It ranks higher than the right of the capitalist also ; for even taking it for granted, that this latter has been acquired without any spoliation whatever, and by the gradual accumulations of ages, yet the succession to it could not have been established without the aid of legislation, which aid may have been granted on conditions. Yet, sacred as the property in the faculties of industry is, it is constantly infringed upon, not only in the flagrant abuse of personal slavery, but in many other points of more frequent occurrence. A government is guilty of an invasion upon it, when it appropriates to itself a particular branch of industry, the business of exchange and brokerage for example ; or when it sells the exclusive privilege of conducting it. It is a still greater violation to authorise a gendarme, commissary of police or judge, to arrest and detain individuals at discretion, on the plea of public safety or security to the constituted authorities ; thus depriving the individual of the fair and reasonable certainty of having his time and faculties at his own disposal, and of being able

[014-004]a man's labour is put in requisition for one purpose, though designed by himself for another ; as when an artisan or trader is forced into the military life, whether permanently or merely for the occasion. I am well aware, that the importance of maintaining social order, whereon the security of property depends, takes precedence of property itself; for which very reason, nothing short of the necessity of defending that order from manifest danger can authorise these or similar violations of individual right. And this it is which impresses upon the proprietors the necessity of requiring, in the constitution of the body politic, some guarantee or other, that the public service shall never be made a mask to the passions and ambition of those in power. Thus taxation, wrhen not intended as an engine of national depression and misery, must be proved indispensable to the existence of social order ; every step it takes beyond these limits, is an actual spoliation ; for taxation, even where levied- by national consent, is a violation of property ; since no values can be levied, but upon the produce of the land, capital, and industry of individuals. But there are some extremely rare cases, where interference between the owner and his property is even beneficial to production itself. For exable to complete what he may begin upon. What robber or despoiler could commit a more atrocious act of invasion upon the public security, certain as he his of being speedily put down, and counteracted by private as well as public opposition ?

[014-005]ample, in all countries that admit the detestable right of slavery, a right standing in hostility to all others, it is found expedient to limit the master's power over his slave. (#) Thus also, if a society stand in urgent need of timber for the shipwright or the carpenter, it must reconcile itself to some regulations respecting the felling of private woods* ; or the fear of losing the veins of mineral that intersect the soil, may sometimes oblige a government to work the mines itself. It may be readily conceived, that, even if there were no restraints upon mining, want of skill, the impatience of avarice, or the insufficiency of capital, might induce a proprietor to exhaust the superficial, which are commonly the poorest lodes, and occasion the loss of those of superior depth and quality. Sometimes a vein of mineral passes through the ground of many proprietors, but is only accessible in one spot. In this case, the obstinacy of a refractory proprietor must be disregarded, and the prosecution of the works be compulsory ; though, after all, I will not undertake to affirm, that it would * Probably also, were it not for maritime wars, originating, sometimes in puerile vanity, and sometimes in national errors of self-interest, commerce would be the best purveyor of timber forv ship-building ; so that, in reality, the abuse of the interference of public authority, in respect to the growth of private timber, is only a consequence of a previous abuse of a more destructive and less excusable character. (a) This is merely an instance of the necessity of counteracting one poison by another. T.

[014-006]i not be more advisable on the whole to respect his rights, or that the possession of a few additional mines is not too dearly purchased by this infringement upon the inviolability of property. Lastly, public safety sometimes imperiously requires the sacrifice of private property ; but that sacrifice is a violation, notwithstanding any indemnity given in such cases. For the right of property implies the free disposition of one's own ; and its sacrifice, however fully indemnified, is a forced disposition. (Z>) When public authority is not itself a spoliator, it procures to the nation the greatest of all blessings, protection from spoliation by others. Without this protection of each individual by the united force of the whole community, it is impossible to conceive any considerable developement of the productive powers of man, of land, and of capital ; or even to conceive the existence of capital at all; for it is nothing more than accumulated value, operating under the safeguard of authority. This is the reason why no nation has ever arrived at any degree of opulence, that has not been subject to a regular government. (b) /Property being a mere creature of society, is, in strict justice, liable to the conditions essential to the well-being of society its creator. But, beyond all doubt, it is expedient to render it as inviolable and extensive as possible. Why ? Because, 1. It is one of the rewards of industry ; and there is a manifest expedience in enlarging those stimulative rewards. 2. Its objects neither can nor will be turned to so much productive account, otherwise than by the perpetuation of the ownership, T.

[014-007]Civilised nations are indebted to political organisation for the innumerable and infinitely various productions, that satisfy their infinite wants, as well as for the fine arts and the opportunities of leisure that accumulation affords, without which the faculties of the mind could never be cultivated, or man by their means attain the full dignity, whereof his nature is susceptible. The poor man, that can call nothing his own, is equally interested with the rich in upholding the inviolability of property. His personal services would not be available, without the aid of accumulations previously made and protected. Every obstruction to, or dissipation of these accumulations is a material injury to his means of gaining a livelihood ; and the ruin and spoliation of the higher is surely followed by the misery and degradation of the lower classes. A confused notion of the advantages of this right of property has been equally conducive with the personal interest of the wealthy, to make all civilised communities pursue and punish every invasion of property as a crime. The study of political economy is admirably calculated to justify and confirm this act of legislation ; inasmuch as it explains, why the happy effects, resulting from the right of property, are more striking in proportion as that right is well guarded by political institutions. VOL.
