---
description: 'The economic effects of colonies on the mother country'
id: chapter-19
label: 'Chapter XIX: Of colonies and their products'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# OF COLONIES AND THEIR PRODUCTS, COLONIES are settlements formed in distant countries by an elder nation, called, the mother-country. When the latter wishes to enlarge its intercourse with a country, already populous and civilised, whose territory it has, therefore, no hopes of getting into its own possession, it commonly contents itself with the establishment of a factory or mercantile residence, where its -factors may trade, in conformity with the local regulations ; as the Europeans have done in China and Japan. When colonies shake off' their dependence upon the mother-country, they become substantive and independent states. It is common for nations to colonise, when their population becomes crowded in its ancient territorial limits; and when particular classes of society are exposed to the persecution of the rest. These appear to have been the onlv motives for colonisation *t among the ancients ; the moderns have been actuated by other views. The vast improvements in navigation have opened new channels to their enterprise, and discovered countries before un 

[019-001]known ; they have found their way to another hemisphere, and to the most inhospitable climates, not with the intention of there fixing themselves and their posterity, but to obtain valuable articles of commerce, and return to their native countries, enriched with the fruits of a forced, but yet very extensive production. It is worth while to note this difference of motive, which has made so marked a difference in the consequences of the two systems of colonisation. I am strongly tempted to call one the colonial system of the ancients, and the other, the colonial system of the moderns ; although there have been many colonies in modern times estaw blished on the ancient plan, of which those of North America are the most distinguished, (a) The production of colonies, formed upon the ancient system, is inconsiderable at the commencement, but increases with great rapidity. The colonists choose for their country of adoption a spot, where the soil is fertile, the climate genial, or the position advantageous for commercial purposes. (a) The distinction of the two systems is more imaginary than real. Most of the early establishments of the Europeans in the West were made with the view of absolute migration. The French at St. Domingo, the English at Barbadoes, the Spaniards almost universally, settled without the intention of returning home. The introduction of negro labour was an afterthought. Slavery was an established practice in all the ancient world ; and colonies either made prize of the indigenes, or imported slaves from abroad, as soon as they were rich enough to buy them. T. x 4

[019-002]The land is generally quite fresh, whether it have been the scene of a dense population long since extinguished, or merely the range of roving tribes, too small in number and strength to exhaust the productive qualities of the soil. Families, transplanted from a civilised to an entirely new country, carry with them theoretical and practical knowledge, which is one of the chief elements of productive industry : they carry likewise habits of industry, calculated to set these elements in activity, as well as the habit of subordination, so essential to the preservation of social order : they commonly take with them some little capital also, not in money, but in tools and stock of different kinds : moreover, they have no landlord to share the produce of a virgin soil, far exceeding in extent what they are able to bring into cultivation for years to come. To these causes of rapid prosperity, should, perhaps, be superadded the chief cause of all, the natural desire of mankind to better their condition, and to render as comfortable as possible the mode of life they have adopted. The rapid increase of products in colonies, founded upon this plan, would have been still more striking, if the colonists had carried with them a larger capital ; but, as we have already observed, it is not the families favored by fortune that emigrate; those, who have the command of a sufficient capital to procure a comfortable existence in their native country, the scene of their halcyon days of infancy, will rarely be tempted to 1

[019-003]renounce habits, friends, and relations, to embark in what must always be attended with hazard, and encounter the inseparable hardships of a primitive establishment. This accounts for the scarcity of capital in newly-settled colonies ; and is one reason why it bears so high a rate of interest there. In point of fact, capital is of much more rapid accumulation in new colonies, than in countries long civilised. It would seem as if the colonists, in abandoning their native country, leave behind them part of their vicious propensities ; they certainly carry with them little of that fondness for show, that costs so dear in Europe, and brings so poor a return. No qualities, but those of utility, are in estimation in the country they are going to ; and consumption is limited to objects of rational desire, which is sooner satisfied than artificial wants. The towns are few and small ; the life of agriculturists, which they must necessarily adopt, is of all others the most economical ; finally, their industry is proportionately more prqductive, and requires a smaller capital to work upon. The character of the colonial government usually accords with that of individuals ; it is active in the execution of its duties, sparing of expense, and careful to avoid quarrels ; thus there are few taxes, sometimes none at all ; and, since the government takes little or nothing from the revenues of the subject, his ability to multiply his savings, and consequently to enlarge his productive capital, is very great. With very little capital to begin upon, the annual produce of the colony very soon ex 

[019-004]B. 1. ceeds its consumption. Hence, the astonishingly rapid progress in its wealth and population ; for human labour becomes dear in proportion to the accumulation of capital ; and it is a weiLknown maxim, that population always increases according to the demand.* With these data, there is no difficulty in explaining the causes of the rapid advance of such colonies. Among the ancients, we find, that Ephesus and Miletus in Asia Minor, Tarentum and Crotona in Italy, Syracuse and Agrigentum in Sicily, very soon surpassed the parent cities in wealth and consequence. The English colonies in North America, which bear the closest resemblance of any in our times to those of ancient Greece, present a picture of prosperity less striking perhaps, but quite as deserving of notice, and still in the attitude of advance. It is the invariable practice of colonies, founded upon this plan, and without any thoughts of returning home, to provide themselves an independent government ; and, even where the mothercountry reserves the right of legislation, that right will sooner or later be dissolved by the operation of natural causes, and matters be brought to that footing, on which justice and regard to its real interest should have prompted her to put them originally. But, to proceed to the colonies formed upon the colonial system of the moderns ; the founders of * Vide infra, under the head of Population, Book II. c. 11.

[019-005]oi«5 them were for the most part adventurers, whose object was, not to settle in an adopted country, but rapidly to amass a fortune, and return to enjoy it in their former homes.* The early adventurers of this stamp found ample gratification of their extravagant rapacity, first in the cluster of the Antilles, in Mexico and Peru, and subsequently in Brazil and in the Eastern Indies. After exhausting the resources previously accumulated by the aborigines, they were compelled to direct their industry towards discovering the mines of these new countries, and to turn to account the no less valuable produce of their agriculture. Successive swarms of new colonists poured in from time to time, animated for the most part with some hope of return, with the desire, not of living in affluence upon the land they cultivated, and leaving behind them a contented posterity and a spotless name, but of making inordinate gain, to be afterwards enjoyed elsewhere : this motive led them to adopt a system of compulsory cultivation, of which negro slavery was the principal instrument. But let me ask, in what manner does slavery operate upon production ? Is the labour of the slave less costly, than that of the free labourer? * There have been many exceptions in North America and elsewhere. The colonies of Spain and Portugal in the New World were of an ambiguous character. Some of the colonists contemplated a return ; others went to establish themselves and their posterity ; but the whole plan of them has been subverted, since the commencement of the struggle for emancipation.

[019-006]This is an important enquiry, originating in the influence of the modern system of colonisation upon the multiplication of wealth. Stewart, Turgot, and Smith, all agree in thinking, that the labour of the slave is dearer and less productive than that of the freeman. — Their arguments amount to this : a man, that neither works nor consumes on his own account, works as little and consumes as much as he can : he has no interest in the exertion of that degree of care and intelligence, which alone can ensure success : his life is shortened by excessive labour, and his master must replace it at great expense : besides, the free workman looks after his own support ; but that of the slave must be attended to by the master ; and, as it is impossible for the master to do it so economically as the free workman, the labour of the slave must cost him dearer.* This position has been controverted by the following calculation : — The annual expense of a negro in the West Indies, upon the plantations most humanely administered, does not exceed 300 Jr. : add the interest of his prime cost, say at ten per cent., for it is a life interest ; the average price of a negro is about 2000^/r., so that, allowing 200 Jr. for the annual interest, the whole expense * Stewart (Sir Jas.). Inquiry into the Prin. of Pol. Econ. book ii. c. 607. Turgot. Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses, §23. Smith. Wealth of Notions, booki. c. 8. book iii. c. 2.

[019-007]of a negro to his owner is but 500 fi . per annum (£), a sum doubtless much inferior to the charge of free labour in that part of the world. An ordinary free labourer may earn there 5, 6, 7 Jr. per day, or even more. Taking the medium of 6 fr.y and reckoning but 300 working days in the year, the annual wages will amount to 1800 Jr. instead of 500. * Common sense will tell us, that the consumption of a slave must be less than that of a free workman. The master cares not if his slave enjoy life, provided he do but live ; a pair of trowsers and a jacket are the whole wardrobe of the negro : his lodging a bare hut, and his food the manioc root, to which kind masters now and then add a little dried fish. A population of free workmen, taken * It should be observed here, that the free labourers, who are so much better paid, are commonly engaged in occupations, which, though less laborious, require a greater degree of intelligence and personal skill. Tailors and watchmakers are generally freemen. And the mere existence of slavery of itself enhances the price of free field-labour, by driving all competition out of the market. (b) In this calculation no account has been taken of the housing of the negro, the tools and implements supplied to him, or the clothing furnished by the mastery neither does our author seem to make any allowance for the probable increase of agricultural production, which free negro labour might afford. Free European labour would doubtless be far more expensive, were it practicable. The interest of money is also estimated far too low, and the infant and the aged must be provided for by the master. T.

[019-008]IS ON PRODUCTION. B. I. one with another, has women, children, and invalids to support : the ties of consanguinity, friendship, love, and gratitude, all contribute to multiply consumption ; whereas, the slave-owner is often relieved by the effects of fatigue from the maintenance of the veteran : the tender age and sex enjoy little exemption from labour ; and even the soft impulse of sexual attraction is subject to the avaricious calculations of the master. What is the motive, which operates in every man's breast to counteract the impulse towards the gratification of his wants and appetites ? Doubtless, the providential care of the future. Human wants and appetites have a tendency to extend,— frugality to reduce, consumption ; and it is easy to conceive, that these opposite motives, working in the mind of the same individual, help to counteract each other. But, where there is master and slave, the balance must needs incline to the side of frugality ; the wants and appetites operate upon the weaker party, and the motive of frugality upon the stronger. It is a well-known fact, that the net produce of an estate in St. Domingo cleared off the whole purchase-money in six years ; whereas in Europe the net produce seldom exceeds the ^r or TV of the purchase-money, and sometimes falls far short even of that. Smith himself elsewhere tells us, that the planters of the English islands admit, that the rum and molasses will defray the whole expenses of a sugar plantation, leaving the total produce of sugar as net proceeds; which, as he justly observes, is much the same as if our farmers were to pay their

[019-009]rent and expenses with the straw only, and to make a clear profit of all the grain. Now I ask, how many products are there, that exceed the expenses of production in the same degree ?(c) Indeed, this very exorbitance of profit shows, that the industry of the master is paid out of all proportion with that of the slave, (d) To the consumer it makes no difference. One of the productive classes benefits by the depression of the rest; and that would be all, were it not that the vicious system of production, resulting from this derangement, opposes the introduction of a better plan of industry. The slave and the master are both degraded beings, incapable of approximating (c) What reference can this inequality have to the relative position of the proprietor and the different productive agents one to another ? It is a mere question of difference of interest of capital. Capital in the West Indies brings a return very different, in its ratio to rent or the profit of land, from what it yields in Europe. Land, the source of production, sells cheap, because of the greater unhealthiness of climate, insecurity of tenure, abundance, &c. &c. Were the whole of the land appropriated, it is probable, that the complete emancipation of the slaves would very little improve their relative condition. T. (d) This may be much doubted. The intelligence of the master-agents of production must be paid very highly, where intelligence is rare, and the risk of health and other circumstances deter a great many from entering into competition. It is the proprietor, and not the conductor of the concern, that is disproportionately paid. But would he not be equally so, were labour quite free ? The appropriators of the sources of production are always able to exact a very large proportion of the surplus produce; and the surplus produce of a West Indian plantation is very great in relation to its extent. T.

[019-010]to the perfection of industry, and, by their contagion, degrading the industry of the free man, who has no slaves at his command. For labour can never be honorable, or even respectable, where it is executed by an inferior cast. The forced and unnatural superiority of the master over the slave is exhibited in the affectation of lordly indolence and inactivity : and the faculties of mind are debased in equal degree ; the place of intelligence is usurped by violence and brutality. 1 have been told by travellers of veracity and observation, that they consider all progress in the arts in Brazil and other settlements of America as utterly hopeless, while slavery shall continue to be tolerated. Those states of the North American Union, which have proscribed slavery, are making the largest strides towards national prosperity. The inhabitants of the slave states of Georgia and Carolina raise the best cotton in the world, but cannot work it up. During the last war with England, they were obliged to send it overland to New York to be spun into yarn. The same cotton is sent back, at a vast expense, to be consumed at the place of its original growth in a manufactured state. (<?) This is a just retribution for the toleration of a practice, by which one part of man(e) So it is now from Hindustan, where labour is free and most abundant. Cotton will flow towards machinery, which has become too powerful for the competition of human labour, even where it is the cheapest. This is, therefore, not the effect of the toleration of slavery in those states. T.

[019-011]kind is made to labour, and subjected to the severest privation, for the benefit of another. Policy is in this point in accordance with humani*y- CO It remains yet to be explained, what are the consequences of the commercial intercourse between the colony and the mother-country, in regard to production ; always taking it for granted, that the colony continues in a state of dependence; for the moment it shakes off the yoke, it has nothing colonial but its origin, and stands, in relation to the mother-country, on exactly the same footing as any other nation on the globe. The parent-state, with a view to secure to the produce of its own soil and industry the market of colonial consumption, generally prohibits the colonists from purchasing European commodities from any one else, which enables her own merchants to sell their goods in the colony for some(f) Though our author has come to this correct conclusion, his reasoning is neither logical nor satisfactory; indeed, the whole of this important subject is dismissed with a precipitation little suited to its importance. There are two motives of human industry, the hope of enjoyment, and the fear of suffering. The slave is actuated principally by the latter, the free agent by the former. Neither of these motives should have been thus cursorily adverted to, in the analysis of actual production, but have been fairly set forth in the outset, immediately after the detail of the sources of production; being both of them the stimuli^ which give activity to those sources. After all that our author and others have done, much yet remains for the organization of the science. T. VOL. I. y

[019-012]what more than they are currently worth. This is a benefit conferred on the subjects of the parentstate at the expense of the colonists, who are likewise its subjects. Considering the mother-country and the colony to be integral parts of one and the same state, the profit and loss balance each other; and this restriction is nugatory, except inasmuch as it entails the charge of an establishment of custom or excise-officers ; and thus increases the national expenditure. While, on the one hand, the colonists are obliged to buy of the mother-country, they are, on the other, compelled to sell their colonial produce exclusively to its merchants, who thus obtain an extra advantage without any creation of value, at the expense, likewise, of the colonists, by the enjoyment of an exclusive privilege, and of exemption from competition. Here, too, the profit and loss destroy each other nationally, but not individually ; what a merchant of Havre or Bourdeaux gains in this way is substantial profit ; but it is taken from the pockets of one or more subjects of the same state, who had equal right to have their interests attended to. It is true, indeed, that the colonists are indemnified in another way; viz. either by the miseries of the slave population, as we have already explained ; or by the privations of the inhabitants of the mother-country, as I am about to show. So completely is the whole system built upon compulsion, restriction, and monopoly, that these very domestic consumers are compelled to buy

[019-013]what colonial articles of consumption they require exclusively from the national colonies ; every other colony, and all the rest of the world, being denied the liberty of importing colonial * produce, or subjected to the payment of a heavy fine, in the shape of an import duty. It would seem, that the home-consumer should at any rate derive an obvious benefit, in the price of colonial produce, from his exclusive right of purchasing of the colonist. But even this unjust preference is denied him; for, as soon as the produce arrives in Europe, the home-merchant is allowed to re-export and sell it where he chooses, and particularly to those nations, that have no colonies of their own ; so that after all the planter is deprived of the competition of buyers, although the home-consumer is made to suffer its full effect. All these losses fall chiefly upon the class of home-consumers, a class of all others the most important in point of number, and deserving of attention on account of the wide diffusion of the evils of any vicious system affecting it, as well as of the functions it performs in every part of the social machine, and the taxes it contributes to the public purse, wherein consists the power of the government. They may be divided into two parts ; whereof the one is absorbed in the superfluous charges of raising the colonial produce, which * Or equinoctial ; the term is applied to the ordinary products of equinoctial latitudes. Y 2

[019-014]might be got cheaper elsewhere *; this is a dead loss to the consumer, without gain to any body. The other part, which is also paid by the consumer, goes to make the fortunes of West-Indian planters and merchants. The wealth thus acquired is the produce of a real tax upon the people, although, being centred in few hands, it is apt to dazzle the eyes, and be mistaken for wealth of colonial and commercial acquisition. And it is for the protection of this imaginary advantage, that almost all the wars of the 18th century have been undertaken, and that the European states have thought themselves obliged to keep up, at a vast expense, civil and judicial, as well as marine and military, establishments, at the opposite extremities of the globe, t * Poivre, a writer of great information and probity, assures us, that white sugar of the best quality is sold in Cochin China at the rate of 3 piastres or 16 jr. of our money per quintal of the country, which is equal to 150 livr. poids de marc, little more than 2 sous per livr. ; and that more than 80 millions of livr. are thence exported annually to China at that rate. Adding 300 per cent, for the charges and profits of trade, which is a most liberal allowance, the sugar of Cochin China might, under a free trade, be sold in France at from 8 to 9 sous per livr. The English already derive from Asia a considerable quantity both of sugar and indigo, at a cheaper rate than those of the West Indies. And, doubtless, if the Europeans were to plant independent and industrious colonies along the northern coast of Africa, the culture of equinoctial products there would rapidly gain ground, and supply Europe in greater abundance at a still cheaper rate. f Arthur Young, in 1789, estimated the annual charge entailed on France, by the possession of St. Domingo, at 4-8 millions

[019-015]* 3C25 When Poivre was appointed governor of the Isle of France, the colony had not been planted more than 50 years ; yet he calculated it to have then cost France no less than 60 millions of/r.; to be a source of regular and large out-going j and to bring her no return of any kind whatsoever. * It is true, that the money spent on the defence of that settlement had the further object of upholding our other possessions in the East Indies ; but, when we find that these latter were still more expensive both to the government and to the proprietors of the two companies, old and new, it is impossible to deny, that all we gained by keeping the Mauritius at this enormous expense was, the opportunity of a further waste in Bengal and on the coast of Coromandel. The same observations will apply to such of our possessions in other parts of the world, as were of no importance, but in a military point of view. Should it be pretended, that these stations are kept up at a great sacrifice, not with the object of gain, but to extend and affirm the power of the mother-country, it might yet be asked, why maintain them at such loss, since this power has no millions of francs. He has gone into detail to prove, that, if the sums spent on her colonies for 25 years only had been devoted to the improvement of any one of her own provinces, she would have acquired an annual addition of 120 millions of francs, net revenue, consisting of actual products, without loss to any body. Vide his Journey in France. * CEuvres de Poivre, p. 209. In this estimate he takes no account of the charge of the military and marine establishment of France herself, of which a part should be set down to the colony. Y 3

[019-016]other object but the preservation of the colonies, which turn out to be themselves a losing concern ? * That England has benefited immensely by the loss of her North American colonies, is a fact no one has attempted to deny, t Yet she spent the incredible sum of 1,800,000,000^., in attempting to retain possession ; a monstrous error in policy indeed ; for she might have enjoyed the same benefits, that is to say, have emancipated her colonies, without expending a sixpence ; besides saving a profusion of gallant blood, and gaining credit for generosity, in the eyes of Europe and of posterity, t * Vide the Works of Benjamin Franklin, vol. ii.p. 50., for the opinion of that celebrated man, who had so much experience in these matters. I find it stated in the Travels of Lord Valentia, that the Cape of Good Hope, in 1802, cost England an excess of from six to seven millions of francs per annum above its own revenue. -j~ « Bristol was Dne of the chief entrepots of North American commerce. Her principal merchants and inhabitants joined in a most energetic representation to parliament, that their city would be infallibly ruined, by the acknowledgment of American independence; adding, that their port would be so deserted, as not to be worth the charge of keeping up. Notwithstanding their representations, peace became a matter of necessity, and the dreaded separation was consented to. Ten years had scarcely elapsed after this event, when the same worthy persons petitioned the parliament, for leave to enlarge and deepen the port, which, instead of being deserted, as they had apprehended, was incapable of receiving the influx of additional shipping, that the commerce of independent America had given birth to.' De Levis, Lettres Chinoises. J These remarks are not altogether applicable to the British dependencies in the East ^ because there the nation is rather a conqueror

[019-017]GH. XIX. ON PRODUCTION. 327 The blunders committed by the ministers of George III., during the whole course of the first American war, in which, indeed, they were unhappily abetted, by the corruption of the parliament and the pride of the nation, were imitated by Napoleon, in his attempt to reduce the revolted negroes of St. Domingo. Nothing but its distance and maritime position prevented that scheme from proving equally disastrous with the war of Spain. Yet, comparatively, the independence of that fine island conqueror than a colonist, having the domination over thirtytwo millions of inhabitants, and the absolute disposal of the revenue levied upon them. But the clea/ national profit derived from the acquisition, is by no means so considerable, as may be generally supposed ; for the charges of administration and protection must be deducted. Colquhoun, in his Treatise on the Wealth, Power, and Resources of the British Empire, which gives an exaggerated picture of them, states the total revenue of the sovereign company, at 1 8,05 1,478/. sterling; and its expenditure at, 16,984-,27U. ; leaving a surplus of 1,067,207/. (g) In all probability, were India in a state of national independence, the commerce between her and Great Britain would increase so much, as to produce to the latter an additional revenue, larger than the amount of that surplus, to say nothing of the increase of individual profits. (g) The position of the British power in India, has been every way improved by the late operations ; for an account of which, and of the present financial resources of the company, vide Narrative of the late Operations, by H. T. Prinsep. It is by no means clear, that the independence of India would, at present, produce the advantages anticipated by our author ; for those advantages would depend upon its better administration, to which the natives are at present hardly competent. T. Y 4

[019-018]S2S ON PRODUCTION. B. I. might have been made equally productive of commercial benefit to France, as that of America had been to England.* It is high time to drop our * When I speak of the advantage of American emancipation to Great Britain herself, I mean commercial, not political advantage. I know very well, that the latter is doomed to fall, and that by the instrumentality of her revolted offspring. But this catastrophe will not have originated in the struggle for colonial independence : but in the insubstantial and perishable basis of British, and in the solidity and progressive character of American greatness, (h) National power, resting upon daminion by land or sea, can never be permanent ; because it arrays against itself the interests- and passions of mankind : and it is utterly impossible, that any nation should henceforward enjoy external sway, so extensive, or so long-lived as that of the Romans ; knowledge is too far advanced, the means of resistance too well understood, and mutual intercourse too general and too free. (7i) Our author seems here and elsewhere, to dwell with some satisfaction, on the prospect of the political degradation of Great Britain. But he forgets, that the same productive power, which has raised her to pre-eminence, may still uphold her, if properly directed. The sources of her greatness are natural means, operated upon by her domestic industry : her external sway is rather the index of the existence and amount, than the essence of her superiority. Neither is the basis of American greatness quite so substantial as he seems to imagine. In short, every nation has in itself the seeds of wealth and improvement, as well as of decay and impoverishment. Britain has industry, intelligence, and capital ; her bane is heavy debt and taxation, aggravated by a poor-law system. America has industry and territorial extent; but she has negro-sJavery, a more formidable source of mischief than any one of Britain's scourges. The southern states, which are now cultivated by negroes, will one day probably be the scene of negro dominion, and a thorn in the side of the giant republic. The sources of national

[019-019]absurd lamentations for the loss of our colonies, considered as a source of national prosperity. For, in the first place, France now enjoys a greater degree of prosperity, than while she retained her colonies ; witness the increase of her population. Before the revolution, her revenues could maintain but twenty-five millions of people : they now support thirty millions, (1819). In the second place, the first principles of political economy will teach us, that the loss of colonies by no means implies a loss of the trade with them. Wherewith did France before buy the colonial products ? with her own domestic products to be sure. Has she not since continued to buy them in the Same way, though sometimes of a neutral, or even an enemy ? I admit, that the ignorance and vices of her rulers for the time being have made her pay for those products much dearer, than she need have done : but now that she buys them at the natural price, (exclusive of course of the import duties,) and pays for them as before with her domestic products, in what way is she a loser ? Political convulsions have given a new direction to commerce ; the import of sugar and coffee is no longer national prosperity or decay, may be checked or stimulated, re-opened or destroyed by human agency. Our author reckons with too much confidence, upon the perpetuation of ministerial folly and corruption ; and, to say the truth, both the experience of the past, and the observation of the present, fully warrant him in so doing. But the progress of intelligence in the nation, may enforce the tardy acquiescence of authority. T.

[019-020]confined to Nantes and Bourdeaux ; and those cities have suffered in consequence. But, as France now consumes at least as much of those articles as ever she did, all, that has not come by the way of Nantes or Bourdeaux, must needs have found its way in some other channel. France cannot have bought in any other way, than, as of old, with the products of her own land, capital, and industry ; for, excepting robbery and piracy, one nation has no other means of buying of another. Indeed, France might have benefited largely by the trade, which has supplanted her old colonial commerce, had not old prejudices and erroneous notions constantly opposed the natural current of human affairs. Perhaps it may be argued, that the colonies furnish commodities, which are no where else to be had. The nation, therefore, that should have no share of territories so highly favored by nature, would lie at the mercy of the nation, that should first get possession ; for the monopoly of purchasing the colonial produce would enable her to exact her own price from her less fortunate neighbour. Now it is proved beyond all doubt, that what we erroneously call colonial produce grows every where within the tropics, where the soil is adapted to its cultivation. The spices of the Moluccas are found to answer at Cayenne, and probably by this time in many other places y and no monopoly was ever more complete, than the trade of the Dutch in that commodity. They had the sole possession of the only spice 3

[019-021]islands, and allowed nobody else to approach them. Has Europe been in any want of spices, or has she bought them for their weight in gold ? Have we any reason to regret the not having devoted two hundred years of war, fought a score of naval battles, and sacrificed some hundreds of millions, and the lives of half a million of our fellow creatures, for the paltry object of getting our pepper and cloves cheaper by some two or three sous a pound ? And this example, it is worth while to observe, is the most favorable one for the colonial system, that could possibly be selected. One can hardly imagine the possibility of monopolizing sugar, a staple product of most parts of Asia, Africa, and America, so completely as the Dutch did the spice trade ; yet has this very trade been snatched from the avaricious grasp of the monopolist nation, almost without firing a shot. The ancients, by their system of colonization, made themselves friends all over the known world ; the moderns have sought to make subjects, and therefore have made enemies. Governors, deputed by the mother-country, feel not the slightest interest in the diffusion of happiness and real wealth amongst a people, with whom they do not propose to spend their lives, to sink into privacy and retirement, or to conciliate popularity. They know their consideration in the mother-country will depend upon the fortune they return with, not upon their behaviour in office. Add to this the large discretionary power, that must unavoidably be vested in the deputed rulers of distant posses 

[019-022]sions, and there will be every ingredient towards the composition of a truly detestable government. It is to be feared, that men in power, like the rest of mankind, are too little disposed to moderation, too slow in their intellectual progress, embarrassed as it is at every step by the unceasing manoeuvres of innumerable retainers, civil, military, financial, and commercial, all impelled, by interested motives, to present things in false colors, and involve the simplest questions in obscurity, to allow any reasonable hope of accelerating the downfall of a system, which for the last three or four hundred years must have wonderfully abridged the inestimable benefits, that mankind at large, in all the five great divisions of the globe*, have, or ought to have derived from the rapid progress of discovery, and the prodigious impulse given to human industry since the commencement of the sixteenth century. The silent advances of intelligence, and the irresistible tide of human affairs will alone effect its subversion. * The vast continent of New Holland, with its surrounding islands, is now generally considered by geographers as a distinct portion of the globe, under the denomination of Australia or Austrasia, which has been given to it on account of its position exclusively within the southern hemisphere.
