---
description: 'The tools, subsistence, and raw materials that constitute productive capital'
id: chapter-3
label: 'Chapter III: Of the nature of productive capital'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# OF THE NATURE OF PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL, AND THE MODE IN WHICH IT CONCURS IN THE BUSINESS OF PRODUCTION. As we advance in the investigation of the processes of industry, we cannot fail to perceive, that mere unassisted industry is insufficient to invest things with value. The human agent of industry must, besides, be provided with pre-existing products; without which his agency, however skilful and intelligent, would never be put in motion. These pre-existing requisites are, 1. The tools and implements of the several arts. The husbandman could do nothing without his spade and mattock, the weaver without his loom, or the mariner without his ship. 2. The products necessary for the subsistence of the industrious agent, so long as he is occupied in completing his share of the work of production. This outlay of his subsistence is, indeed, in the long run, replaced by the product he is occupied upon, or the price he will receive for it; but he is obliged continually to make the advance. S. The raw materials, which are to be converted into finished products by the means of his industry. These materials, it is true, are often the gratuitous offering of nature ; but they are much more gene 

[003-001]* rally the products of antecedent industry (a) ; as in the case of seed-corn supplied by agriculture. (a) Nature is the primary source of every product; industry, whether corporeal or intellectual, may enlarge the sphere of human wants and gratifications, by discovering the latent utility of matter, and overcoming natural or artificial difficulty of attainment ; and capital may further that extension, masHi iich as the utility of a modification, already given to a natural product by human powers, may consist in enabling those powers to give a further modification to that or to another product, or to make a fresh discovery of utility. The order of production is simply this : nature offers its powers and its products ; industry discovers their various and latent utility, surmounts the difficulty of attainment, and gives the requisite modification i which being once obtained, the product of nature, thus modified by industry, may be used as capital, to advance discovery and heap modification upon modification. Capital, therefore, consists not in value, but in natural products, appropriated, perhaps modified, but at any rate invested with value, by human agency. But one should be careful not to reckon as capital any mere primary natural agents or powers, as land and the like, although perhaps capable of total or partial appropriation,, and whether acquired by corporeal or by intellectual industry. For these are the primary sources of production ; and capital consists only of products. Neither are permanent ameliorations of the natural sources an item of capital ; but an enlargement only of those natural sources. The draining of a lake by an artificial cut, not liable to be obstructed by any natural cause, is an acquisition pro tanto of the natural source, land. Our author appears in this and the two next chapters to trace production upwards through capital and industry to nature, the primary source. In Chap. VI. he falls into the opposite arrangement ; tracing it downwards from nature to the finishing stroke of industry assisted by capital. This is surely the better mode of handling the subject, both for simplicity and perspicuity. Vide infra, Chap. VI. in notis. T.

[003-002]metals, the fruit of the labour of the miner and smelter, drugs, brought by the merchant perhaps from the extremities of the globe. The value of all these must be found in advance by the industrious agent that works them up. The value of all these items constitute what is denominated productive capital. Under this head of productive capital must likewise be classed the value of all erections and improvements upon real or landed property, which increase its annual produce, as well as that of the farming live and dead stock, that operates as machinery in aid of human industry. Another item of productive capital is money, whenever it is employed to facilitate the interchange of products, without which production could never make any progress. Money distributed through the whole mechanism of human industry, like the oil that greases the wheels of complex machinery, gives the requisite ease and facility to its movements. But gold and silver are not productive, unless employed by industry; they are like the oil in a machine remaining in a state of inaction. And so also of all other tools and implements of human industry. It would evidently be a great mistake to suppose, that the capital of a community consists solely of its money. The merchant, the manufacturer, the cultivator, commonly have the least considerable portion of the value composing their capital invested in the form of money ; nay, the more active their concern is, the smaller is the 15

[003-003]CH. lit. ON PRODUCTION. #9 relative proportion of their capital so vested to the residue. The funds of the merchant are placed out in goods on their transit by land or water, or warehoused in different directions: the capital of the manufacturer chiefly consists of the raw material in different stages of progress, of tools, implements, and necessaries for his workmen ; while that of the cultivator is vested in farming buildings, live stock, fences, and inclosures. They all studiously avoid burthening themselves with more money than is sufficient for current use. What is true of one, two, three, or four individuals, is true of society in the aggregate. The capital of a nation is made up of the sum total of private capitals ; and, in proportion as a nation is prosperous and industrious, in the same proportion is that part of its capital, vested in the shape of money, trifling compared to the amount of the gross national capital. Necker estimates the circulating medium in France, in the year 17&4, at about 2200 millions of francs, and there are reasons for believing his estimate exaggerated ; but this is not the time to state them. However, if account be taken of all the works, enclosures, live stock, utensils, machines, ships, commodities, and provisions of all sorts belonging to the French people or their government in every part of the world; and if to these be added the furniture, decorations, jewellery, plate, and other items of luxury or convenience, whereof they were possessed, at the same period, it will be found, that 2200 millions of circulating medium was a mere

[003-004]$0 ON PRODUCTtON. B. I. trifle compared to the aggregate of these united values. * Beeke estimates the total capital of Great Britain at 2300 millions sterling t, (equal to more than 55,000 millions of our francs.) The total amount of her circulating specie, before the establishment of her present paper-money, was never reckoned by the highest estimates at more than 47 millions sterling t; that is to say, about l-50th of her capital. Smith reckoned it at no more than 18 millions, which could not be the l-127th part. (&) Capital in the hands of a national government forms a part of the gross national capital. * Arthur Young, in his " Journey in France,'1 in spite of the unfavourable view he gives of French agriculture, estimates the total capital employed in that kingdom in that branch of industry alone, at more than 11,000 millions of francs ; and states his belief, that the capital of Great Britain, similarly employed, is in the proportion of two to one. •j- Observations on the produce of the income-tax. J Pitt, who is supposed to have overrated the quantity of specie, states the gold at forty-four millions ; and Price estimates the silver at three millions, making a total of forty-seven millions. (b) These estimates have been strangely brought together, though made at very different periods of the national wealth of Britain. The money of England alone at present, reckoning specie and Bank of England paper, does not amount to above thirty millions, yet her annual produce has greatly increased since Pitt's calculation was made, and prices have in nowise retrograded. But this is owing to the superior rapidity with which paper circulates value, and the great improvement of the banking system ; which are matters that will be adverted to under the head of Money, infr*9 Chap. XXI. T.

[003-005]* SI We shall see, by and bye, how capital, which is subject to continual wear and consumption in the process of production, is continually replaced by the very operation of production ; or rather, how its value, when destroyed under one form, re-appears under another, (c) At present it is enough to have a distinct conception, that, without it, industry could produce nothing, (d) Capital must work, as it were, in concert with industry; and this concurrence is what I call the productive agency of capital. (c) That is to say, how one modification of matter disappears totally or partially and another takes its place. T. (d) Industry may produce considerably without the preexistence of any but natural products. Therefore, if we are to understand this passage literally, natural products must be classed as capital. Probably our author considers them so, when reduced into human possession. T.
