---
description: 'Table of contents for Volume I, Book I: Of the Production of Wealth'
id: contents
label: 'Contents'
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# THE FIRST VOLUME. BOOK I. OF THE PRODUCTION OF WEALTH. CHAP. Page I. Of what is meant by the term production - 1 II. Of the different kinds of industry, and the mode in which they concur in production 9 III. Of the nature of productive capital, and the mode in which it concurs in the business of production - 26 IV. Of the natural agents, that assist in the production of wealth ; and specially of land -32 V. Of the mode, in which industry, capital, and natural agents unite for the purpose of production - 40 VI. Of the operations common to all branches of industry alike - - 46 VII. Of the labour of mankind, of nature, and of machinery respectively - 59 VIII. Of the advantages and disadvantages, resulting from the division of labour; and of the extent to which it may be carried - 72

[P03-001]XIV CHAP. IX. X. XL XII. XIII. XIV. XV. XVI. CONTENTS. I'age Of the different methods of employing commercial industry; and the mode in which they concur in production - 90 Of the transformations undergone by ca- 103 111 132 pital, in the progress of production Of the formation and multiplication of capital Of unproductive capital Of immaterial products, or values consumed at the moment of production - 136 Of the right of property Of the vent or demand for products Of the benefits, resulting from the brisk cir- 1 62 culation of money or commodities - 183 XVII. Of the effect of government-regulations, intended to influence production - - 188 Sect. 1. Effect of regulations prescribing the nature of the products - 189 Digression Upon what is called - 1 99 the balance of trade 2. Of the effect of regulations, fixing the manner of production - 254 3. Of privileged trading companies - 270 4. Of regulations affecting the corntrade XVIII. Of the effect upon national wealth, resulting from the productive efforts of public authority Of colonies and their products Of temporary and permanent emigration, considered in reference to national wealth 333 Of the nature and uses of money Sect. 1. General remarks - 341 2. Of the material of money - 350 XIX. XX. XXL - 280 301 310

[P03-002]XV CHAP. Page XXI. Sect. 3. Of the accession of value, a commodity receives, by being vested with the character of money - 355 4. Of the utility of coinage; and of the charge of its execution - 367 5. Of alterations of the standard of money - 378 6. Of the reason, why money is neither a sign nor a measure - 392 7. Of a particularity, that should be attended to, in estimating the sums mentioned in history - 411 8. Of the absence of any fixed ratio of value, between one metal and another - - 421 9. Of money as it ought to be - 425 10. Of copper and base metal coinage 437 1 1 . Of the preferable form of coined money - 440 12. Of the party, on whom the loss of coin by wear should properly fall . 442 XXII. Of signs or representatives of money Sect. 1. Of bills of exchange and letters of credit . 44g 2. Of banks of deposit - - 454 3. Of banks of circulation or discount; and of bank-notes, or convertible paper . 459 4. Of paper-money - - 481
