---
description: 
id: sec03
label: "Section 3"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 3

[003-001]The next day it was proclaimed on [[piazza-san-marco|the Piazza]], as a bit of news for the people of Venice--for which, indeed, those who had not witnessed the contest in the [[frari|church of the Frari]] cared little and understood nothing--that "in the Philosophical Contest which had taken place between the Friars of the Frari and the Friars of the Servi, the victory had been won by [[fra-paolo-sarpi|Fra Paolo Sarpi]], of the Servi, who had honorably triumphed through his vast understanding of the wisdom of the Fathers of the Church." This was also published in the black frame beside the great door of the Frari and posted upon the entrance to the church of the Servi, while in the refectories of the respective convents it formed a theme of absorbing interest.

[003-002]The Frari discussed the possibilities of childish mouthpieces for learned doctors, miraculously concealed--but low, for fear of scandal.

[003-003]The Servi said it out, for all to hear, "that it was a modern wonder of a Child in the Temple!" But [[fra-gianmaria|Fra Gianmaria]] hushed them, and was afraid; for often while he taught he came upon some new surprise, for he perceived that the boy's mind held some hidden spring of knowledge which was to him unfathomable.

[003-004]"It is most wonderful," he said one evening to [[fra-giulio|Fra Giulio]], as they talked together in the cloister after vespers; "I solemnly declare that it hath happened to me to ask him a question of which I, verily, knew not the answer; and he, keeping in quiet thought for some moments, hath so lucidly responded that his words have carried with them the conviction that he had made a discovery which I knew not." "It is some lesson which Don Ambrogio hath taught him." "Not so--for Don Ambrogio hath little learning; but Paolo will cover us with honor. In learning he is never weary, yet hath he an understanding greater than mine own, and in docility he hath no equal. In his duty in the convent and in the church he is even more punctilious." "Is it strange--or is it well," asked Fra Giulio with hesitation, "that in this year he hath spent with us he asks not for his mother, nor the little maid his sister, nor seemeth to grieve for them? For the boy is young." "Nay," answered Fra Gianmaria, sternly; "it is no lack, but a grace that hath been granted him." "Knowledge is a wonderful mystery," Fra Giulio answered; but softly to himself, as he crossed the cloister, he added, "but love is sweet, and the boy is very young." The boy was kneeling placidly before the crucifix in his cell when Fra Giulio went to give him his nightly benediction; but the good friar's heart was troubled with tenderness because of a vision, that would not leave him, of a hungering mother's face.

[003-005]II Many years later one of the great artists of Venice, wandering about at sunset with an elusive vision of some wonderful picture stirring impatience within his soul, found a maiden sitting under the vine-covered pergola of the [[traghetto|Traghetto]] [[san-maurizio|San Maurizio]], where she was waiting for her brother-in-law, who would presently touch at this ferry on his homeward way to [[murano|Murano]]. A little child lay asleep in her arms, his blond head, which pitying Nature had kept beautiful, resting against her breast; the meagre body was hidden beneath the folds of her mantle, which, in the graceful fashion of those days, passed over her head and fell below the knees; her face, very beautiful and tender, was bent over the little sufferer, who had forgotten his pain in the weariness it had brought him as a boon.

[003-006]The delicate purple bells of the vine upon the trellis stirred in the evening breeze, making a shimmer of perfume and color about her, like a suggestion of an aureole; and in the arbor, as in one of those homely shrines which everywhere make part of the Venetian life, she seemed aloof as some ideal of an earlier Christian age from the restless, voluble group upon the tiny quay.

[003-007]There were _facchini_--those doers of nondescript smallest services, quarreling amiably to pass the time, springing forward for custom as the [[gondola|gondolas]] neared the steps; _gransieri_--the licensed traghetto beggars, ragged and picturesque, pushing past with their long, crooked poles, under pretence of drawing the gondolas to shore; one or two women from the islands, filling the moments with swift, declamatory speech until the gondola of Giambattista or of Jacopo should close the colloquy; an older peasant, tranquilly kneeling to the Madonna of the traghetto, amid the clatter, while steaming greasy odors from her housewifely basket of Venetian dainties mount slowly, like some travesty of incense, and cloud the humble shrine. Two or three comers swell the group from the recesses of the dark little shop behind, for no other reason than that life is pleasant where so much is going on; and some maiden, into whose life a dawning romance is just creeping, confesses it with a brighter color as she hangs, half-timidly, her bunch of tinselled flowers before the red lamp of the good little Madonna of this _traghetto benedetto_, whose gondoliers are the bravest in all Venice! Meanwhile the boatmen, coming, going, or waiting, keep up a lively chatter.

[003-008]And under the trellis, as if far removed, the sleeping child and [[marina-magagnati|Marina of Murano]] bending over him a face glorified with its story of love and compassion, are like a living Rafaello!

[003-009]"The _bambino_ is beautiful," said the artist, drawing nearer, but speaking reverently, for he knew that he had found the face he had been seeking for his Madonna for the altar of the Servi. "What doth he like, your little one? For I am a friend to the _bambini_, and the _poverina_ hath pain to bear." She was more beautiful still when she smiled and the anxiety died out of her girlish face for a moment, in gratitude for the sympathy.

[003-010]"Eccellenza, thanks," she answered simply; "he has a beautiful face.

[003-011]Sometimes when he has flowers in his little hand he smiles and is quite still." But the radiant look passed swiftly with the remembrance of the pain that would come to the child on waking, and she kissed the tiny fingers that lay over the edge of her mantle with a movement of irrepressible tenderness, lapsing at once into reverie; while the artist, full of the enthusiasm of creation, stood dreaming of his picture. This Holy Mother should be greater, more compassionate, nearer to the people than any Madonna he had ever painted; for never had he noted in any face before such a passion of love and pity. In that moment of stillness the sunset lights, intensifying, cast a glow about her; the child, half-waking, stretched up his tiny hand and touched her cheek with a rare caress, and the light in her face was a radiance never to be forgotten. The [[paolo-veronese|Veronese]]'s wonderful _Madonna del Sorriso_ leaped to instant life; a _smile_ full of the pathos of human suffering, tender in comprehension, perfect in faith--this, which this moment of inspiration had revealed to him, would he paint for the consolation of those who should kneel before the altar of the Servi!

[003-012]She was busy with the child, putting him gently on the ground as a gondola approached; he, with his thought in intense realization, fixing the peculiar beauty of these sunset clouds in his artist memory as sole color-scheme of his picture; for this grave, sweet face, with its pale, fair tones and profusion of soft brown hair, would not bear the vivid draperies that the Veronese was wont to fashion--the mantle must be a gray cloud, pink flushed, with delicate sunset borderings where it swept away to shroud the child; the beauty of his creation should be in that smile of exquisite compassion, and this wonderful sunset in which it should glow forever!

[003-013]It was a rare moment with the Veronese, in which he seemed lifted above himself; the revelation of the face had seized him, translating him into the poetic atmosphere which he rarely attained; the harmonies of the vision were so perfect that they sufficed for the over-sumptuousness of color and detail which were usually features of his conceptions.

[003-014]Some one called impatiently from the gondola in rude, quick tones, and the artist woke from his reverie. The maiden lingered on the step for a word of adieu to this stranger who wished to give the little one pleasure, but she dared not disturb him, for he was some great signor--so she interpreted his dress and bearing--and she was only a maiden of Murano.

[003-015]He was still under the spell of his great moment, and he was in the presence of one who should help him to make it immortal; he uncovered his head with a motion of courtly deference he did not often assume as he started forward over the rough planks of the traghetto. "Signora, where shall I bring the flowers to make the little one smile?" "To Murano, near the Stabilimento [[girolamo-magagnati|Magagnati]], Eccellenza," she answered without hesitation, lifting the baby in her arms to escape the rough help of the gondolier, who reached forward to hasten his stumbling movements.

[003-016]And so they floated off from the traghetto--the Madonna that was to be, into the deepening twilight, while the Veronese, a splendid and incongruous figure amid these lowly surroundings, leaned against the paltry column that supported the shrine, wrapped in a delicious reverie of creation; for he was unused to failure and he had no doubts, though he had not yet proffered his request.

[003-017]"To-morrow," he said, "I will paint that face!" *       *       *       *       * "By our Lady of Murano!" the gondolier cried suddenly. "He spoke to thee like a queen--and it was Paolo Cagliari! What did he want with thee?" "Not me, [[piero|Piero]]; it was the child. He wished to give him flowers. I knew he must be great to care thus for our 'bimbo.' It was really he--the Veronese?" "The child! Santa Maria! He is not too much like a cherub that the great painter should notice him!" The baby threw out his little clenched fist, striking against the protecting arms that held him closer, his face drawn with sudden pain; for a moment he fought against Marina, and then, the spasm over, settled wearily to sleep in her arms.

[003-018]"Poverino!" said the gondolier softly, while Marina crooned over him an Ave Maria, and the gondola glided noiselessly to its cadence.

[003-019]"Piero," she said, looking up with eyes full of tears, "sometimes I think I cannot bear it! He needs thy prayers as well as mine--wilt thou not ask our Lady of [[san-donato|San Donato]] to be kinder to him? And I have seen to-day, on the [[rialto|Rialto]], a beautiful lamp, with angels' heads. Thou shouldst make an offering----" The gondolier shook his head and shrugged his shoulders; he had little faith or reverence. "I will say my aves, _poveriello_," he promised; "but the lamps are already too many in San Donato. And for the bambino, I will go not only once, but twice this year to confession--the laws of our traghetto ask not so much, since once is enough. But thou art even stricter with thy rules for me." She did not answer, and they floated on in silence.

[003-020]"To-morrow," said Piero at length, "there is festa in [[castello|San Pietro di Castello]]." She moved uneasily, and her beautiful face lost its softness.

[003-021]"It is nothing to me," she answered shortly.

[003-022]"It is a pretty festa, and Messer Magagnati should take thee. By our Lady of Castello, there are others who will go!" "It would be better for the bambino," he persisted sullenly, as she did not answer him. His voice was not the pleasanter now that its positive tone was changed to a coaxing one.

[003-023]"One is enough, Piero," she said. "And for the festa of [[san-pietro-in-castello|San Pietro in Castello]]--never, never name it to me!" "Santa Maria!" her companion ejaculated under his breath; "it is the women, the gentle _donzelle_, who are hard!"
