---
description: 
id: sec08
label: "Section 8"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 8

[008-001]"And the [[tintoretto|Tintoretto]], at Santa Maria dell' Orto?" "He, too, is a _furioso_, wonderful in form--and the Michelangelo had not the coloring of our Jacopo. But the terror of the Tintoretto is very terrible and very human. The Michelangelo fills a great gloom with phantasms--they question--and one cannot escape." "It hath been a morning of delights," [[girolamo-magagnati|Girolamo]] said with grave courtesy when the talk had come to an end. "I thank the master for this honor." "Nay," answered the knightly [[paolo-veronese|Veronese]]; "it is I who have received. And more, yet more would I ask. I know not if in this chamber of treasures I may leave the trifle which I came to bring for the bambino?" he added with hesitation, as he placed upon the table his little inlaid box of baubles and his bunch of spicy flowers. "Yet it was a promise." And while Girolamo listened in astonishment he told abruptly the story of his meeting with [[marina-magagnati|Marina]] and the little one, unconsciously weaving his thoughts into such a picture as he talked, that Girolamo recognized the inspiration and was already won to plead his cause.

[008-002]"This," continued the artist, unfolding a letter, "is the order which hath been sent me by [[fra-paolo-sarpi|Fra Paolo Sarpi]], of the convent of the Servi, a man most wise and of high repute in Venice. 'The face,' this learned friar sayeth, 'must be full of consolation and one to awaken holy thoughts.

[008-003]And I, being not an artist' (which, because he is greater than so many of his craft, he hath the grace to acknowledge!), 'have no other word to say, save that it shall be noble and most spiritual, as befitteth our religion.' And such a face till now, Messer Girolamo Magagnati--so beautiful and holy--I have not found. But now it is a vision sent to me from heaven, quite other than any picture I have ever dreamed, and I will paint no other for this Madonna of the Servi. I also, like the Angelo, would give my holiest work for the good of my soul; for the days of man are numbered, though his blood be warm in his veins like wine! It would be a pious act for the maiden; and if she will most graciously consent, the picture shall be an offering for the altar of the chapel of Consolation in the Servi." "I will ask her," said the father simply, and felt no surprise at what he had granted when he was left alone with his thoughts, for Paolo Cagliari, because of a way he had that men could not resist, already seemed to him a friend; for the rare mingling of knightly grace and artistic enthusiasm, overcoming spasmodically the usual assertiveness of his demeanor, seemed at such moments to mean more than when assumed by those who were never passionate nor brusque, and his very incongruities held a fascination for his friends.

[008-004]V Marina came often to the studio of the Veronese in [[san-samuele|San Samuele]], while the _Madonna del Sorriso_ grew slowly into life; it was not that most perfect life of which the artist had dreamed, for hitherto beauty had sufficed to him and he had never sought to burden his creations with questions of the soul; but now the sadness of the unattainable that was growing within him looked out of the wonderful eyes of the maiden on his canvas, yet he tossed his brushes aside in discontent. "Her smile eludeth me, though it hath the candor of a child's," the master cried.

[008-005]Within his studio his pupils came and went, some earnest to follow in the footsteps of the master, absorbed in their tasks; others, golden youths, painting a little because Art was beautiful--not overcoming.

[008-006]In the inner chamber, which was the artist's sanctum, were only the Veronese and his brother Benedetto at work; his brother, who was architect and sculptor too, was putting in the background of an elaborate palace in a fine Venetian group upon which Paolo worked when not occupied with his Madonna; and a favorite pupil, the young nobleman [[marcantonio-giustiniani|Marcantonio Giustiniani]], was in attendance upon the master. The lovely girlish face, of a spiritual type rare in Venice, seemed to the young patrician more beautiful than that of any of the noble, smiling ladies who were waiting to be won by him, and in those hours of blissful service he, too, made a study--crude and inartistic.

[008-007]"Thy hand hath yet to learn its cunning," the master said, as in much confusion, one morning when they were quite alone, his pupil revealed his roughly executed head; "yet thou hast painted the soul! The heart hath done it, Signorino mio, for thou art not yet an artist. There is no other lady for Marcantonio Giustiniani; yet she comes not of a noble house." "She makes it noble!" cried the young fellow, flushing hotly, "for she is like her face." "Ay, for me and thee she is noble," said the Veronese compassionately, for he loved the boy. "But for the noble Senator, thy father--of the Council of [[council-of-ten|the Ten]]--he will not find this maiden's name in the '[[golden-book|Libro d'Oro]].' I am sorry for thee." "Master!" cried Marcantonio imploringly, "art thou with me?" "Verily, but I can do naught for thee." "Listen, then! One day the nobles shall find that name inscribed in the 'Libro d'Oro'; it shall be there, for mine shall suffice." The master answered nothing, but bending over the sketch which his pupil had made he caressed it, here and there, with loving touches of his magic brush, while the young nobleman poured forth his vehement speech, forgetting to watch the master's fingers.

[008-008]"Once in the annals of the Republic there is noted such a marriage; a daughter of [[murano|Murano]], of the house of Beroviero--nay, not so beautiful as Marina--wedded with one of our noblest names; and the children, by decree of the Senate, were written every one in the 'Libro d'Oro.'" "_This_ have I done for thee!" said the master, moving away from the sketch and disclosing it to the young fellow, who gazed at it in silent amazement. "Only the eyes have I not touched," the Veronese explained; "for thou hast made them more soulful than even unto me they seemed, and thus have I read thy secret." "Maestro mio!" cried Marcantonio at length, in ecstasy; "none among us may learn the marvel of thine art!" "I have but touched thy sketch with the power that mine art could give," the master answered, well pleased. "Yet it is thou who hast read the secret of the face that was not revealed to me." "We were speaking of the 'Libro d'Oro,'" the young patrician interrupted eagerly.

[008-009]"It may be so, I know not," the Veronese answered indifferently, for he himself was not written in that noble chronicle. "My art deals little with these cumbrous records of the Republic." "Thou art wrong to scorn them, caro maestro, for in them is chronicled the glory of Venice." "The saying doeth honor--from a pupil to his master!" the artist burst forth with his quick, uncontrollable temper. "The Tablets of Stone were reserved for the highest dignity of the Law; and in that Sala dei Capi, where at this moment sits [[giustinian-giustiniani|Giustinian Giustiniani]]--one of the chosen three of the Council of the Ten--my name is written largely with mine own hand, as artists write their names, _above_ the heads of rulers for all coming time to see! The _Avvogadori_ do not keep my 'Libro d'Oro'; the entrance to it is by divine right!" He flung his brushes fiercely aside, in one of those moods that seemed all unwarranted in comparison with the slightness of the provocation--moods that alternated with the lovable, genial, generous impulses of an artist soul, overwhelming in energy and great in friendship; yet jealous, to a degree a lesser nature could scarcely pardon, of anything that seemed to touch upon his province as an artist and the claims of art to highest honor.

[008-010]*       *       *       *       * The day was drawing near when Marcantonio Giustiniani, the only son of Giustinian Giustiniani, a noble of the Senate and of the Council of the Ten, should present himself before the _Avvocato del Comun_ to claim admission to the [[maggior-consiglio|Great Council]] as a noble, born in lawful wedlock, of noble parents, inscribed in the Golden Book.

[008-011]To the young fellow himself this twenty-fifth anniversary of his birth, when, by Venetian law, the ceremony must take place, approached with needlessly rapid footsteps; he was not yet ready for the duties it would bring, so much more did he incline to that measure of boyish freedom which had thus far been his, so unwilling was he to renounce his longing for some form of art life--the impulse to which fretted him almost unbearably, in view of the political career which opened mercilessly before him, threatening every dearer project.

[008-012]Not that he felt himself born to be an artist--Paolo Cagliari laughed at his studies while he encouraged his coming to the studio, telling him that for one who had not chosen Art for his mistress the drawings were "well enough"; and from the Veronese the words were consoling. His mother had been afraid of this taste for art, which, for a short time, had exercised such sway over his fancy, stimulated by his _culte_ for the beautiful, that he had plead with her to win his father's consent for an art life. Yet he had himself acquiesced in her quiet but inflexible showing of the futility of attempting such an overturning of Giustiniani traditions, though he still went with dangerous frequency to the studio of the Veronese, to which she had procured him entrance upon his promise that he would not seriously consider that impossible possibility at which he had hinted. There had been mention of Pordenone and of Aretino, with a certain cool scorn that was worse than censure, and as convincing, there was the [[titian|Titian]], than whom, in art and sumptuousness, one could not be greater; but, even for him, Cavalière of France, there was no place in the Consiglio!

[008-013]Not that Marcantonio would voluntarily have relinquished his hereditary place in the state, his possible part in its glory--the dream which came to all young noblemen of the portrait in that splendid Sala di Consiglio of his own face grown venerable, wearing the ermine and the ducal coronet, in token of that supremacy so dear to each Venetian heart, but jealously held by every noble of the Republic within confines which lessened with each succession, until the crown was assumed in trembling and ignominious restriction--if with external pomp and honor that might befit a king.

[008-014]But he wanted time; he wanted liberty to choose his own life or enjoy his restlessness, and he realized the more keenly, from the sense of power that was so chafed in the curbing, that he was too young to be forced into such ruthless service; and he could not but acquiesce the less fervently because it was not open to him to _give_ himself, since the claim of Venice was absolute and resistance was a crime.

[008-015]But with quite other sentiments the preparations for the fête were progressing in that ancient family of Giustiniani, where the day was awaited with an impatience which increased the fervor and the pomp of preparation, but was not otherwise manifested in any sign of undignified eagerness. No house in Venice had held this right for more generations; no house was princelier in its bearing, nor more superbly republican! No member of that Supreme Council was more esteemed than the stern Giustinian, who had been again and again elected to the most important missions of the state; no _donna nobile_ of all the Venetians was prouder, more highly born, more beautiful, nor more coldly gracious than the mother of Marcantonio.

[008-016]In such an environment there was but one career possible for the only son of the house, who had been carefully trained, according to the traditions that made culture for the young Venetian of those days; he had even attended courses of those philosophical conferences which had become the fashion since the sittings of the famous [[council-of-trent|Council of Trent]], and which had been conducted in various convents by distinguished professors from Padua and Bologna, and even by some of the learned men of Rome; it was a species of amusement creditable for a young nobleman--it would quicken the reasoning powers and give more subtlety in debate, when government problems should later absorb his gifts.
