---
description: 
id: sec28
label: "Section 28"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 28

[028-001]When [[marina-magagnati|Marina]] moved it was to throw herself before the altar, resting her head upon her clasped hands, in an agony of supplication.

[028-002]*       *       *       *       * In the midst of an excited debate, immediately preceding the final vote, the door of the Senate Chamber was suddenly thrown open by the keeper, who announced in an awestruck tone: "A citizen claims the right of the humblest Venetian to bring before Messer the [[doge|Doge]] a message of vital import in the question under discussion." He uttered the words tremblingly, as if he had been taught them, and the interruption at such an hour, though not unprecedented, was at least unusual enough to cause consternation. The flood of words ceased; there was an uneasy movement among the senators, then a hush of suspense.

[028-003]Without waiting for the customary consent of the Doge, a procession of white-robed, white-veiled women passed through the open doorway, moving slowly and solemnly to the Doge's throne. The leader stepped forth from her group of maidens and knelt at the foot of the dais.

[028-004]This sudden arrest of action by these white-robed gliding figures, at a moment when the Senate was about to defy the authority of the Church, brought a superstitious thrill to many hearts within that chamber.

[028-005]Among the younger senators it was whispered, in unsteady tones, that a message delayed for the death of a prince was likely to bring trouble--messengers, perchance, from another world--when forced again to discussion. They listened breathlessly for the message; but the figure still knelt in silence.

[028-006]The group of Councillors on the dais swayed and parted against that wonderful background of Tintoret, the dead Christ and the two Doges reverently kneeling in proof of the devotion of this [[la-serenissima|Most Serene Republic]]. Around the vast and sumptuous chamber, where the proud [[signoria|Signoria]] assembled, like a council of kings, Venice had chronicled her triumphs and her religious humility in endless repetition and intimately blended, as became her faith; the Doges Priuli, kneeling in prayer; Venice, mounted defiantly on the Lion of Saint Mark; other portraits of other doges, in attitudes of devotion; other pictures of the Christ, of the saints, always symbolic; but over all,--triumphant, beautiful,--with its irresistible sea-tones, cool and strong, Venice, Queen of the Sea, compelling the homage of her rulers, from the ceiling's height.

[028-007]Twice the Doge essayed to speak, but the faces of the younger men warned him of the danger of such an interruption at a moment when the entire vote had seemed sure, and so filled him with wrath that he dared not speak until he could control his voice, lest its tremor be mistaken for fear. The moment seemed an hour.

[028-008]"Reveal thyself!" [[leonardo-donato|Leonardo Donato]] commanded at last; "and rise!" The supplicant slowly rose, throwing back her veil, and revealing a face that was spirit-like in its pallor and beauty, with deep eyes, unfathomably sad. Her maidens gathered close about her, as if to support her, for she trembled as she stood.

[028-009]A low murmur arose. "The Lady of the Giustiniani!" In all that vast Council Chamber there was no movement, save the slight commotion among a group of red-robed senators farthest from the throne, who were forcibly detaining the Senator [[marcantonio-giustiniani|Marcantonio Giustiniani]], and the imperative gesture from the dais which had waved him back and hushed his involuntary exclamation of horror. Among the [[savii|Savii]], [[giustinian-giustiniani|Giustinian Giustiniani]] sat livid with anger, close under the eyes of that one calm, terrible Counsellor whose gaze, fastened upon him, rendered speech impossible.

[028-010]"My daughter," said the Doge, in a tone full of consideration, "this is not fitting. At another moment we will listen to thy request. Thou mayest withdraw." "Serenissimo, Prince of Venice!" Marina cried, stretching forth her hands, "be gracious to me! _Now_ must I speak my message, or it will be too late--and it hath been granted me in a vision, for the welfare of the people of Venice. _If the Ruler of this Republic will win the consent of the Senate and the Council to comply with the admonitions of the Most Holy Father, the day shall be happy for Venice_." "Take her away--she is distraught," commanded one of the Chiefs of [[council-of-ten|the Ten]], starting forward.

[028-011]There was a movement of irresolution among those immediately surrounding the Doge; but the Lady Marina, like one commissioned for a holy emprise, had no fear.

[028-012]"Nay, for I claim my right, as citizen of Venice, to bring my grievance to the Doge's throne!" she answered proudly. "I am mother to a son who shall one day take his seat among the nobles of this Council; I am daughter to a man of the people,--beloved by his own class and honorably known, in the records of the Ten, among the industries of Venice,--who hath but now refused the seat of honor they would have granted him, that he might more truly serve the interests of the people; I am wife to a noble whose ancient name hath been written again and again in records of highest service most honorable to the Republic. My grievance is the grievance of Venice--of the nobles and the people!" She spoke with the exaltation of inspiration, and there was a hush in the chamber, as if she had wrought some spell they could not break.

[028-013]Presently into this silence a voice--low, clear, emotionless--dropped the consenting words, "Speak on, that justice be not defrauded by the half-told tale." Instinctively the eyes of the senators turned to the face of the [[fra-paolo-sarpi|Chief Counsellor]], whose opinions had ruled the debate for many days past; but he sat serene and unmoved among his violet-robed colleagues, with no trace of sympathy nor speech upon his placid and inscrutable countenance. If the words were his they were simply an impartial reminder of duty--they concealed no opinion; the senators were to be the judges of the scene, and justice required them to listen.

[028-014]They gave a quickened interest.

[028-015]"I plead for the people, who have no representatives here--for the people, who are faithful to the Church and dutiful to the Holy Father; let not this undeserved horror come upon them. Leave them their heaven, who have no earthly paradise!" The lady's strength seemed failing, for the last words had come more painfully, though with a ring of passionate indignation.

[028-016]Again Marcantonio Giustiniani broke from his detaining colleagues in an attempt to reach his wife; and a second time the hands of the Councillors waved him back.

[028-017]"Spare us this anathema, most gracious Prince!" she cried. "I speak for the mothers of all the babes of Venice. And oh, my Lords,"--and now the words came in a low, intense wail, as she turned instinctively and included them all in the beseeching motion of her hands,--"if you have no mercy on yourselves, at least have mercy on your tender little ones!

[028-018]Do not bring damnation on these innocent, helpless children by your own act. Be great enough to submit to a greater power!" "It is unseemly," murmured another of the Councillors, yet low, as if afraid of his own judgment in a case so strange.

[028-019]Leonardo Donato had been in possession of the supreme ducal authority but a few weeks, not long enough to unlearn the tone of command and the quick power of decision which had distinguished him as ambassador, when he had been chosen with the unanimous approval of this august assembly, to conciliate the court of Rome in the hour of the Republic's great emergency. His presence of mind returned to him; the scene had lasted long enough, and the situation was critical. The noble Lady Marina must be retired without disgrace, for the honor of the Ca' Giustiniani; but, above all, that she might not heighten the impression which her presence had already created. And she must be placed where she could exercise no further influence, yet in a way that should awaken no commiseration; for she was beautiful and terribly in earnest, and in her deep eyes there was the light of a prophet, and all Venice was at her feet.

[028-020]The Doge spoke a word low to his Councillors, who sat nearest him on either side, and they, with decorous signs of approval, passed it on to the others. Thus fortified he rose, descended the steps of the ducal throne, and addressed her with grave courtesy; the whole house, as in custom bound, rising also while their prince was standing.

[028-021]"We do not forget, most noble Lady Marina Giustiniani, that more than many others thou art a daughter of the Republic, being especially adopted by the Act of the Signoria; and thy love for Venice wins forgiveness for the strangeness of thy fear that we, her loyal rulers, could work her harm. But thou art distressed and needing rest, from the pain of the vision which thou hast confided to us. We will care for thee, as a father should.

[028-022]"Let the noble Senator Marcantonio Giustiniani approach and conduct his lady to private apartments within our palace, where she may rest, with her maidens, until she shall be refreshed. One of our secretaries shall show the way and remain to see that every aid is bestowed." The secretary whom the Doge had designated by a glance had approached and received a rapid order, spoken in an undertone; Marina had fallen, almost fainting, upon her husband's arm, as he reached her after the permission so intolerably delayed, yet he dared not move in that imperious presence without further bidding. His hand stole over hers to comfort her. She had suffered so much that he could not be angry.

[028-023]Leonardo Donato's eyes quickly scanned the faces of the senators, seeking the two least sympathetic.

[028-024]"The Senators [[morosini|Morosini]] and Sagredo will escort them," he said, "and will return in haste with the Senator Giustiniani to do their duty to the Republic." At the door Marina turned again, rallying her failing strength with a last desperate effort, but the words came in a broken, agonized whisper: "O Santissima Maria Vergine! Mater Dolorosa! because thou art the special guardian of this Virgin City--and here, in her councils, none of thy reverend fathers may plead for thee--be merciful, Madre Beatissima!

[028-025]Save us from our doom!" XIX As the door closed upon the retreating cortège the attitude of the Doge grew stern. He turned as if about to address the still standing Senate, when, remembering that he had already assumed the initiative to an unusual degree, and having so recent a recollection of that formidable coronation oath whose slightest infraction would be visited upon his nearest of kin, he mounted in silence to his seat and consulted with his Councillors until the senators were in their places. Then, in a tone of authority, he proclaimed: "That which hath just occurred within this hall of the Senate shall be for those who have witnessed it as if it had not been, and the secretaries of the day shall not transcribe it upon their records, since it hath already more than sufficiently consumed our time. This vision of the lady was doubtless wrought by unwise tampering, being a vision of a nature that may gain credence with women--dependent and timid and unversed in law--but with which men and rulers have nothing to do." An expression of relief slowly grew upon the faces before him while the Doge was speaking; noting which his words were allowed to produce their full effect during the few moments of relaxation and informal talk, which, as was immediately announced by a secretary, would occupy the time until the return of the three senators--all meanwhile keeping their seats that no moment might be lost in resuming the important interrupted debate.

[028-026]The strain had been so great, both during the discussion and the visit of the Lady Marina, that there was a willingness among the senators to unbend, to throw aside serious impressions and make light of all dread, as womanish and weak, accepting the Doge's words as leaders. For in those days the faith of many of the gravest walked only a little way from the borderland of superstition; and it was long since any of their princes had held so great a reputation for judgment and diplomacy as Leonardo Donato.
