---
description: 
id: sec48
label: "Section 48"
tags: ["chapter"]
type: chapter
---

# Section 48

[048-001]The figure stood motionless in the shadow of a column, muffled in a long black mantle, a black beretta partially concealing the face.

[048-002]There was an icy inflection in the tones which sent a chill to [[marcantonio-giustiniani|Marcantonio]]'s heart as he listened. One of the Chiefs of [[council-of-ten|the Ten]] was always a member of the still more dreaded Inquisition, whose identity was never known, and the passionless voice held a hint of indisputable authority--was his suffering wife to rely upon the mercy of the most puissant member of this terrible commission!

[048-003]"Take my life for hers!" he implored, so beside himself with grief and terror that he disclosed his fear for [[marina-magagnati|Marina]]; "and bid her return to care for our little one." "Not so," said the emotionless voice; "the Lady Marina hath disproved her right to care for a noble of Venice. It would be to imperil his loyalty to leave the child under his mother's influence." "My God!" cried Marcantonio bitterly; "take me to her and let us die together--if the Republic may grant us so much grace!" Again the [[doge|Doge]] would have spoken compassionate words, but the other interposed: "The State hath little use for the lady's life--save in her keeping. And she herself, perchance, hath less. For so hath her strange whim wrought upon her that she knoweth naught of that which passeth around her, and one face to her is like another." The young Senator turned from the cruel speaker to the Doge in mute appealing agony. The old man grasped his hand in a steadying clasp.

[048-004]"Let us go to her," said Leonardo, very low, when he could command his voice. "She is like a lovely child--resisting nothing. It is some shock--it will pass." *       *       *       *       * And now there came a day when the proud heart of Venice was stirred to its core, for a messenger dashed breathless into the Council Chamber--an excited, protesting throng of the populace surging in through the open door behind him. "[[fra-paolo-sarpi|Fra Paolo]]! Il caro Padre! Morto!" "_Dead_!" They started to their feet with ready imprecations. Fra Paolo, who had left them an hour before, with the [[malipiero|Signor Malipiero]] and his devoted secretary! They exchanged glances of terrible comprehension--the triumph of Venice was avenged upon the faithful servant of the State!

[048-005]The Consiglio broke up in confusion.

[048-006]"Eccellentissimi," the messenger explained to the horror-stricken questioners, "they were five,--rushing out from the dark of the convent wall against him when he came alone down the steps of the [[ponte-della-pugna|Ponte della Pugna]],--the villains held the others down. And Fra Paolo lay dead on the Fondamenta--stabbed in many places, as if one would cut him in bits--and the stiletto still in his forehead! And they sent me----" "'Alone'? you ask me, Illustrissimi?--Santissima Vergine! the whole city pouring in to the cries of those that found him; and the murderers off before one could touch them, and never a guard near! They carried him into the Servi.--And the people--furious--are storming the palazzo of the nuncio as I pass; and some one cries that the envoy is off to the Lido, with his fine friends, who start for Rome. A thousand devils!--May the good [[san-nicolo|San Nicolò]] send them to feed the fishes!" The Senate, to testify its honor, grief, and sympathy for the beloved Counsellor, had instantly adjourned, and its members repaired in great numbers to the convent to make personal inquiries, returning to a new session prolonged through the night; for Fra Paolo, who had fainted from loss of blood on his pallet in the Servite cell, had recovered consciousness and hovered between life and death--his humble bed attended by the most famous physicians and surgeons whom the Republic could summon to her aid. The secretaries, meanwhile, were busy in preparing resolutions of affection by which to honor him in the sight of the Venetian people; letters of announcement to foreign courts, as if he had been of the blood royal; proclamations of reward for the persons of the criminals, alive or dead, which, before the day had dawned, the Signori della Notte had affixed to the doors of [[san-marco|San Marco]], along the [[rialto|Rialto]], on the breast of Ser Robia, that all might read. And for means of bringing the offenders to justice they plotted and schemed as none but Venetians could do.

[048-007]It was three days since the storm, and [[piero-salin|the gastaldo]] had not yet been released, he also was simply detained, without ignominy or discomfort in rooms set apart for prisoners of State before they had been brought to trial; for the events of these days had been too absorbing to permit of an examination of his case. And now, in the gray dawn which broke upon that night of anxiety and excitement, alternating between hope and fear as frequent messengers, each guarded by a detachment of palace guards, appeared with fresh news from the convent, the weary senators strolled up and down in the great chambers opening on the sea façade of the Ducal Palace discussing the event in a more desultory way--its meaning, its dangers, the achievements of the great man who might, even now, be receiving the viaticum in the convent of the Servi.

[048-008]He was first named with terms of endearment strange upon the lips of that stately assembly--"Il caro Padre," "Teologo amato di Venezia"--yet the guards had failed to seize those villains who lay in wait at the Ponte della Pugna! The bridges and traghetti must be closely watched.--Ah--the gastaldo grande!

[048-009]"Hath one yet been named _Condottiere_ for this frontier service?" questioned one of the older senators, among a group of the more important men who had detached themselves from the others and strolled out into the great loggia on the sea façade for a reviving breath of the morning air. "For such an employ there is none like [[piero|Piero]] Salin for daring and intrigue; and the assassins may linger long in hiding on the route to Rome." And so they first remembered Piero in these crowded days and discussed his fault with a degree of leniency that would have been foreign to the traditions of Venice had he not been needed for important secret service.

[048-010]Meanwhile, Fra Paolo was still the theme among the senators at large in the Council Chamber. "Il miracolo del suo secolo," they called him, as they rehearsed the opinions of the learned men of their age in every field of science.

[048-011]"It cannot be from knowledge, acquired as all men learn, that he taketh this position in such varied sciences," said the Senator [[morosini|Morosini]]; "for a life-time doth suffice to few men for such attainment in one field as he hath reached in all. It must be that the marvel of his mind doth hold some central truth which maketh all science cognate." "Else were he not 'friend and master' to Galileo of Padua." "And it is told that Acquapendente, who hath been summoned by the [[signoria|Signoria]] to bestow his skill, hath learned of him some matters which he taught in the medical school of Bologna. The world hath not his equal for learning." "By the blessed San Marco!" ejaculated one under his breath, who had been idly leaning on the balustrade, as he crossed himself and looked furtively around to note whether he had been overheard.

[048-012]But the others of the group, keenly alive to danger, had instantly joined him.

[048-013]"Was this some new intrigue?" "Was the night not already full with horror?" they questioned of each other, thrilled with dread and superstition.

[048-014]Dawn was growing over the water, and the gray and oily surface of the lagoon was closely dotted with [[gondola|gondolas]], distinct and black in the morning twilight; they came sweeping on from San Nicolò and [[castello|Castello]]--black and red, breast to breast--gathering impetus as they neared [[piazzetta|the Piazzetta]], in numbers which must have left every [[traghetto]] of Venice deserted; [[nicolotti|Nicolotti]] and [[castellani|Castellani]]--_allies_, since they never had been friends! It was some intrigue of the people, or some favor they had come to ask--_to-day_, when the Senate might not spare one thought for disorder among the masses!

[048-015]Weary and overwrought, after their night of sorrowful labor, they looked at each other in consternation.

[048-016]"It is their gastaldo whom they are come to seek," a secretary of the Ten confided by inspiration to his Chief, as an old man, wearing the robe of a bancalo, was escorted from the landing by a band of gondoliers with black and crimson sashes, who disappeared under the entrance to the palace courtyard.

[048-017]"Let him be summoned and honorably discharged; he hath done no harm that may be compared with the disaffection of the traghetti." "Rather, let them receive him back, appointed by the Senate to honor, as Condottiere of the border forces"; a second Chief hastened to respond, for the moment was grave, "and the command will most excellently fit the gastaldo." "And for the Lady of the Giustiniani, it matters little--Rome or Venice," said an old senator, compassionately, as he followed his colleagues into the Council Chamber. "She hath so spent herself in grieving that she knoweth naught. For the Senator Marcantonio hath vainly sought to teach her that the interdict hath been lifted; yet even this she comprehendeth not." "We are come, your Excellencies, for news of our Gastaldo Grande, whose presence is verily needful for the traghetti," said the white-haired bancalo, when an audience had been granted him.

[048-018]"How many of you have come as escort?" the secretary questioned carelessly.

[048-019]"Eccellenza, we are enough," the bancalo answered fearlessly, and with a significant pause, "_to prove the will of the people--as well Nicolotti as Castellani_. And to escort our Gastaldo Grande with honor, since it hath pleased your excellencies to receive him--_as a guest_--in the Ducal Palace." He was the eldest of the officers of the traghetti, accustomed to respect, upheld by the united forces of the people; this man of the people and this mouthpiece of the nobles measured each other fearlessly as they looked into each other's faces--each coolly choosing his phrases to carry so much as the other might count wise.

[048-020]"It is well," said the secretary of the Ten, after a brief private conference with his Chiefs, "that ye are come in numbers to do him honor. Since the Senate hath need of his brave service and hath named Piero Salin, for exigencies of the Republic, Condottiere, with honors and men of artillery to do him service." And so it chanced, that because of the stress of the time, Piero Salin floated off in triumph to [[murano|Murano]], named General of the Border Forces, with secret orders from the Ten.

[048-021]XXXIII The great bell in the tower of the arsenal told twelve of the day, and already the broader waters near the rios which led to the high machicolated walls surrounding this famous Venetian stronghold were crowded with gondolas of the people and barges from the islands filled with men, women, and children, jubilant with holiday speech and brilliant in gala colors; for this was one of those perpetually recurring festas which so endeared this City of the Sea to its pleasure-loving people.

[048-022]This splendid ceremony of inspection by the Doge was a day of annual triumph, for nowhere in all the world was there such an arsenal, and nowhere such an army of workmen,--thirty-five thousand men trained to the cunning from father to son in lifelong service,--with sailors, sixteen thousand more, who should presently make a brave review within those battlemented walls, to tickle the fancy of the Serenissimo and his guests. For these pageants of Venice were not guiltless of timely hints to the onlookers of the futility of opposition to a naval force so great and so admirably controlled; and well might the Republic be proud of the foundry, the docks, the galleys, which the Doge and the Signoria came each year in state to visit, with all the nobles of the [[maggior-consiglio|Maggior Consiglio]] and many of the high officials.

[048-023]This year it was to be a fête more magnificent than usual, for the households of the ambassadors were bidden to the banquet which was prepared in the Great Hall of the arsenal--the attractions of which were invitingly rehearsed, as the speakers leaned across from gondola to gondola, to exchange their pleasant bits of gossip with dramatic exaggerations. "And the gondolas of the ambassadors! Santa Maria! the Signori, 'i provveditori alle pompe' have nothing to say, for there is a dispensation! the velvets and satins and golden fringes--it will be a true glimpse of the _paradiso_!"
